Vol.:(0123456789)
Quality & Quantity (2021) 55:1703–1725
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-020-01072-9
1 3
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive
exploratory research
Mattia Casula1  · Nandhini Rangarajan2
 · Patricia Shields2
Accepted: 5 November 2020 / Published online: 8 December 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
While hypotheses frame explanatory studies and provide guidance for measurement and
statistical tests, deductive, exploratory research does not have a framing device like the
hypothesis. To this purpose, this article examines the landscape of deductive, exploratory
research and ofers the working hypothesis as a fexible, useful framework that can guide
and bring coherence across the steps in the research process. The working hypothesis conceptual framework is introduced, placed in a philosophical context, defned, and applied
to public administration and comparative public policy. Doing so, this article explains: the
philosophical underpinning of exploratory, deductive research; how the working hypothesis informs the methodologies and evidence collection of deductive, explorative research;
the nature of micro-conceptual frameworks for deductive exploratory research; and, how
the working hypothesis informs data analysis when exploratory research is deductive.
Keywords Exploratory research · Working hypothesis · Deductive qualitative research ·
Pragmatism
1 Introduction
Exploratory research is generally considered to be inductive and qualitative (Stebbins
2001). Exploratory qualitative studies adopting an inductive approach do not lend themselves to a priori theorizing and building upon prior bodies of knowledge (Reiter 2013;
Bryman 2004 as cited in Pearse 2019). Juxtaposed against quantitative studies that employ
deductive confrmatory approaches, exploratory qualitative research is often criticized for
lack of methodological rigor and tentativeness in results (Thomas and Magilvy 2011). 
* Mattia Casula
mattia.casula2@unibo.it
Nandhini Rangarajan
nr11@txstate.edu
Patricia Shields
ps07@txstate.edu
1 Department of Political and Social Sciences, University of Bologna, Strada Maggiore 45,
40125 Bologna, Italy
2 Texas State University, San Marcos, TX, USA
1704 M. Casula et al.
1 3
This paper focuses on the neglected topic of deductive, exploratory research and proposes working hypotheses as a useful framework for these studies.
To emphasize that certain types of applied research lend themselves more easily to
deductive approaches, to address the downsides of exploratory qualitative research, and
to ensure qualitative rigor in exploratory research, a signifcant body of work on deductive qualitative approaches has emerged (see for example, Gilgun 2005, 2015; Hyde 2000;
Pearse 2019). According to Gilgun (2015, p. 3) the use of conceptual frameworks derived
from comprehensive reviews of literature and a priori theorizing were common practices
in qualitative research prior to the publication of Glaser and Strauss’s (1967) The Discovery of Grounded Theory. Gilgun (2015) coined the terms Deductive Qualitative Analysis
(DQA) to arrive at some sort of “middle-ground” such that the benefts of a priori theorizing (structure) and allowing room for new theory to emerge (fexibility) are reaped simultaneously. According to Gilgun (2015, p. 14) “in DQA, the initial conceptual framework and
hypotheses are preliminary. The purpose of DQA is to come up with a better theory than
researchers had constructed at the outset (Gilgun 2005, 2009). Indeed, the production of
new, more useful hypotheses is the goal of DQA”.
DQA provides greater level of structure for both the experienced and novice qualitative
researcher (see for example Pearse 2019; Gilgun 2005). According to Gilgun (2015, p. 4)
“conceptual frameworks are the sources of hypotheses and sensitizing concepts”. Sensitizing concepts frame the exploratory research process and guide the researcher’s data collection and reporting eforts. Pearse (2019) discusses the usefulness for deductive thematic
analysis and pattern matching to help guide DQA in business research. Gilgun (2005) discusses the usefulness of DQA for family research.
Given these rationales for DQA in exploratory research, the overarching purpose of this
paper is to contribute to that growing corpus of work on deductive qualitative research.
This paper is specifcally aimed at guiding novice researchers and student scholars to the
working hypothesis as a useful a priori framing tool. The applicability of the working
hypothesis as a tool that provides more structure during the design and implementation
phases of exploratory research is discussed in detail. Examples of research projects in public administration that use the working hypothesis as a framing tool for deductive exploratory research are provided.
In the next section, we introduce the three types of research purposes. Second, we
examine the nature of the exploratory research purpose. Third, we provide a defnition
of working hypothesis. Fourth, we explore the philosophical roots of methodology to see
where exploratory research fts. Fifth, we connect the discussion to the dominant research
approaches (quantitative, qualitative and mixed methods) to see where deductive exploratory research fts. Sixth, we examine the nature of theory and the role of the hypothesis in
theory. We contrast formal hypotheses and working hypotheses. Seven, we provide examples of student and scholarly work that illustrates how working hypotheses are developed
and operationalized. Lastly, this paper synthesizes previous discussion with concluding
remarks.
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1705
1 3
2 Three types of research purposes
The literature identifes three basic types of research purposes—explanation, description
and exploration (Babbie 2007; Adler and Clark 2008; Strydom 2013; Shields and Whetsell
2017). Research purposes are similar to research questions; however, they focus on project
goals or aims instead of questions.
Explanatory research answers the “why” question (Babbie 2007, pp. 89–90), by explaining “why things are the way they are”, and by looking “for causes and reasons” (Adler and
Clark 2008, p. 14). Explanatory research is closely tied to hypothesis testing. Theory is
tested using deductive reasoning, which goes from the general to the specifc (Hyde 2000,
p. 83). Hypotheses provide a frame for explanatory research connecting the research purpose to other parts of the research process (variable construction, choice of data, statistical
tests). They help provide alignment or coherence across stages in the research process and
provide ways to critique the strengths and weakness of the study. For example, were the
hypotheses grounded in the appropriate arguments and evidence in the literature? Are the
concepts imbedded in the hypotheses appropriately measured? Was the best statistical test
used? When the analysis is complete (hypothesis is tested), the results generally answer the
research question (the evidence supported or failed to support the hypothesis) (Shields and
Rangarajan 2013).
Descriptive research addresses the “What” question and is not primarily concerned with
causes (Strydom 2013; Shields and Tajalli 2006). It lies at the “midpoint of the knowledge continuum” (Grinnell 2001, p. 248) between exploration and explanation. Descriptive research is used in both quantitative and qualitative research. A feld researcher might
want to “have a more highly developed idea of social phenomena” (Strydom 2013, p. 154)
and develop thick descriptions using inductive logic. In science, categorization and classifcation systems such as the periodic table of chemistry or the taxonomies of biology
inform descriptive research. These baseline classifcation systems are a type of theorizing
and allow researchers to answer questions like “what kind” of plants and animals inhabit a
forest. The answer to this question would usually be displayed in graphs and frequency distributions. This is also the data presentation system used in the social sciences (Ritchie and
Lewis 2003; Strydom 2013). For example, if a scholar asked, what are the needs of homeless people? A quantitative approach would include a survey that incorporated a “needs”
classifcation system (preferably based on a literature review). The data would be displayed
as frequency distributions or as charts. Description can also be guided by inductive reasoning, which draws “inferences from specifc observable phenomena to general rules or
knowledge expansion” (Worster 2013, p. 448). Theory and hypotheses are generated using
inductive reasoning, which begins with data and the intention of making sense of it by theorizing. Inductive descriptive approaches would use a qualitative, naturalistic design (open
ended interview questions with the homeless population). The data could provide a thick
description of the homeless context. For deductive descriptive research, categories, serve
a purpose similar to hypotheses for explanatory research. If developed with thought and a
connection to the literature, categories can serve as a framework that inform measurement,
link to data collection mechanisms and to data analysis. Like hypotheses they can provide
horizontal coherence across the steps in the research process.
Table  1 demonstrated these connections for deductive, descriptive and explanatory
research. The arrow at the top emphasizes the horizontal or across the research process
view we emphasize. This article makes the case that the working hypothesis can serve
the same purpose as the hypothesis for deductive, explanatory research and categories for 
1706 M. Casula et al.
1 3
Table 1 Connecting research purpose and frameworks for deductive inquiry
Type of purpose Micro-conceptual framework Methodology Data analysis Primary philosophical underpinning
Explanatory Formal hypotheses Quantitative, experimental design, survey,
time series, existing data
Inferential statistics Positivism
Descriptive Categories Quantitative, survey, content analysis Simple descriptive statistics Positivism
Exploratory ??? Q2 ??? Q3 ??? Q4 ??? Q1
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1707
1 3
deductive descriptive research. The cells for exploratory research are flled in with question
marks.
The remainder of this paper focuses on exploratory research and the answers to questions found in the table:
1. What is the philosophical underpinning of exploratory, deductive research?
2. What is the Micro-conceptual framework for deductive exploratory research? [As is
clear from the article title we introduce the working hypothesis as the answer.]
3. How does the working hypothesis inform the methodologies and evidence collection of
deductive exploratory research?
4. How does the working hypothesis inform data analysis of deductive exploratory
research?
3 The nature of exploratory research purpose
Explorers enter the unknown to discover something new. The process can be fraught with
struggle and surprises. Efective explorers creatively resolve unexpected problems. While
we typically think of explorers as pioneers or mountain climbers, exploration is very much
linked to the experience and intention of the explorer. Babies explore as they take their
frst steps. The exploratory purpose resonates with these insights. Exploratory research,
like reconnaissance, is a type of inquiry that is in the preliminary or early stages (Babbie
2007). It is associated with discovery, creativity and serendipity (Stebbins 2001). But the
person doing the discovery, also defnes the activity or claims the act of exploration. It
“typically occurs when a researcher examines a new interest or when the subject of study
itself is relatively new” (Babbie 2007, p. 88). Hence, exploration has an open character that
emphasizes “fexibility, pragmatism, and the particular, biographically specifc interests of
an investigator” (Maanen et al. 2001, p. v). These three purposes form a type of hierarchy.
An area of inquiry is initially explored. This early work lays the ground for, description
which in turn becomes the basis for explanation. Quantitative, explanatory studies dominate contemporary high impact journals (Twining et al. 2017).
Stebbins (2001) makes the point that exploration is often seen as something like a
poor stepsister to confrmatory or hypothesis testing research. He has a problem with this
because we live in a changing world and what is settled today will very likely be unsettled in the near future and in need of exploration. Further, exploratory research “generates initial insights into the nature of an issue and develops questions to be investigated by
more extensive studies” (Marlow 2005, p. 334). Exploration is widely applicable because
all research topics were once “new.” Further, all research topics have the possibility of
“innovation” or ongoing “newness”. Exploratory research may be appropriate to establish
whether a phenomenon exists (Strydom 2013). The point here, of course, is that the exploratory purpose is far from trivial.
Stebbins’ Exploratory Research in the Social Sciences (2001), is the only book devoted
to the nature of exploratory research as a form of social science inquiry. He views it as
a “broad-ranging, purposive, systematic prearranged undertaking designed to maximize
the discovery of generalizations leading to description and understanding of an area of
social or psychological life” (p. 3). It is science conducted in a way distinct from confrmation. According to Stebbins (2001, p. 6) the goal is discovery of potential generalizations,
which can become future hypotheses and eventually theories that emerge from the data. He 
1708 M. Casula et al.
1 3
focuses on inductive logic (which stimulates creativity) and qualitative methods. He does
not want exploratory research limited to the restrictive formulas and models he fnds in
confrmatory research. He links exploratory research to Glaser and Strauss’s (1967) fexible, immersive, Grounded Theory. Strydom’s (2013) analysis of contemporary social work
research methods books echoes Stebbins’ (2001) position. Stebbins’s book is an important
contribution, but it limits the potential scope of this fexible and versatile research purpose.
If we accepted his conclusion, we would delete the “Exploratory” row from Table 1.
Note that explanatory research can yield new questions, which lead to exploration.
Inquiry is a process where inductive and deductive activities can occur simultaneously or
in a back and forth manner, particularly as the literature is reviewed and the research design
emerges.1
 Strict typologies such as explanation, description and exploration or inductive/
deductive can obscures these larger connections and processes. We draw insight from Dewey’s (1896) vision of inquiry as depicted in his seminal “Refex Arc” article. He notes that
“stimulus” and “response” like other dualities (inductive/deductive) exist within a larger
unifying system. Yet the terms have value. “We need not abandon terms like stimulus and
response, so long as we remember that they are attached to events based upon their function in a wider dynamic context, one that includes interests and aims” (Hildebrand 2008, p.
16). So too, in methodology typologies such as deductive/inductive capture useful distinctions with practical value and are widely used in the methodology literature.
We argue that there is a role for exploratory, deductive, and confrmatory research. We
maintain all types of research logics and methods should be in the toolbox of exploratory
research. First, as stated above, it makes no sense on its face to identify an extremely fexible purpose that is idiosyncratic to the researcher and then basically restrict its use to qualitative, inductive, non-confrmatory methods. Second, Stebbins’s (2001) work focused on
social science ignoring the policy sciences. Exploratory research can be ideal for immediate practical problems faced by policy makers, who could fnd a framework of some kind
useful. Third, deductive, exploratory research is more intentionally connected to previous research. Some kind of initial framing device is located or designed using the literature. This may be very important for new scholars who are developing research skills and
exploring their feld and profession. Stebbins’s insights are most pertinent for experienced
scholars. Fourth, frameworks and deductive logic are useful for comparative work because
some degree of consistency across cases is built into the design.
As we have seen, the hypotheses of explanatory and categories of descriptive research
are the dominate frames of social science and policy science. We certainly concur that neither of these frames makes a lot of sense for exploratory research. They would tend to tie
it down. We see the problem as a missing framework or missing way to frame deductive,
exploratory research in the methodology literature. Inductive exploratory research would
not work for many case studies that are trying to use evidence to make an argument. What
exploratory deductive case studies need is a framework that incorporates fexibility. This
is even more true for comparative case studies. A framework of this sort could be usefully applied to policy research (Casula 2020a), particularly evaluative policy research, and
applied research generally. We propose the Working Hypothesis as a fexible conceptual
1 In practice, quantitative scholars often run multivariate analysis on data bases to fnd out if there are correlations. Hypotheses are tested because the statistical software does the math, not because the scholar has
an a priori, relational expectation (hypothesis) well-grounded in the literature and supported by cogent
arguments. Hunches are just fne. This is clearly an inductive approach to research and part of the large
process of inquiry.
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1709
1 3
framework and as a useful tool for doing exploratory studies. It can be used as an evaluative criterion particularly for process evaluation and is useful for student research because
students can develop theorizing skills using the literature.
Table 1 included a column specifying the philosophical basis for each research purpose.
Shifting gears to the philosophical underpinning of methodology provides useful additional context for examination of deductive, exploratory research.
4 What is a working hypothesis
The working hypothesis is frst and foremost a hypothesis or a statement of expectation that
is tested in action. The term “working” suggest that these hypotheses are subject to change,
are provisional and the possibility of fnding contradictory evidence is real. In addition, a
“working” hypothesis is active, it is a tool in an ongoing process of inquiry. If one begins
with a research question, the working hypothesis could be viewed as a statement or group
of statements that answer the question. It “works” to move purposeful inquiry forward.
“Working” also implies some sort of community, mostly we work together in relationship
to achieve some goal.
Working Hypothesis is a term found in earlier literature. Indeed, both pioneering pragmatists, John Dewey and George Herbert Mead use the term working hypothesis in important nineteenth century works. For both Dewey and Mead, the notion of a working hypothesis has a self-evident quality and it is applied in a big picture context.2
Most notably, Dewey (1896), in one of his most pivotal early works (“Refex Arc”),
used “working hypothesis” to describe a key concept in psychology. “The idea of the refex
arc has upon the whole come nearer to meeting this demand for a general working hypothesis than any other single concept (Italics added)” (p. 357). The notion of a working hypothesis was developed more fully 42 years later, in Logic the Theory of Inquiry, where Dewey
developed the notion of a working hypothesis that operated on a smaller scale. He defnes
working hypotheses as a “provisional, working means of advancing investigation” (Dewey
1938, pp. 142). Dewey’s defnition suggests that working hypotheses would be useful
toward the beginning of a research project (e.g., exploratory research).
Mead (1899) used working hypothesis in a title of an American Journal of Sociology
article “The Working Hypothesis and Social Reform” (italics added). He notes that a scientist’s foresight goes beyond testing a hypothesis.
Given its success, he may restate his world from this standpoint and get the basis for
further investigation that again always takes the form of a problem. The solution of
this problem is found over again in the possibility of ftting his hypothetical proposition into the whole within which it arises. And he must recognize that this statement
is only a working hypothesis at the best, i.e., he knows that further investigation will
show that the former statement of his world is only provisionally true, and must be
false from the standpoint of a larger knowledge, as every partial truth is necessarily
false over against the fuller knowledge which he will gain later (Mead 1899, p. 370).
2 In 1958, Philosophers of Science, Oppenheim and Putnam use the notion of Working Hypothesis in their
title “Unity of Science as Working Hypothesis.” They too, use it as a big picture concept, “unity of science
in this sense, can be fully realized constitutes an over-arching meta-scientifc hypothesis, which enables one
to see a unity in scientifc activities that might otherwise appear disconnected or unrelated” (p. 4).
1710 M. Casula et al.
1 3
Cronbach (1975) developed a notion of working hypothesis consistent with inductive
reasoning, but for him, the working hypothesis is a product or result of naturalistic inquiry.
He makes the case that naturalistic inquiry is highly context dependent and therefore results
or seeming generalizations that may come from a study and should be viewed as “working
hypotheses”, which “are tentative both for the situation in which they frst uncovered and
for other situations” (as cited in Gobo 2008, p. 196).
A quick Google scholar search using the term “working hypothesis” show that it is
widely used in twentieth and twenty-frst century science, particularly in titles. In these
articles, the working hypothesis is treated as a conceptual tool that furthers investigation
in its early or transitioning phases. We could fnd no explicit links to exploratory research.
The exploratory nature of the problem is expressed implicitly. Terms such as “speculative”
(Habib 2000, p. 2391) or “rapidly evolving feld” (Prater et al. 2007, p. 1141) capture the
exploratory nature of the study. The authors might describe how a topic is “new” or reference “change”. “As a working hypothesis, the picture is only new, however, in its interpretation” (Milnes 1974, p. 1731). In a study of soil genesis, Arnold (1965, p. 718) notes
“Sequential models, formulated as working hypotheses, are subject to further investigation
and change”. Any 2020 article dealing with COVID-19 and respiratory distress would be
preliminary almost by defnition (Ciceri et al. 2020).
5 Philosophical roots of methodology
According to Kaplan (1964, p. 23) “the aim of methodology is to help us understand, in
the broadest sense not the products of scientifc inquiry but the process itself”. Methods
contain philosophical principles that distinguish them from other “human enterprises and
interests” (Kaplan 1964, p. 23). Contemporary research methodology is generally classifed as quantitative, qualitative and mixed methods. Leading scholars of methodology
have associated each with a philosophical underpinning—positivism (or post-positivism),
interpretivism or constructivist and pragmatism, respectively (Guba 1987; Guba and Lincoln 1981; Schrag 1992; Stebbins 2001; Mackenzi and Knipe 2006; Atieno 2009; Levers
2013; Morgan 2007; O’Connor et al. 2008; Johnson and Onwuegbuzie 2004; Twining et al.
2017). This section summarizes how the literature often describes these philosophies and
informs contemporary methodology and its literature.
Positivism and its more contemporary version, post-positivism, maintains an objectivist
ontology or assumes an objective reality, which can be uncovered (Levers 2013; Twining
et al. 2017).3
 Time and context free generalizations are possible and “real causes of social
scientifc outcomes can be determined reliably and validly (Johnson and Onwuegbunzie
2004, p. 14). Further, “explanation of the social world is possible through a logical reduction of social phenomena to physical terms”. It uses an empiricist epistemology which
3 It should be noted that the positivism described in the research methods literature does not resemble philosophical positivism as developed by philosophers like Comte (Whetsell and Shields 2015). In the research
methods literature “positivism means diferent things to diferent people….The term has long been emptied
of any precise denotation …and is sometimes afxed to positions actually opposed to those espoused by the
philosophers from whom the name derives” (Schrag 1992, p. 5). For purposes of this paper, we are capturing a few essential ways positivism is presented in the research methods literature. This helps us to position
the “working hypothesis” and “exploratory” research within the larger context in contemporary research
methods. We are not arguing that the positivism presented here is anything more. The incompatibility theory discussed later, is an outgrowth of this research methods literature…
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1711
1 3
“implies testability against observation, experimentation, or comparison” (Whetsell and
Shields 2015, pp. 420–421). Correspondence theory, a tenet of positivism, asserts that “to
each concept there corresponds a set of operations involved in its scientifc use” (Kaplan
1964, p. 40).
The interpretivist, constructivists or post-modernist approach is a reaction to positivism.
It uses a relativist ontology and a subjectivist epistemology (Levers 2013). In this world of
multiple realities, context free generalities are impossible as is the separation of facts and
values. Causality, explanation, prediction, experimentation depend on assumptions about
the correspondence between concepts and reality, which in the absence of an objective
reality is impossible. Empirical research can yield “contextualized emergent understanding rather than the creation of testable theoretical structures” (O’Connor et  al. 2008, p.
30). The distinctively diferent world views of positivist/post positivist and interpretivist
philosophy is at the core of many controversies in methodology, social and policy science
literature (Casula 2020b).
With its focus on dissolving dualisms, pragmatism steps outside the objective/subjective
debate. Instead, it asks, “what diference would it make to us if the statement were true”
(Kaplan 1964, p. 42). Its epistemology is connected to purposeful inquiry. Pragmatism has
a “transformative, experimental notion of inquiry” anchored in pluralism and a focus on
constructing conceptual and practical tools to resolve “problematic situations” (Shields
1998; Shields and Rangarajan 2013). Exploration and working hypotheses are most comfortably situated within the pragmatic philosophical perspective.
6 Research approaches
Empirical investigation relies on three types of methodology—quantitative, qualitative and
mixed methods.
6.1 Quantitative methods
Quantitative methods uses deductive logic and formal hypotheses or models to explain,
predict, and eventually establish causation (Hyde 2000; Kaplan 1964; Johnson and Onwuegbunzie 2004; Morgan 2007).4
 The correspondence between the conceptual and empirical
world make measures possible. Measurement assigns numbers to objects, events or situations and allows for standardization and subtle discrimination. It also allows researchers
to draw on the power of mathematics and statistics (Kaplan 1964, pp. 172–174). Using
the power of inferential statistics, quantitative research employs research designs, which
eliminate competing hypotheses. It is high in external validity or the ability to generalize
to the whole. The research results are relatively independent of the researcher (Johnson &
Onwuegbunzie 2004).
Quantitative methods depend on the quality of measurement and a priori conceptualization, and adherence to the underlying assumptions of inferential statistics. Critics charge
4 It should be noted that quantitative researchers often use inductive reasoning. They do this with existing
data sets when they run correlations or regression analysis as a way to fnd relationships. They ask, what
does the data tell us?
1712 M. Casula et al.
1 3
that hypotheses and frameworks needlessly constrain inquiry (Johnson and Onwuegbunzie
2004, p. 19). Hypothesis testing quantitative methods support the explanatory purpose.
6.2 Qualitative methods
Qualitative researchers who embrace the post-modern, interpretivist view,5
 question everything about the nature of quantitative methods (Willis et al. 2007). Rejecting the possibility of objectivity, correspondence between ideas and measures, and the constraints of
a priori theorizing they focus on “unique impressions and understandings of events rather
than to generalize the fndings” (Kolb 2012, p. 85). Characteristics of traditional qualitative research include “induction, discovery, exploration, theory/hypothesis generation and
the researcher as the primary ‘instrument’ of data collection” (Johnson and Onwuegbunzie
2004, p. 18). It also concerns itself with forming “unique impressions and understandings
of events rather than to generalize fndings” (Kolb 2012, p. 85). The data of qualitative
methods are generated via interviews, direct observation, focus groups and analysis of
written records or artifacts.
Qualitative methods provide for understanding and “description of people’s personal
experiences of phenomena”. They enable descriptions of detailed “phenomena as they are
situated and embedded in local contexts.” Researchers use naturalistic settings to “study
dynamic processes” and explore how participants interpret experiences. Qualitative methods have an inherent fexibility, allowing researchers to respond to changes in the research
setting. They are particularly good at narrowing to the particular and on the fipside have
limited external validity (Johnson and Onwuegbunzie 2004, p. 20). Instead of specifying a
suitable sample size to draw conclusions, qualitative research uses the notion of saturation
(Morse 1995).
Saturation is used in grounded theory—a widely used and respected form of qualitative
research, and a well-known interpretivist qualitative research method. Introduced by Glaser and Strauss (1967), this “grounded on observation” (Patten and Newhart 2000, p. 27)
methodology, focuses on “the creation of emergent understanding” (O’Connor et al. 2008,
p. 30). It uses the Constant Comparative method, whereby researchers develop theory from
data as they code and analyze at the same time. Data collection, coding and analysis along
with theoretical sampling are systematically combined to generate theory (Kolb 2012, p.
83). The qualitative methods discussed here support exploratory research.
A close look at the two philosophies and assumptions of quantitative and qualitative
research suggests two contradictory world views. The literature has labeled these contradictory views the Incompatibility Theory, which sets up a quantitative versus qualitative tension similar to the seeming separation of art and science or fact and values (Smith
1983a, b; Guba 1987; Smith and Heshusius 1986; Howe 1988). The incompatibility theory
does not make sense in practice. Yin (1981, 1992, 2011, 2017), a prominent case study
scholar, showcases a deductive research methodology that crosses boundaries using both
quantaitive and qualitative evidence when appropriate.
5 Qualitative researchers are also associated with phenomenology, hermeneutics, naturalistic inquiry and
constructivism.
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1713
1 3
6.3 Mixed methods
Turning the “Incompatibility Theory” on its head, Mixed Methods research “combines
elements of qualitative and quantitative research approaches … for the broad purposes of
breadth and depth of understanding and corroboration” (Johnson et  al. 2007, p. 123). It
does this by partnering with philosophical pragmatism.6
 Pragmatism is productive because
“it ofers an immediate and useful middle position philosophically and methodologically; it
ofers a practical and outcome-oriented method of inquiry that is based on action and leads,
iteratively, to further action and the elimination of doubt; it ofers a method for selecting methodological mixes that can help researchers better answer many of their research
questions” (Johnson and Onwuegbunzie 2004, p. 17). What is theory for the pragmatist
“any theoretical model is for the pragmatist, nothing more than a framework through which
problems are perceived and subsequently organized” (Hothersall 2019, p. 5).
Brendel (2009) constructed a simple framework to capture the core elements of pragmatism. Brendel’s four “p”’s—practical, pluralism, participatory and provisional help to show
the relevance of pragmatism to mixed methods. Pragmatism is purposeful and concerned
with the practical consequences. The pluralism of pragmatism overcomes quantitative/
qualitative dualism. Instead, it allows for multiple perspectives (including positivism and
interpretivism) and, thus, gets around the incompatibility problem. Inquiry should be participatory or inclusive of the many views of participants, hence, it is consistent with multiple realities and is also tied to the common concern of a problematic situation. Finally, all
inquiry is provisional. This is compatible with experimental methods, hypothesis testing
and consistent with the back and forth of inductive and deductive reasoning. Mixed methods support exploratory research.
Advocates of mixed methods research note that it overcomes the weaknesses and
employs the strengths of quantitative and qualitative methods. Quantitative methods provide precision. The pictures and narrative of qualitative techniques add meaning to the
numbers. Quantitative analysis can provide a big picture, establish relationships and its
results have great generalizability. On the other hand, the “why” behind the explanation is
often missing and can be flled in through in-depth interviews. A deeper and more satisfying explanation is possible. Mixed-methods brings the benefts of triangulation or multiple
sources of evidence that converge to support a conclusion. It can entertain a “broader and
more complete range of research questions” (Johnson and Onwuegbunzie 2004, p. 21) and
can move between inductive and deductive methods. Case studies use multiple forms of
evidence and are a natural context for mixed methods.
One thing that seems to be missing from mixed method literature and explicit design
is a place for conceptual frameworks. For example, Heyvaert et al. (2013) examined nine
mixed methods studies and found an explicit framework in only two studies (transformative
and pragmatic) (p. 663).
6 See Feilzer (2010), Howe (1988), Johnson and Onwuegbunzie (2004), Morgan (2007), Onwuegbuzie and
Leech (2005), Biddle and Schaft (2015).
1714 M. Casula et al.
1 3
7 Theory and hypotheses: where is and what is theory?
Theory is key to deductive research. In essence, empirical deductive methods test theory.
Hence, we shift our attention to theory and the role and functions of the hypotheses in
theory. Oppenheim and Putnam (1958) note that “by a ‘theory’ (in the widest sense) we
mean any hypothesis, generalization or law (whether deterministic or statistical) or any
conjunction of these” (p. 25). Van Evera (1997) uses a similar and more complex defnition
“theories are general statements that describe and explain the causes of efects of classes of
phenomena. They are composed of causal laws or hypotheses, explanations, and antecedent
conditions” (p. 8). Sutton and Staw (1995, p. 376) in a highly cited article “What Theory is
Not” assert the that hypotheses should contain logical arguments for “why” the hypothesis
is expected. Hypotheses need an underlying causal argument before they can be considered
theory. The point of this discussion is not to defne theory but to establish the importance
of hypotheses in theory.
Explanatory research is implicitly relational (A explains B). The hypotheses of explanatory research lay bare these relationships. Popular defnitions of hypotheses capture this
relational component. For example, the Cambridge Dictionary defnes a hypothesis a
“an idea or explanation for something that is based on known facts but has not yet been
proven”. Vocabulary.Com’s defnition emphasizes explanation, a hypothesis is “an idea or
explanation that you then test through study and experimentation”. According to Wikipedia a hypothesis is “a proposed explanation for a phenomenon”. Other defnitions remove
the relational or explanatory reference. The Oxford English Dictionary defnes a hypothesis as a “supposition or conjecture put forth to account for known facts.” Science Buddies
defnes a hypothesis as a “tentative, testable answer to a scientifc question”. According to
the Longman Dictionary the hypothesis is “an idea that can be tested to see if it is true or
not”. The Urban Dictionary states a hypothesis is “a prediction or educated-guess based
on current evidence that is yet be tested”. We argue that the hypotheses of exploratory
research—working hypothesis—are not bound by relational expectations. It is this fexibility that distinguishes the working hypothesis.
Sutton and Staw (1995) maintain that hypotheses “serve as crucial bridges between
theory and data, making explicit how the variables and relationships that follow from a
logical argument will be operationalized” (p. 376, italics added). The highly rated journal,
Computers and Education, Twining et al. (2017) created guidelines for qualitative research
as a way to improve soundness and rigor. They identifed the lack of alignment between
theoretical stance and methodology as a common problem in qualitative research. In addition, they identifed a lack of alignment between methodology, design, instruments of data
collection and analysis. The authors created a guidance summary, which emphasized the
need to enhance coherence throughout elements of research design (Twining et al. 2017 p.
12). Perhaps the bridging function of the hypothesis mentioned by Sutton and Staw (1995)
is obscured and often missing in qualitative methods. Working hypotheses can be a tool to
overcome this problem.
For reasons, similar to those used by mixed methods scholars, we look to classical
pragmatism and the ideas of John Dewey to inform our discussion of theory and working
hypotheses. Dewey (1938) treats theory as a tool of empirical inquiry and uses a map metaphor (p. 136). Theory is like a map that helps a traveler navigate the terrain—and should
be judged by its usefulness. “There is no expectation that a map is a true representation of
reality. Rather, it is a representation that allows a traveler to reach a destination (achieve
a purpose). Hence, theories should be judged by how well they help resolve the problem 
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1715
1 3
or achieve a purpose” (Shields and Rangarajan 2013, p. 23). Note that we explicitly link
theory to the research purpose. Theory is never treated as an unimpeachable Truth, rather
it is a helpful tool that organizes inquiry connecting data and problem. Dewey’s approach
also expands the defnition of theory to include abstractions (categories) outside of causation and explanation. The micro-conceptual frameworks7
 introduced in Table 1 are a type
of theory. We defne conceptual frameworks as the “way the ideas are organized to achieve
the project’s purpose” (Shields and Rangarajan 2013 p. 24). Micro-conceptual frameworks
do this at the very close to the data level of analysis. Micro-conceptual frameworks can
direct operationalization and ways to assess measurement or evidence at the individual
research study level. Again, the research purpose plays a pivotal role in the functioning of
theory (Shields and Tajalli 2006).
8 Working hypothesis: methods and data analysis
We move on to answer the remaining questions in the Table 1. We have established that
exploratory research is extremely fexible and idiosyncratic. Given this, we will proceed
with a few examples and draw out lessons for developing an exploratory purpose, building a framework and from there identifying data collection techniques and the logics of
hypotheses testing and analysis. Early on we noted the value of the Working Hypothesis
framework for student empirical research and applied research. The next section uses a
masters level student’s work to illustrate the usefulness of working hypotheses as a way
to incorporate the literature and structure inquiry. This graduate student was also a mature
professional with a research question that emerged from his job and is thus an example of
applied research.
Master of Public Administration student, Swift (2010) worked for a public agency
and was responsible for that agency’s sexual harassment training. The agency needed to
evaluate its training but had never done so before. He also had never attempted a signifcant empirical research project. Both of these conditions suggest exploration as a possible approach. He was interested in evaluating the training program and hence the project
had a normative sense. Given his job, he already knew a lot about the problem of sexual
harassment and sexual harassment training. What he did not know much about was doing
empirical research, reviewing the literature or building a framework to evaluate the training (working hypotheses). He wanted a framework that was fexible and comprehensive.
In his research, he discovered Lundvall’s (2006) knowledge taxonomy summarized with
four simple ways of knowing (Know-what, Know-how, Know-why, Know-who). He asked
whether his agency’s training provided the participants with these kinds of knowledge?
Lundvall’s categories of knowing became the basis of his working hypotheses. Lundvall’s
knowledge taxonomy is well suited for working hypotheses because it is so simple and is
easy to understand intuitively. It can also be tailored to the unique problematic situation of
the researcher. Swift (2010, pp. 38–39) developed four basic working hypotheses:
WH1: Capital Metro provides adequate know-what knowledge in its sexual harassment
training
7 The term conceptual framework is applicable in a broad context (see Ravitch and Riggan 2012). The
micro-conceptual framework narrows to the specifc study and informs data collection (Shields and Rangarajan 2013; Shields et al. 2019a) .
1716 M. Casula et al.
1 3
WH2: Capital Metro provides adequate know-how knowledge in its sexual harassment training
WH3: Capital Metro provides adequate know-why knowledge in its sexual harassment training
WH4: Capital Metro provides adequate know-who knowledge in its sexual harassment training
From here he needed to determine what would determine the diferent kinds of
knowledge. For example, what constitutes “know what” knowledge for sexual harassment training. This is where his knowledge and experience working in the feld as well
as the literature come into play. According to Lundvall et al. (1988, p. 12) “know what”
knowledge is about facts and raw information. Swift (2010) learned through the literature that laws and rules were the basis for the mandated sexual harassment training. He
read about specifc anti-discrimination laws and the subsequent rules and regulations
derived from the laws. These laws and rules used specifc defnitions and were enacted
within a historical context. Laws, rules, defnitions and history became the “facts” of
Know-What knowledge for his working hypothesis. To make this clear, he created subhypotheses that explicitly took these into account. See how Swift (2010, p. 38) constructed the sub-hypotheses below. Each sub-hypothesis was defended using material
from the literature (Swift 2010, pp. 22–26). The sub-hypotheses can also be easily tied
to evidence. For example, he could document that the training covered anti-discrimination laws.
WH1: Capital Metro provides adequate know-what knowledge in its sexual Harassment training
WH1a: The sexual harassment training includes information on anti-discrimination
laws (Title VII).
WH1b: The sexual harassment training includes information on key defnitions.
WH1c: The sexual harassment training includes information on Capital Metro’s
Equal Employment Opportunity and Harassment policy.
WH1d: Capital Metro provides training on sexual harassment history.
Know-How knowledge refers to the ability to do something and involves skills (Lundvall and Johnson 1994, p. 12). It is a kind of expertise in action. The literature and
his experience allowed James Smith to identify skills such as how to fle a claim or
Fig. 1 A Common structure used
in the development of working
hypotheses
Wh1
Wh1a
Wh1b
Wh1c
wh1d
Wh 2
Wh2a
Wh2b
wh2c
Wh3
Wh3a
Wh3b
Wh3c
Wh3d
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1717
1 3
how to document incidents of sexual harassment as important “know-how” knowledge
that should be included in sexual harassment training. Again, these were depicted as
sub-hypotheses.
WH2: Capital Metro provides adequate know-how knowledge in its sexual Harassment
training
WH2a: Training is provided on how to fle and report a claim of harassment
WH2b: Training is provided on how to document sexual harassment situations.
WH2c: Training is provided on how to investigate sexual harassment complaints.
WH2d: Training is provided on how to follow additional harassment policy procedures
protocol
Note that the working hypotheses do not specify a relationship but rather are simple
declarative sentences. If “know-how” knowledge was found in the sexual harassment training, he would be able to fnd evidence that participants learned about how to fle a claim
(WH2a). The working hypothesis provides the bridge between theory and data that Sutton
and Staw (1995) found missing in exploratory work. The sub-hypotheses are designed to
be refned enough that the researchers would know what to look for and tailor their hunt for
evidence. Figure 1 captures the generic sub-hypothesis design.
When expected evidence is linked to the sub-hypotheses, data, framework and research
purpose are aligned. This can be laid out in a planning document that operationalizes the
data collection in something akin to an architect’s blueprint. This is where the scholar
explicitly develops the alignment between purpose, framework and method (Shields and
Rangarajan 2013; Shields et al. 2019b).
Table  2 operationalizes Swift’s working hypotheses (and sub-hypotheses). The table
provide clues as to what kind of evidence is needed to determine whether the hypotheses
are supported. In this case, Smith used interviews with participants and trainers as well as a
review of program documents. Column one repeats the sub-hypothesis, column two specifes the data collection method (here interviews with participants/managers and review of
program documents) and column three specifes the unique questions that focus the investigation. For example, the interview questions are provided. In the less precise world of
qualitative data, evidence supporting a hypothesis could have varying degrees of strength.
This too can be specifed.
For Swift’s example, neither the statistics of explanatory research nor the open-ended
questions of interpretivist, inductive exploratory research is used. The deductive logic
of inquiry here is somewhat intuitive and similar to a detective (Ulriksen and Dadalauri
2016). It is also a logic used in international law (Worster 2013). It should be noted that the
working hypothesis and the corresponding data collection protocol does not stop inquiry
and feldwork outside the framework. The interviews could reveal an unexpected problem
with Smith’s training program. The framework provides a very loose and perhaps useful
ways to identify and make sense of the data that does not ft the expectations. Researchers using working hypotheses should be sensitive to interesting fndings that fall outside
their framework. These could be used in future studies, to refne theory or even in this case
provide suggestions to improve sexual harassment training. The sensitizing concepts mentioned by Gilgun (2015) are free to emerge and should be encouraged.
Something akin to working hypotheses are hidden in plain sight in the professional literature. Take for example Kerry Crawford’s (2017) book Wartime Sexual Violence. Here
she explores how basic changes in the way “advocates and decision makers think about
and discuss confict-related sexual violence” (p. 2). She focused on a subsequent shift from 
1718 M. Casula et al.
1 3Table 2 Operationalization of the working hypotheses: an example Working hypothesis Method of data collection Evidence/criteria WH1: Capital Metro provides adequate know-what knowledge in its sexual Harassment training
WH1a: Capital Metro provides training on anti-discrimination laws (Title VII) Interview supervisors and managers (Interview questions) How does the sexual harassment training address anti-discrimination laws? Additional
questions as appropriate
Interview participants (Interview questions) What did you learn about antidiscrimination law? Additional questions as appropriate
Document analysis (1) Capital Metro EEO Basic training manual (2) Capital Metro EEO Policy How do these documents address history of discrimina- tion laws? Additional questions as appropriate
WH1b: Capital Metro provides training on sexual harassment defnitions Interview supervisors and managers (Interview questions) How does the sexual harassment training address key defnitions? Additional questions
as appropriate
Interview participants (Interview questions) What defnitions about sexual
harassment did you learn? Additional questions as
appropriate
Document Analysis (1) Capital Metro EEO Basic training manual (2) Capital Metro EEO Policy Which defnitions can be found in these documents?
WH1c: and WH1d Data collection methods Further specifcation of evidence used
WH2: Capital Metro sexual harassment training provides adequate “know how” training
WH2a: Capital Metro provides training on how-to fle
and report a claim of harassment
Interview supervisors and managers (Interview questions) How well does the sexual harassment training prepare participants to fle and report a
claim? Additional questions as appropriate
Interview with participants (Interview questions) How well did the sexual harassment training prepare you to fle and report a claim?
Additional questions as appropriate
Document analysis (1) Capital Metro EEO Basic training manual (2) Capital Metro EEO Policy How well do the documents cover how-to fle a report of sexual harassment?
WH2b: Capital Metro provides training on how to document sexual harassment situations Interview of supervisors and managers (Interview questions) How does the sexual harassment training address how to document sexual harassment
situations? Additional questions as appropriate
Interview participants
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1719
1 3
Table 2 (continued)
Working hypothesis Method of data collection Evidence/criteria
(Interview questions) How well did the training cover
how to document sexual harassment situations? Additional questions as appropriate
Document analysis (1) Capital Metro EEO Basic training manual (2) Capital Metro EEO Policy How well do these documents address procedures to document sexual harassment situations
Wh2c & d Data collection methods. Etc. Specify further evidence used
1720 M. Casula et al.
1 3
silence to action. The shift occurred as wartime sexual violence was reframed as a “weapon
of war”. The new frame captured the attention of powerful members of the security community who demanded, initiated, and paid for institutional and policy change. Crawford
(2017) examines the legacy of this key reframing. She develops a six-stage model of potential international responses to incidents of wartime violence. This model is fairly easily
converted to working hypotheses and sub-hypotheses. Table 3 shows her model as a set of
(non-relational) working hypotheses. She applied this model as a way to gather evidence
among cases (e.g., the US response to sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo) to show the ofcial level of response to sexual violence. Each case study chapter
examined evidence to establish whether the case ft the pattern formalized in the working
hypotheses. The framework was very useful in her comparative context. The framework
allowed for consistent comparative analysis across cases. Her analysis of the three cases
went well beyond the material covered in the framework. She freely incorporated useful
inductively informed data in her analysis and discussion. The framework, however, allowed
for alignment within and across cases.
9 Conclusion
In this article we argued that the exploratory research is also well suited for deductive
approaches. By examining the landscape of deductive, exploratory research, we proposed
the working hypothesis as a fexible conceptual framework and a useful tool for doing
exploratory studies. It has the potential to guide and bring coherence across the steps in
the research process. After presenting the nature of exploratory research purpose and how
it difers from two types of research purposes identifed in the literature—explanation, and
description. We focused on answering four diferent questions in order to show the link
between micro-conceptual frameworks and research purposes in a deductive setting. The
answers to the four questions are summarized in Table 4.
Table 3 Example illustrating a set of working hypotheses as a framework for comparative case studies
Source: Adaptation from Table 1.1 of Crawford’s (2017) book Wartime Sexual Violence
Stages of potential international response to sexual violence
WH1: Nonrecognition or no action to prevent sexual violence during confict
WH1a: Sexual violence is not recognized as part of a specifc confict or the confict itself is not recognized
WH1b: Wartime sexual violence as a general issue is not recognized
WH1c: No action is taken, and no formal discussion occurs within or among International Organizations
(IO)
WH2: Sexual Violence is documented during a confict and learning occurs
WH2a: Sexual violence as an aspect of a confict is the subject of a report, publication, study or conference
attended by a state or IO
WH2b: Information gathering about sexual violence during a confict occurs
H3: There is a rhetorical response and condemnation of sexual violence during a confict
WH3a: Sexual violence as part of a specifc confict is subject of a speech, unprompted remarks or press
release of a high-ranking state ofcial or leader of an IO
WH3b: Rhetorical remarks occur but resources to reduce or study sexual violence are not committed
Three additional stages of international response were provided by Crawford (2017)
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1721
1 3
Table 4 Linking micro-conceptual frameworks and research purposes in deductive research
Type of purpose Micro-conceptual framework Methodology Data analysis Primary philosophical underpinning
Explanatory Formal Hypotheses Quantitative, experimental design, survey,
time series, existing data
Inferential statistics Positivism
Descriptive Categories Quantitative, survey, content analysis Simple descriptive statistics Positivism
Exploratory Working hypotheses Qualitative, mixed methods, case study,
quantitative
Evidence of all types may or may
not use statistics
Pragmatism
1722 M. Casula et al.
1 3
Firstly, we argued that working hypothesis and exploration are situated within the pragmatic philosophical perspective. Pragmatism allows for pluralism in theory and data collection techniques, which is compatible with the fexible exploratory purpose. Secondly,
after introducing and discussing the four core elements of pragmatism (practical, pluralism, participatory, and provisional), we explained how the working hypothesis informs the
methodologies and evidence collection of deductive exploratory research through a presentation of the benefts of triangulation provided by mixed methods research. Thirdly, as is
clear from the article title, we introduced the working hypothesis as the micro-conceptual
framework for deductive explorative research. We argued that the hypotheses of explorative
research, which we call working hypotheses are distinguished from those of the explanatory research, since they do not require a relational component and are not bound by relational expectations. A working hypothesis is extremely fexible and idiosyncratic, and it
could be viewed as a statement or group of statements of expectations tested in action
depending on the research question. Using examples, we concluded by explaining how
working hypotheses inform data collection and analysis for deductive exploratory research.
Crawford’s (2017) example showed how the structure of working hypotheses provide a
framework for comparative case studies. Her criteria for analysis were specifed ahead of
time and used to frame each case. Thus, her comparisons were systemized across cases.
Further, the framework ensured a connection between the data analysis and the literature
review. Yet the fexible, working nature of the hypotheses allowed for unexpected fndings
to be discovered.
The evidence required to test working hypotheses is directed by the research purpose
and potentially includes both quantitative and qualitative sources. Thus, all types of evidence, including quantitative methods should be part of the toolbox of deductive, explorative research. We show how the working hypotheses, as a fexible exploratory framework,
resolves many seeming dualisms pervasive in the research methods literature.
To conclude, this article has provided an in-depth examination of working hypotheses
taking into account philosophical questions and the larger formal research methods literature. By discussing working hypotheses as applied, theoretical tools, we demonstrated that
working hypotheses fll a unique niche in the methods literature, since they provide a way
to enhance alignment in deductive, explorative studies.
Acknowledgements The authors contributed equally to this work. The authors would like to thank Quality
& Quantity’s editors and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable advice and comments on previous versions of this paper.
Funding Open access funding provided by Alma Mater Studiorum - Università di Bologna within the
CRUI-CARE Agreement. There are no funders to report for this submission.
Compliance with ethical standards
Confict of interest No potential confict of interest was reported by the author.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1723
1 3
References
Adler, E., Clark, R.: How It’s Done: An Invitation to Social Research, 3rd edn. Thompson-Wadsworth, Belmont (2008)
Arnold, R.W.: Multiple working hypothesis in soil genesis. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 29(6), 717–724 (1965)
Atieno, O.: An analysis of the strengths and limitation of qualitative and quantitative research paradigms.
Probl. Educ. 21st Century 13, 13–18 (2009)
Babbie, E.: The Practice of Social Research, 11th edn. Thompson-Wadsworth, Belmont (2007)
Biddle, C., Schaft, K.A.: Axiology and anomaly in the practice of mixed methods work: pragmatism, valuation, and the transformative paradigm. J. Mixed Methods Res. 9(4), 320–334 (2015)
Brendel, D.H.: Healing Psychiatry: Bridging the Science/Humanism Divide. MIT Press, Cambridge (2009)
Bryman, A.: Qualitative research on leadership: a critical but appreciative review. Leadersh. Q. 15(6), 729–
769 (2004)
Casula, M.: Under which conditions is cohesion policy efective: proposing an Hirschmanian approach to
EU structural funds, Regional & Federal Studies, https://doi.org/10.1080/13597566.2020.1713110
(2020a)
Casula, M.: Economic gowth and cohesion policy implementation in Italy and Spain, Palgrave Macmillan,
Cham (2020b)
Ciceri, F., et  al.: Microvascular COVID-19 lung vessels obstructive thromboinfammatory syndrome
(MicroCLOTS): an atypical acute respiratory distress syndrome working hypothesis. Crit. Care
Resusc. 15, 1–3 (2020)
Crawford, K.F.: Wartime sexual violence: From silence to condemnation of a weapon of war. Georgetown
University Press (2017)
Cronbach, L.: Beyond the two disciplines of scientifc psychology American Psychologist. 30 116–127
(1975)
Dewey, J.: The refex arc concept in psychology. Psychol. Rev. 3(4), 357 (1896)
Dewey, J.: Logic: The Theory of Inquiry. Henry Holt & Co, New York (1938)
Feilzer, Y.: Doing mixed methods research pragmatically: implications for the rediscovery of pragmatism as
a research paradigm. J. Mixed Methods Res. 4(1), 6–16 (2010)
Gilgun, J.F.: Qualitative research and family psychology. J. Fam. Psychol. 19(1), 40–50 (2005)
Gilgun, J.F.: Methods for enhancing theory and knowledge about problems, policies, and practice. In:
Katherine Briar, Joan Orme., Roy Ruckdeschel., Ian Shaw. (eds.) The Sage handbook of social work
research pp. 281–297. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage (2009)
Gilgun, J.F.: Deductive Qualitative Analysis as Middle Ground: Theory-Guided Qualitative Research. Amazon Digital Services LLC, Seattle (2015)
Glaser, B.G., Strauss, A.L.: The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research.
Aldine, Chicago (1967)
Gobo, G.: Re-Conceptualizing Generalization: Old Issues in a New Frame. In: Alasuutari, P., Bickman, L.,
Brannen, J. (eds.) The Sage Handbook of Social Research Methods, pp. 193–213. Sage, Los Angeles
(2008)
Grinnell, R.M.: Social work research and evaluation: quantitative and qualitative approaches. New York:
F.E. Peacock Publishers (2001)
Guba, E.G.: What have we learned about naturalistic evaluation? Eval. Pract. 8(1), 23–43 (1987)
Guba, E., Lincoln, Y.: Efective Evaluation: Improving the Usefulness of Evaluation Results Through
Responsive and Naturalistic Approaches. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco (1981)
Habib, M.: The neurological basis of developmental dyslexia: an overview and working hypothesis. Brain
123(12), 2373–2399 (2000)
Heyvaert, M., Maes, B., Onghena, P.: Mixed methods research synthesis: defnition, framework, and potential. Qual. Quant. 47(2), 659–676 (2013)
Hildebrand, D.: Dewey: A Beginners Guide. Oneworld Oxford, Oxford (2008)
Howe, K.R.: Against the quantitative-qualitative incompatibility thesis or dogmas die hard. Edu. Res. 17(8),
10–16 (1988)
Hothersall, S.J.: Epistemology and social work: enhancing the integration of theory, practice and research
through philosophical pragmatism.Eur. J. Social Work 22(5), 860–870 (2019)
Hyde, K.F.: Recognising deductive processes in qualitative research. Qual. Market Res. Int. J. 3(2), 82–90
(2000)
Johnson, R.B., Onwuegbuzie, A.J.: Mixed methods research: a research paradigm whose time has come.
Educ. Res. 33(7), 14–26 (2004)
Johnson, R.B., Onwuegbuzie, A.J., Turner, L.A.: Toward a defnition of mixed methods research. J. Mixed
Methods Res. 1(2), 112–133 (2007)
1724 M. Casula et al.
1 3
Kaplan, A.: The Conduct of Inquiry. Chandler, Scranton (1964)
Kolb, S.M.: Grounded theory and the constant comparative method: valid research strategies for educators.
J. Emerg. Trends Educ. Res. Policy Stud. 3(1), 83–86 (2012)
Levers, M.J.D.: Philosophical paradigms, grounded theory, and perspectives on emergence. Sage Open 3(4),
2158244013517243 (2013)
Lundvall, B.A.: Knowledge management in the learning economy. In: Danish Research Unit for Industrial
Dynamics Working Paper Working Paper, vol. 6, pp. 3–5 (2006)
Lundvall, B.-Å., Johnson, B.: Knowledge management in the learning economy. J. Ind. Stud. 1(2), 23–42
(1994)
Lundvall, B.-Å., Jenson, M.B., Johnson, B., Lorenz, E.: Forms of Knowledge and Modes of Innovation—
From User-Producer Interaction to the National System of Innovation. In: Dosi, G., et al. (eds.) Technical Change and Economic Theory. Pinter Publishers, London (1988)
Maanen, J., Manning, P., Miller, M.: Series editors’ introduction. In: Stebbins, R. (ed.) Exploratory research
in the social sciences. pp. v–vi. Thousands Oak, CA: SAGE (2001)
Mackenzie, N., Knipe, S.: Research dilemmas: paradigms, methods and methodology. Issues Educ. Res.
16(2), 193–205 (2006)
Marlow, C.R.: Research Methods for Generalist Social Work. Thomson Brooks/Cole, New York (2005)
Mead, G.H.: The working hypothesis in social reform. Am. J. Sociol. 5(3), 367–371 (1899)
Milnes, A.G.: Structure of the Pennine Zone (Central Alps): a new working hypothesis. Geol. Soc. Am.
Bull. 85(11), 1727–1732 (1974)
Morgan, D.L.: Paradigms lost and pragmatism regained: methodological implications of combining qualitative and quantitative methods. J. Mixed Methods Res. 1(1), 48–76 (2007)
Morse, J.: The signifcance of saturation. Qual. Health Res. 5(2), 147–149 (1995)
O’Connor, M.K., Netting, F.E., Thomas, M.L.: Grounded theory: managing the challenge for those facing
institutional review board oversight. Qual. Inq. 14(1), 28–45 (2008)
Onwuegbuzie, A.J., Leech, N.L.: On becoming a pragmatic researcher: The importance of combining quantitative and qualitative research methodologies. Int. J. Soc. Res. Methodol. 8(5), 375–387 (2005)
Oppenheim, P., Putnam, H.: Unity of science as a working hypothesis. In: Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. II, pp. 3–36 (1958)
Patten, M.L., Newhart, M.: Understanding Research Methods: An Overview of the Essentials, 2nd edn.
Routledge, New York (2000)
Pearse, N.: An illustration of deductive analysis in qualitative research. In: European Conference on
Research Methodology for Business and Management Studies, pp. 264–VII. Academic Conferences
International Limited (2019)
Prater, D.N., Case, J., Ingram, D.A., Yoder, M.C.: Working hypothesis to redefne endothelial progenitor
cells. Leukemia 21(6), 1141–1149 (2007)
Ravitch, B., Riggan, M.: Reason and Rigor: How Conceptual Frameworks Guide Research. Sage, Beverley
Hills (2012)
Reiter, B.: The epistemology and methodology of exploratory social science research: Crossing Popper with
Marcuse. In: Government and International Afairs Faculty Publications. Paper 99. http://scholarcom
mons.usf.edu/gia_facpub/99 (2013)
Ritchie, J., Lewis, J.: Qualitative Research Practice: A Guide for Social Science Students and Researchers.
Sage, London (2003)
Schrag, F.: In defense of positivist research paradigms. Educ. Res. 21(5), 5–8 (1992)
Shields, P.M.: Pragmatism as a philosophy of science: A tool for public administration. Res. Pub. Admin.
41995-225 (1998)
Shields, P.M., Rangarajan, N.: A Playbook for Research Methods: Integrating Conceptual Frameworks and
Project Management. New Forums Press (2013)
Shields, P.M., Tajalli, H.: Intermediate theory: the missing link in successful student scholarship. J. Public
Af. Educ. 12(3), 313–334 (2006)
Shields, P., & Whetsell, T.: Public administration methodology: A pragmatic perspective. In: Raadshelders,
J., Stillman, R., (eds). Foundations of Public Administration, pp. 75–92. New York: Melvin and Leigh
(2017)
Shields, P., Rangarajan, N., Casula, M.: It is a Working Hypothesis: Searching for Truth in a Post-Truth
World (part I). Sotsiologicheskie issledovaniya 10, 39–47 (2019a)
Shields, P., Rangarajan, N., Casula, M.: It is a Working Hypothesis: Searching for Truth in a Post-Truth
World (part 2). Sotsiologicheskie issledovaniya 11, 40–51 (2019b)
Smith, J.K.: Quantitative versus qualitative research: an attempt to clarify the issue. Educ. Res. 12(3), 6–13
(1983a)
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1725
1 3
Smith, J.K.: Quantitative versus interpretive: the problem of conducting social inquiry. In: House, E. (ed.)
Philosophy of Evaluation, pp. 27–52. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco (1983b)
Smith, J.K., Heshusius, L.: Closing down the conversation: the end of the quantitative-qualitative debate
among educational inquirers. Educ. Res. 15(1), 4–12 (1986)
Stebbins, R.A.: Exploratory Research in the Social Sciences. Sage, Thousand Oaks (2001)
Strydom, H.: An evaluation of the purposes of research in social work. Soc. Work/Maatskaplike Werk 49(2),
149–164 (2013)
Sutton, R. I., Staw, B.M.: What theory is not. Administrative science quarterly. 371–384 (1995)
Swift, III, J.: Exploring Capital Metro’s Sexual Harassment Training using Dr. Bengt-Ake Lundvall’s taxonomy of knowledge principles. Applied Research Project, Texas State University https://digital.libra
ry.txstate.edu/handle/10877/3671 (2010)
Thomas, E., Magilvy, J.K.: Qualitative rigor or research validity in qualitative research. J. Spec. Pediatric
Nurs. 16(2), 151–155 (2011)
Twining, P., Heller, R.S., Nussbaum, M., Tsai, C.C.: Some guidance on conducting and reporting qualitative
studies. Comput. Educ. 107, A1–A9 (2017)
Ulriksen, M., Dadalauri, N.: Single case studies and theory-testing: the knots and dots of the process-tracing
method. Int. J. Soc. Res. Methodol. 19(2), 223–239 (2016)
Van Evera, S.: Guide to Methods for Students of Political Science. Cornell University Press, Ithaca (1997)
Whetsell, T.A., Shields, P.M.: The dynamics of positivism in the study of public administration: a brief
intellectual history and reappraisal. Adm. Soc. 47(4), 416–446 (2015)
Willis, J.W., Jost, M., Nilakanta, R.: Foundations of Qualitative Research: Interpretive and Critical
Approaches. Sage, Beverley Hills (2007)
Worster, W.T.: The inductive and deductive methods in customary international law analysis: traditional and
modern approaches. Georget. J. Int. Law 45, 445 (2013)
Yin, R.K.: The case study as a serious research strategy. Knowledge 3(1), 97–114 (1981)
Yin, R.K.: The case study method as a tool for doing evaluation. Curr. Sociol. 40(1), 121–137 (1992)
Yin, R.K.: Applications of Case Study Research. Sage, Beverley Hills (2011)
Yin, R.K.: Case Study Research and Applications: Design and Methods. Sage Publications, Beverley Hills
(2017)
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afliations.