computer law & security review 40 (2021) 105531
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/CLSR
Protecting the Internet with international law
Joanna Kuleszaa,∗
, Rolf H. Weber b
a University of Lodz, Kopcinskiego 8/12, 90-232 Lodz, Poland
b University of Zurich, Bahnhofstrasse 70/ P.O. Box, Zürich CH 8021, Switzerland
a r t i c l e i n f o
Keywords:
International law
Internet’s core
Due diligence
State responsibility
International liability
Cybersecurity
a b s t r a c t
The Internet remains the odd child of international law. While forever more universal law
venues such as conferences, edited volumes or research projects consider “the Internet” a
peculiar, interesting aspect of its well-recognized disciplines, international scholarship fails
to address the global network as a whole, stalling the application of the fully developed and
well-suited international law apparatus to the global community’s biggest contemporary
challenge. “Internet governance” is still perceived by legal scholars as construed to international relations and, at best, a potential ground for soft law in a distant future. That is not
the case: Internet governance, with all its challenges, has been shaping international law for
almost two decades. The latest unveilings of the ways in which the Internet impacts global
policies and laws caught the public eye with the 2018 Cambridge Analytica scandal and,
previously, with the 2013 Snowden revelations, yet as surprising as they might have been to
the average user, they are direct results of network’s architecture and its governance model.
This paper looks at the evolving concept of “Internet’s public core” as an opportunity to
bridge this dogmatic gap. We identify the scope and meaning of “Internet’s core” and assess its legitimacy within existing international normative frameworks. We argue that the
technical components crucial to the flawless operation of the global network, such as the
Domain Name System and Internet’s backbone networks, can be effectively protected with
international law.
1. International law and the global network –
facing the challenge
The Internet is an environment where international law, with
all its perplexities, needs to be coherently and effectively applied. Yet current international law approach to Internet governance shows a pertaining reluctance of scholars and practitioners to embrace the challenges posed by global governance of the biggest international open electronic network.
The few Internet-related works strongly rooted in international law, most predominantly the Tallinn Manual and the
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: joannakulesza@gmail.com (J. Kulesza),
rolf.weber@rwi.uzh.ch (R.H. Weber).
Tallinn Manual 2.0, have been commissioned by NATO and
effectively strongly rely on the law of armed conflict, with
both: their dogmatic approach and the selection of commissioned experts, while, as those experts rightfully observed, no
armed conflict, as per international law terminology, has yet
occurred in cyberspace.1 Despite Internet’s rapid growth since
1 Reliable, expertise-based research and reporting by e.g. the International Law Commission on the appropriate application of
international law norms and principles to the challenges posed
by cyberspace might prove the solution to the pertaining political challenge surrounding cybersecurity and Internet governance.
Most recently this need was made explicitly evident by the failure
of the UN Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in the
Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of
International Security, discussed further in this text.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2021.105531
2 computer law & security review 40 (2021) 105531
the early 1990s and its significant impact on global politics,
trade and social paradigms,the global network is still not seen
as a stable part of international legal scholarship, with “Internet” or “information and communication technology” related
papers, presentations or works appearing in dispersed narratives, each focused on e.g. the law of armed conflicts, human
rights, democratic accountability or international trade. There
is no general perspective on the Internet as a part of the international legal system.
In this paper we argue (once again)2 that the Internet – an
open global network operating on a uniform system of domain
names and Internet Protocol addresses – deserves a steady
place in the international law dogmatic. This is not an attempt
to take on the decades old argument of “the law of the horse”3
but rather a confirmation of the need for a comprehensive
look at the challenges which the global Internet-based communications have had on international law and community.
We look at the relatively novel concept of “Internet’s public
core” as a good opportunity to apply well-established norms
and principles of international law to global Internet governance. We see the need for such response rising from the increasing risks posed to core Internet operations by the growing
expectations from local governments and different groups of
interest and identify the most appropriate means and venues
to address the growing need to secure Internet functions and
stability of its core infrastructures. We argue that the recognized principles of international law, in particular those on
state responsibility, due diligence and international liability
can be applied to cyberspace and its most fundamental subsets.
In our analysis, we look at various existing venues where
Internet governance related issues are being discussed and
assess their relevance for addressing Internet security challenges. Following the current trend in academic debates on
Internet governance, we recognize the need for a versatile
approach. Many international fora, such as the International
Telecommunications Union (ITU),the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) or the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names
and Numbers (ICANN), offer possibilities to embrace the security and stability issues relevant for Internet governance. We
recommend coordination of their individual efforts, paving
the way for an international customary compromise, possibly
leading to a more tangible “contractual” framework. The arguments made in this paper are intended to fuel a discussion on
other areas “shared” by Internet governance and international
law, such as freedom of expression, privacy, private and public
accountability or the no-harm principle.
The first section of the paper briefly covers the phenomenon of Internet governance and describes its multistakeholder approach.We emphasize the fundamental role of three
2 For comprehensive arguments on the pressing need to govern
cyberspace with international law see our previous works, in particular: J. Kulesza, International Internet Law (2012); R. H. Weber, Realizing a New Global Cyberspace Framework, Normative Foundations and
Guiding Principles (2014). 3 L. Lessig, ‘Commentaries the Law of the Horse: What Cyberlaw Might Teach’, 113 Harvard Law Review (1999) 501 ff., referring
to Frank H. Easterbrook, ‘Cyberspace and the Law of the Horse’, 1
University of Chicago Legal Forum (1996) 207 ff.
groups of stakeholders: states, business (including the technical community) and civil society in the process of Internet
standard-setting and policy-making. Then we move on to discuss the notion of Internet’s “public core”. We understand the
“public core of the open internet” as described in the EU Cybersecurity Act, namely as “its main protocols and infrastructure”, seen as
“a global public good”, offering “essential functionality of the internet as a whole” and “underpinning its normal operation.”4 We link
this need of protecting Internet “critical resources” to the wellknown concepts of critical infrastructure protection and address the latest developments in relevant international policies. The following section discusses the ways states and private parties deal with managing critical infrastructures and
how they avoid threats. Drawing analogies to international
law, we refer to e.g. environmental law and international trade
law as proof of the changing face of international law and policy making, pertinent also to Internet governance and cybersecurity. We focus on four principles crucial to Internet governance and international law, with emphasis put on due diligence and state responsibility. The current model of international law and policy making shifts from state-centered to
more distributed and informal forms, just to point to environmental law or international trade specifics, strongly relying on private parties input. This is relevant also for international telecommunications and Internet governance, as discussed in more detail below. We recommend applying the
lessons learned from other areas of law, in particular those
dealing with the environment and global trade for Internet
governance, with due concern for the necessary, accompanying political tension.
2. Internet governance and international law
2.1. Elements of Internet governance
Internet governance, once a purely technical exercise that
later evolved to cover nearly all Internet-related activities, is
now being perceived as one of many tools to enforce national
policies and local laws. States reach out to operators providing
core Internet services, expecting them to assist with issues of
national security, crime prevention or anti-terrorist measures.
This increasing trend shows a misconception of the way the
network operates, putting at risk its fundamental end-to-end
principle: the design within the infrastructure of the network
becomes subject to policy constraints that should be dealt
with at the end nodes. If Internet infrastructures are to be
tweaked and used for the purposes of national security, copyright protection, curtailing free speech according to local standards or shriveling local citizens, we risk damaging the global
network as it is now known. What has been referred to as
“Spliternet” – the creation of numerous smaller networks, dis4 Regulation (EU) 2019/881 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 17 April 2019 on ENISA (the European Union Agency for
Cybersecurity) and on information and communications technology cybersecurity certification and repealing Regulation (EU) No
526/2013 (Cybersecurity Act) (Text with EEA relevance), OJ L 151,
7.6.2019, p. 15–69, para 23, 14.
computer law & security review 40 (2021) 105531 3
connected, reflective of local legal and cultural values – might
lead to fragmentation and the end of global communications.
Originally, “governing” the Internet referred to the performance of the purely technical administration of online services and was done by academics. Yet as the commercial, social and political potential of the Internet grew, the term has
become all-encompassing, covering “the development and application by governments, the private sector and civil society,
in their respective roles, of shared principles, norms, rules,
decision-making procedures, and programmes that shape the
evolution and use of the Internet”.5 Once “managing” Internet resources found its way onto the international diplomatic
agenda, it covered all issues relevant to the reliable and stable operation of the network. As reiterated in the WSIS Tunis
Agenda, “international management of the Internet should
be multilateral, transparent and democratic, with the full involvement of governments,the private sector, civil society and
international organizations”.6 It should aim to secure “equitable distribution of resources” as well as “facilitate access for
all” while ensuring a “a stable and secure functioning of the
Internet”.7 The Tunis Agenda clearly sets out the roles of individual stakeholder groups. It characterized “the management
of the Internet” as encompassing both: “technical and public policy issues” and as such recommended for all relevant
processes to “involve all stakeholders and relevant intergovernmental and international organizations”.8 In this respect it
recognized that the “policy authority for Internet-related public policy issues” rests within “the sovereign right of states” as
they are the ones endowed with “rights and responsibilities
for international Internet-related public policy issues”.9
The complex concept of sovereignty remains outside the
scope of this paper, yet it is not possible to speak of international law and its implications for cyberspace without referencing the rich variety of state positions and academic writing
on state sovereignty online.10 The notion of sovereignty is ambiguous in international law itself. The Westphalian perception of state’s exclusive competence to decide over its internal
matters and external relations. The Westphalian concept of
state sovereignty relied on heads of states (sovereigns) agreeing to govern their peoples within territorial borders as agreed
upon in 1648.11 This was to allow for the enforcement of certain shared cultural values within and not beyond communi5 World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS), Tunis Agenda
for the Information Society (2005), para. 35, U. N. Doc. WSIS05/TUNIS/DOC/6(Rev.1)-E.
6 Ibid., at para. 29 7 Idem.
8 Ibid., at para. 35. 9 Idem. 10 The concept of Westphalian sovereignty, its evolution and
(in)applicability vis-à-vis cyberspace has been discussed at length
here: R. Balleste, J. Kulesza, Signs and Portents in Cyberspace: The Rise
of Jus Internet as New Order in International Law, 23 Fordham Intell.
Prop. Media & Ent. L.J. 1311 (2013). Available at: https://ir.lawnet.
fordham.edu/iplj/vol23/iss4/4. 11 Stephen D. Krasner, Compromising Westphalia, 20 International
Security 115 (Winter, 1995–1996). See also, Jouni Häkli, The Politics
of Belonging: Complexities of Identity in the Catalan Borderlands, 83 Geografiska Annaler. Series B, Human Geography, 111, 112 (2001). (It
took France and Spain 11 more years to find a satisfying consensus, embodied within the Treaty of the Pyrenees of 1659.)
ties which followed them. The Westphalian notion developed
into the sovereignty of “nation-states,” underlaying contemporary international relations. “Nation states” were perceived
to be communities of individuals sharing joint values, history
and culture. They represented more than just the exercise of
power of a single ruler over a group of individuals.12 The idea
of “sovereign nation states,” relying upon the Westphalian order of law, necessitated for nation-states to exist peacefully.
This was achieved by allowing communities to exercise their
common culture and beliefs, communicate in common language(s) and govern themselves in a way they found appropriate within certain territorial limits, and agreed upon among
the nation-states so construed.13 As international law evolved,
so did the concept of sovereignty giving way to contractual
obligations of states, the pacts sunt servanda principle and ius
cogens norms prohibiting certain states actions even within
their borders. “Sovereignty” – term crucial to the architects of
the Westphalian regime – is being substituted by its derivatives. What once safeguarded peaceful coexistence of diverse
views, values and communities were replaced by notions of
“shared” and/or “aligned” sovereignty.14
These novel notions have evolved far from the original concept agreed upon in Westphalia, just as international law itself. The Westphalian notion of sovereignty has been refined
to a much narrower scope with international law instruments
such as peremptory norms or humanitarian intervention setting contemporary limits to this original understanding of
state exclusive competence. Therefore its re-introduction for
the cyber-sphere seems particularly ill suited, as has been argued at length by various authors.15 At first glance the original notion of sovereignty might be perceived as an obstacle to
protecting the “public core” of the Internet. Yet its contemporary understanding with strong focus on sustainable development, human rights and capacity building could easily be an
argument in aligning efforts to ensure maintaining the network secure and resilient in the shared interest of the international community. The application of international law in its
entirety, as accepted by the UN GGE and individual states in
their statements leaves no room for the original, renaissance
understanding of sovereignty. Any states arguing to the contrary are likely acting solely to protect their individual interests, be it those instigated by national security concerns or
motivated by an attempt to avoid international liability or responsibility.
12 See, J. Samuel Barkin and Bruce Cronin, The State and the Nation:
Changing Norms and the Rules of Sovereignty in International Relations,
48 International Organization 107–130 (Winter, 1994), available at
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2706916. 13 Id. at 115–117. 14 For a practical exercise in applying these novel notion of
sovereignty see e.g. Jean-Claude Juncker, State of the Union Address,
12 September 2018 available at: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/
sites/beta-political/files/soteu2018-factsheet-sovereignty_en.pdf
where the former EC chief spoke of a shared belief that “that
sharing sovereignty makes nation states stronger”. 15 See e.g. S.D. Krasner, The case for shared sovereignty, Journal
of Democracy, 2005; S.D. Krasner, The Hole in the Whole: Sovereignty,
Shared Sovereignty, and International Law, 25 Mich. J. Int’l L., 2004;
Milton L Mueller, Against Sovereignty in Cyberspace, 22 International
Studies Review 4, 779–801, 2020.
4 computer law & security review 40 (2021) 105531
This is the case also because a the growing role of the private sector and civil society being predominantly designated
in the technical and economic development of the Internet,
while civil society takes the lead at community level. Intergovernmental organizations help coordinate “internet-related
public policy issues” while international organizations take
the lead in developing “internet-related technical standards
and relevant policies”.16 This all-encompassing definition has
been fundamental for the multistakeholder approach to Internet governance (also known as the multistakeholderism
principle), representing the joint management of Internet resources by three groups: states, business and civil society “in
their respective roles”.17 This comprehensive build-up of the
Internet governance community has been recognized by various international fora that include e.g. the Council of Europe (CoE). In its 2011 Declaration on Internet governance
principles the CoE Committee of Ministers refers indirectly to
“multi-stakeholder governance” of the network when it states
that the “development and implementation of Internet governance arrangements should ensure, in an open, transparent and accountable manner, the full participation of governments, the private sector, civil society, the technical community and users, taking into account their specific roles and responsibilities”.18 Also the NETMundial initiative, a state-led
Internet governance platform, put in place by Brazil as a reaction to the Snowden revelations, revealing US mass cybersurveillance, reiterated the principle of multistakeholderism
at the very top of its list, defining it as “the full participation
of governments, the private sector, civil society, the technical
community, academia and the users in their respective roles
and responsibilities”.19
2.2. Internet governance and international law in practice
The 10 years period after the WSIS summit (2005–2015) fostered debates on making the ambiguous notion of “Internet
governance” more specific. In particular defining the “respective roles” of states, business and civil society proved challenging. Some authors emphasized the role of private actors
in national and international policy making.20 Others called
for linking Internet governance with the framework of international human rights law, viewing the network as a global
enabler for free speech, right to assembly and other human
rights, following the path set by media law, relying on freedom of expression guarantees as the baseline of state commit16 World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS), Tunis Agenda
for the Information Society (2005), para. 35, U. N. Doc. WSIS05/TUNIS/DOC/6(Rev.1)-E.
17 For a detailed discussion on multistakeholderism see: J.
Kulesza, supra note 2, 138–139; R. Radu, J. M. Chenou, R. H. Weber (Eds.), The Evolution of Global Internet Governance: Principles and
Policies in the Making (2014) 79–141; R. H. Weber, Legal foundations
of multistakeholder decision-making, 135 Zeitschrift für Schweizerisches Recht (2016), 247 ff.; Global Commission of Internet Governance, Who Runs the Internet?, Vol. 2, 2016. 18 Council of Europe (CoE), Declaration by the Committee of Ministers
on Internet governance principles (2011) para. 2. 19 NetMundial Initiative, NETMundial principles (2014). 20 See e.g. L. A. Bygrave, Internet Governance by Contract (2015).
ment to the free flow of information online.21Another group
of discussants argued for a return to the initial, technical, narrow perception of the term,22 and so e.g. Broeders relies on
the evolving two-tier approach to the notion of Internet governance, when he argues that Internet’s infrastructure (its core
infrastructure and protocols) are the “first instance” of Internet governance, whereas “it is this public core that drives the
Internet’s development”.23 He views the “using” of Internet’s
infrastructure as a “second instance” of Internet governance,
where “the Internet becomes a tool in the battle to control online content and behavior”, from protecting intellectual property interests to censorship and surveillance.24
Such a distinction is fundamental to the concept of the
“public core of the Internet” and the policy proposal to consider it a “global good”, both discussed in that same paper
and focal to this paper.25 Corresponding to a current trend in
cybersecurity debates which redefines Internet governance to
better reflect current policy needs, many authors offer novel
approaches to the distribution of competence among stakeholders. Savage and McConnell recommend “simplifying Internet governance (IG) by partitioning it into issues that can
be addressed by existing international agencies and those that
cannot”.26 They suggest modifying the way how international
agencies dealing with Internet governance related issues operate so as to reflect the multistakeholder model specific to
ICANN.
The international fora to be considered as possibly addressing the issues relevant to the Internet’s public core are:
1) the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) – an intergovernmental organization within the ambit of the United
Nations, which, despite having taken steps towards multistakeholderism, still lacks the recognition from civil society
or business; 2) the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) – run under UN auspices for over a decade, but never designed to actively attend to pertinent policy issues or serve as a platform
for diplomatic negotiations, hence still enjoying little interest
from states, perceived more as a talk shop formula for civil
society; and 3) the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names
and Numbers (ICANN), the current paradigm of multistakeholderism, yet, unlike the ITU, ill-suited for facilitating intergovernmental negotiations.
21 See e.g. R. Balleste, Internet Governance: Origins, Current Issues,
and Future Possibilities (2015). 22 D. Broeders, The public core of the Internet (2015); D. Broeders,
Defining the protection of the ’Public core of the internet’ as a national
interest 190 ORF Issue Brief (2017); L. DeNardis, Protocol Politics. The
Globalisation of Internet Governance (2009). 23 D. Broeders, supra note 22) 10; for a comprehensive discussion
on trends in Internet governance discourse see generally: R. Radu,
J. M. Chenou, R. H.Weber, supra note 17); for an analysis of different
approaches to Internet governance see therein: D. Sylvan, Global
Internet Governance: Governance without Governors (2014) 23–37. 24 Idem. 25 For a comprehensive analysis of policies and trends in governance of global public goods see also: N. Krisch, ‘The Decay of
Consent: International Law in an Age of Global Public Goods’, 108
American Journal of International Law (2014), 1–40. 26 J. E. Savage, B. McConnell, Exploring Multi-Stakeholder Internet
Governance (2015) 2.
computer law & security review 40 (2021) 105531 5
As the issue of telecommunication and information systems security rises on national and international policy agendas, more venues, traditionally used for international security debates, come into play. Among state-led actions targeting
cybersecurity challenges one should note the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) – the most significantintergovernmental organization focused on armed conflicts and international peace. In 2016 NATO officially recognized cyberspace as
the fifth warfare domain and confirmed that a cyberattack on
any of its allies will be considered an act of war.27 Another outcome of NATO’s cybersecurity focus was the Tallinn Manual
(with its two editions thus far), offering a first every study of
international law applicable to cyberspace.However,the NATO
model is purely governmental and in no way resembles the
paradigmatic multistakeholder model of Internet governance.
NATO’s cybersecurity focus followed over a decade of statelead efforts in the Internet governance domain, initiated with
the ITU WSIS process and culminated in 2012 with the World
Conference on International Telecommunications (WCIT-12)
in Dubai. Both: NATO and ITU enjoy a strong US presence,
which proved highly significant in the light of the “Snowden
revelations”. The 2013 disclosure of long-lasting US surveillance targeting global communications casts a shadow over
White House international policies, raising serious concerns
as to the trustworthiness of US leadership, also with regard to
Internet governance. As a counterbalance to US-led efforts in
governing the global network, Brazil initiated the NetMundial
Initiative (NMI), another intergovernmental forum debating
Internet governance, cybersecurity and human rights.28
As already mentioned, the most recent, relevant and
promising attempt at finding ways of appropriate application
of international law to cyberspace was the UN Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) on Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security. The UN has traditionally called upon experts
to facilitate its work in various areas of international law in
similar ways, yet this particular exercise – the GGE on cybersecurity with the 2016–2017 mandate – was unique in both:
the scope of its mandate and expectations for its result. It built
upon the success of its predecessors. Thus far there have been
five Groups of Governmental Experts (GGEs) working on “existing and potential threats from the cyber-sphere and possible
cooperative measures to address them”.29
The first one, dating back to 2004, consisted of 15 members and failed to produce a consensus report due to two crucial unresolved policy questions, namely: 1) the scope of the
needed debate, in particular whether the focus should be only
directed to infrastructure management or put also on content, especially whether regulating transboundary flow of information was a national security issue, and 2) the need to
27 NATO, Warsaw Security Summit Communique (2016) para.
70–71, available at https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/
official_texts_133169.htm (last visited 31 August 2018). 28 http://netmundial.org/. 29 For a detailed timeline of GGEs and their political composition
within particular mandates see the United Nations Office for Disarmament Issues (UNODA) archive, available at https://www.un.
org/disarmament/topics/informationsecurity/ (last visited 31 December 2020).
include some language emphasizing new threats originating
from state exploitation of new ICTs for military and security
purposes.
The second GGE (2009/2010) produced a report recommending a dialogue on “norms for state use of ICTs to reduce risk
and protect critical infrastructure” and “confidence-building
and risk-reduction measures”.30
The third Group (2012/2013) argued for international law
and in particular the UN Charter to be applicable to cyberspace
which should remain “open, secure, peaceful and accessible”.31 It also confirmed the state sovereignty applied to conduct in cyberspace and to state territorial jurisdiction over ICT
infrastructure located within its borders. It also emphasized
the need to respect human rights online, arguing that “state
efforts to address the security of ICTs must go hand-in-hand
with respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms”
while “states must not use proxies to commit internationally
wrongful acts and must ensure that their territories are not
used by non-state actors for unlawful use of ICTs”.32
The fourth Group (2015) produced a comprehensive consensus report on norms, rules or principles of the responsible behavior of states in cyberspace as well as on confidence building measures, international cooperation and capacity building.33 Its findings confirmed four principles of international
law’s application to cyberspace:
1 “In their use of ICTs, States must observe, among other
principles of international law, State sovereignty, the
settlement of disputes by peaceful means, and nonintervention in the internal affairs of other States.
2 Existing obligations under international law are applicable to State use of ICTs and States must comply with their
obligations to respect and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms.
3 States must not use proxies to commit internationally
wrongful acts using ICTs, and should seek to ensure that
their territory is not used by non-State actors to commit
such acts.
4 The UN should play a leading role in promoting dialogue on
the security of ICTs in their use by States, and in developing common understandings on the application of international law and norms, rules and principles for responsible
State behavior.”34
The fifth Group (2016/2017) was therefore to face a significant challenge,transposing those general principles into more
detailed obligations. It was to tackle cyberspace, Internet governance and cybersecurity – points of particular contention
in the era of rising international tensions on cybersecurity,
the ambiguity of legal qualifications of cyberattacks and the
limit of state due care in preventing foreign harm originating from their territory through computer networks. It operated with traditional intergovernmental tools in a multistake30 U.N. Doc A/65/201. 31 U.N Doc A/68/98. 32 Idem. 33 UN Doc. A/70/174. 34 Idem.
6 computer law & security review 40 (2021) 105531
holder domain, seeking intergovernmental consensus where
governments are no longer the only rule makers. The failure
of the last GGE was due to two factors: increasing political tension over attribution of cyberattacks, fuelled by mutual accusations and a low willingness to share expertise on the part of
all major players and the lack of consideration for non-state
partners in Internet governance norm making.35
While Internet governance is eagerly discussed by governments, the current Internet governance landscape was
originally designed as the effect of bottom-up governance
models, rooted strongly in the technical community, just to
mention the Internet Society (ISOC) or the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) with its “Requests for Comments”
(RfCs), community-developed common standards voluntarily
followed by its members: Internet service providers or software developers. While “security by design” remains a common paradigm within both: ISOC and IETF,36 there is no connection to be made between this extra-legal, communitybased rule making approach and the hard norm setting model
of e.g. NATO. While ICANN, ISOC, and IGF have been attending
to the issue,this communications’ gap holds crucial relevance
for the development of any effective international cybersecurity policies and must be addressed by whatever model of
global cybersecurity. There can be no effective cybersecurity
policy developed solely at governmental level, without strong
presence of the technical community and vigilant input from
civil society. This is particularly relevant to a highly technical
issue that is the protection of Internet’s fundamental functions and resources, referred to as the Internet’s core.
3. Critical Internet infrastructure and “public
core” of the Internet
The concept behind Internet’s public core is a functional one
– it aims to ensure an open and reliable Internet, free from
third party influence, regardless of reasons or interests behind it. As Broeders argues, for the Internet to be considered
35 For an analysis of the UN GEE process see e.g.: Ann Väljataga, “Back to Square One? The Fifth UN GGE Fails to
Submit a Conclusive Report at the UN General Assembly,”
NATO CCDCOE, 2017, https://ccdcoe.org/back-square-one-fifthun-gge-fails-submit-conclusive-report-un-general-assembly.
html. For a detailed analysis of the UN GGE report see: Eneken Tikk
et al., Voluntary, Non-Binding Norms for Responsible State Behaviour
in the Use Of Information and Communications Technology: A Commentary, ed. Eneken Tikk (New York, NY: United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, 2017), https://www.un.org/disarmament/
wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Civil-Society-2017.pdf. An interesting initiative focused on this particular challenge is the Microsoft
proposal of an Internet Geneva convention facilitated by a global
center for cyber-expertise, focusing on forensic attribution of
cyberattacks. While the initiative lacks political support, deeming
it unsuccessful, the fact that a substantial solution for a global
problem is offered by a private party, taking equal footing with
its governmental partners, reflects the very nature of multistakeholder governance. For a more detailed discussion on the
Microsoft’s proposal see further in this text. 36 See e.g.: E. Rescorla, ‘Guidelines for Writing RFC Text on Security
Considerations’, 3552 Requestfor Comments (RfC) (2003) available at
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3552 (last visited 31 December 2020).
a global public good one must “establish and disseminate an
international standard stipulating that the Internet’s public
core”. Although ambiguous, the notion is used to describe
the network’s main protocols and infrastructure, “which are
a global public good”.37 Such an international standard must
safeguard those resources against any intervention by governments.
One of the few international attempts to directly address the issue of Internet’s core at the policy level is CoE’s
2009 report on ”Internet governance and Critical Internet Resources”.38 It identified “Critical Internet Resources” (CIRs)
that require particular care from the international community to ensure the free and reliable flow of information online.
According to the CoE, the CIRs include: root servers, Domain
Name System, Internet Protocol and the Internet “backbone
structures”, including Internet Exchange Points (IXPs).39 It emphasized also the need to secure universal broadband access
and network neutrality and linked the need to protect CIRs
with the existing critical resources dogmatic, indicating the
Internet itself as a “critical resource”, arguing that for it to remain “sustainable, robust, secure and stable” it must be protected “in the same way that other critical common resources
are protected”.40
Another guideline helping to identify the Internet’s core
stems from ISOC, which in its 2005 Comments on the
Chair’s Internet Governance Paper identified “Infrastructure
and management of critical Internet resources” among the
“public policy issues relevant to Internet Governance”.41 The
comments named IP addressing, DNS and the secure operation of RIRs as crucial elements of the Internet’s ecosystem,
claiming that a balanced “equitable access to IP addressing
resources and commend the establishment and evolution of
the Regional Internet Registry system that has responsibility
for this important role”.42
These two documents illustrate well the basis for the existing compromise on the need to protect fundamental Internet
functions reflected in national policies and community-based
technical standards.43 While other elements might be considered crucial for the network’s operation, as for 2018 the consensus on critical Internet resources amounts to a short list
and includes: 1) Internet backbone networks, 2) DNS servers,
3) Internet Exchange Points (IXPs) and 4) TLD related services (registries and registrars). While a progressive, open catalogue of critical Internet resources is to be identified through
37 Broeders, supra note 22 at 13. 38 Council of Europe, Internet governance and critical internet resources a report prepared by the Council of Europe Secretariat Media and Information Society Division Directorate General of Human Rights and Legal Affairs Council of Europe, April 2009. 39 Ibid., at 13–15. 40 Ibid., at 23. 41 Internet Society, Comments on the Chair’s Internet Governance Paper (2005) 4. 42 Ibid., at para. 47 43 For a thorough study on national documents and technical standards regarding cybersecurity and critical Internet resources see e.g.: D. Broeders, supra note 17 (2017); see now
also Microsoft, Cybersecurity Policy Framework (2018), available
at https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/cybersecurity/content-hub/
Cybersecurity-Policy-Framework (last visited 31 December 2020).
computer law & security review 40 (2021) 105531 7
dialogue and diplomacy, the international need for its legal
and organizational protection is beyond doubt. These four resources are to be perceived as “Internet’s public core”, whose
security and stability is indispensable for the reliable operation of the network.
One of the starting points for a discussion on protecting the
Internet’s core could be the political concept of “global public good”, focal to this paper. Although not perfectly aligned
to the needs of Internet governance and the network’s architecture, it is worth a closer look. A complementary concept of “critical infrastructures” and their protection will serve
as another point of reference. The idea of “Internet’s public
core” as a “global public good” can therefore be perceived as a
derivative of two policy concepts: 1) The ambiguous notion of
“global public goods”, once generated by the era of globalization, derived from the economic writings of Paul Samuelson
on “public goods”. It refers to all globally available goods that
are non-rivalrous (consumption does not influence the quantity available to others) and non-excludable (their use cannot
be prevented); the examples of global public goods include
knowledge as well as the common heritage of mankind.44 2)
Critical infrastructure protection as provided by existing national regimes and international cooperation programs, such
as the European Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection (EPCIP), securing networks fundamental to the daily
operation of any modern day society: water and energy supply, mass transportation, health and emergency services and
alike.
This is not to imply that either of those two concepts offers readymade solutions for protecting the public core of the
Internet. It is rather to indicate the network of reference for
further research, attempting to identify those areas of existing international relations, law and policy, which can be relevant for Internet governance at a time of increasing threats to
national security and international peace. The following sections of this paper look at both concepts: critical infrastructure
protection and international law analogies, seeking to identify existing solutions that can be imported to the protection
of Internet’s critical infrastructures and their protection as a
“global public good”.
4. Managing critical infrastructures and
avoiding threats
The Tallinn Manual defines critical infrastructure (CI) as all
systems and assets, physical and virtual, within a nationstate’s jurisdiction that “are so vital that their incapacitation
or destruction may debilitate a State’s security, economy, public health or safety or the environment.”45 It also defines “cyber infrastructure” covering “communications, storage, and
computing resources upon which computer systems operate”.46 This handbook, based on NATO Cooperative Cyber De44 The discussion on “globally public goods” reaches far beyond
the scope of this study. For an introduction to the discussion on
the issue see e.g.: Krisch (supra note 19) 1–40. 45 M.N. Schmitt (ed.), The Tallinn Manual (2013) 258; see also 2nd
ed. (2017). 46 Idem.
fence Centre of Excellence sponsored research, designed as a
non-binding, draft set of cyber norms at a time of war, stipulates in Rule 81 that it is prohibited to attack, destroy, remove
or render useless “objects indispensable to the survival of the
civilian population by means of cyberoperations”.47
Referring to the law on armed conflicts the experts behind
the Tallinn Manual agreed that this provision should cover
“objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population” that include: “foodstuffs, agricultural areas for the production of foodstuffs, crops, livestock, drinking water installations and supplies and irrigation works”. This list clearly indicates that neither the Internet as such nor its infrastructure
fall within the ambit of the existing customary law behind
the proposed rule, although, “depending on circumstances”,
include “cyber infrastructure indispensable to the functioning of electrical generators, irrigation works and installations,
drinking water installations and food production facilities.”48
These observations are to be considered only with reference to a time of war, as per Art. 54(2) Additional Protocol I,
since the first edition of the Tallinn Manual discusses international humanitarian law and its applicability to cyberconflicts, while observing that thus far possibly only the Stuxnet
malware incident (2010) amounted to an “armed attack”, and
that also not without controversy among the experts involved.
With that in mind the discussion on an “armed attack” in cyberspace and its legal consequences remains beyond the ambit of this paper, as for this study the legal qualification of critical Internet infrastructures at the time of war is of little significance. As already stated no cyberconflict has yet been considered an armed conflict according to international law. This
is why rather than a reference to the law of war, one applicable
to the time of peace should be made.
The Tallinn Manual 2.0, advertised by the authors to address the time of peace, follows the same logic and criteria,
addressing crucial infrastructures with the same reference to
Article 52(1) of the Additional Protocol I and explicitly limiting
its application to “international and non-international armed
conflict” following an “attack”.49 While thorough and detailed,
it fails to provide clear guidance on the application of the law
of peace to cyberspace. The experts agreed that interferences
with critical infrastructure fail to “qualify as violations of the
principle of sovereignty” as per contemporary international
law, failing to address core Internet networks as parts of their
legal analysis.50 This conclusion contradicts the current EU
approach to critical Internet infrastructures and cybersecurity.
At the time of peace, networks providing vital resources to national communities are managed as part of national civil defence. One of the more recent examples of international cooperation on protecting critical infrastructure and computer networks is the EU Directive on Security of Network and Information Systems (NIS Directive).51 It builds upon prior European
47 Ibid., at 226. 48 For a detailed discussion on criteria allowing to recognize infrastructures as critical see the cited source: M.N. Schmitt, supra
note 45, at 227 ff. 49 Ibid., at 435. 50 Ibid., at 25–26. 51 Directive (EU) 2016/1148 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 6 July 2016 concerning measures for a high common
8 computer law & security review 40 (2021) 105531
cooperation framed within the 2008 Directive on European
Critical Infrastructures (DirECI).52Annexed to the NIS Directive
are non-exclusive lists of networks considered crucial to the
security of the European Union. EU recognizes “digital infrastructures” as part of critical infrastructures and uniformly implements measures of protection to infrastructures used for
the supply of: 1) energy,53 2) transport services,54 3) banking
services, including credit institutions; 4) financial market services, including operators of trading venues; 5) health care services, including hospitals and private clinics as well as healthcare providers; 6) drinking water intended for human consumption.
The last and newest category included in Annex II to the
NIS Directive covers “digital Infrastructures” and includes a)
Internet exchange points (IXPs), b) Domain Name System service providers and c) Top Level Domain name registries. While
the six former categories reflect those of the 2008 DirECI, the
last, seventh category, mirrors the current EU approach to cybersecurity, viewing crucial Internet infrastructures as part
of the European critical infrastructures ecosystem. Effectively
they all require the same level of protection from their operators, including e.g. security due diligence measures and risk
assessments. While other services or networks might be considered critical by different states or regions (just to mention
the US including election infrastructures in its critical infrastructures list), the recent EU Directive serves as a relevant
point of view for the discourse on international (as opposed
to national) approaches to CI protection.
This latest development in EU cybersecurity policy is interesting for two reasons. First, it lists “digital infrastructures” together with services well-recognized as parts of national critical infrastructures, such as water supply or transportation.
It therefore represents a well deliberated policy decision by
the 28 EU states to use the existing resilience network, represented by e.g. the European Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection (EPCIP), for key Internet resources: IXPs,
DNS operators and TLD registries. Interestingly, the EU debate
on the NIS Directive was prolonged not only due to the inclusion of “digital infrastructures” as critical networks, but also
because obligations similar to those imposed on critical infrastructure operators were to apply also to “digital services”
level of security of network and information systems across the
Union; OJ L 194, July 19, 2016, 1–30. 52 Council Directive 2008/114/EC of 8 December 2008 on the identification and designation of European critical infrastructures and
the assessment of the need to improve their protection; OJ L 345,
Dec. 23, 2008, 75–82. 53 Including electricity, gas and oil operators, such as those in
charge of oil transmission pipelines, oil production, refining and
treatment facilities, its storage and transmission. 54 Including air transport (air carriers, airport managing bodies
and entities operating ancillary installations contained within airports, traffic management control operators providing air traffic
control (ATC) services), railtransport(infrastructure managers and
railway undertakings, including operators of service facilities), water transport (inland, sea and coastal passenger and freight water
transport companies, managing bodies of ports and operators of
vessel traffic services) and road transport(road authorities responsible for traffic management control as well as operators of Intelligent Transport Systems).
offered within the “digital marketplace”: to online search engines and all cloud computing services.55
The use of well-known legal methods and cooperation
mechanisms for critical infrastructure protection with regard
to the Internet backbone seems well justified. Yet imposing obligatory cybersecurity audits and/or insurance on all ecommerce services operating within the EU, not just digital
infrastructures operators, is bound to raise practical concerns,
to be faced after the implementation of the NIS Directive (May
2018). The way EU deals with this practical challenge to CI protection, including parts of what is to be considered the public
core of the Internet, will offer a valuable lesson to other world
regions and set a precedent for further international cooperation on the issue.
Regardless of this practical challenges, it is important to
note that one of the world’s biggest economies decided to take
the critical infrastructure protection route for securing Internet’s operation. The EU example is non-exhaustive as other
states draw different lines for identifying CI sectors and approaches to the “Internet’s public core”, yet due to its practical
impact EU recognition of Internet’s protocols and key services
as a part of civilian critical infrastructure protection must be
noted. Should the EU example prove effective and other countries chose to follow it, this policy line cannot be disregarded
in the discussion on the “Internet’s public core” as a “global
public good” and effective means of protecting it. Therefore,
the concept of “Internet’s public core” can be easily referred to
within the existing legal framework for critical infrastructure
protection and adapted to the needs of the global network.
While the national or regional lists for critical infrastructure
differ, the tools and means for their protection remain similar
and always include a high standard of professional due care
on behalf of its operators. Those are to be considered when
a framework for protecting the “Internet’s public core” is discussed.
5. Lessons learnt from international law
International cooperation on critical infrastructure protection
is not the only analogy to be drawn from existing legal frameworks. Also, for example, the concept of shared spaces, to
be used by all states in a uniform, non-harmful way is not
new to the international community, international relations
and international law. Areas of international law that can be
used for reference with regard to protecting the core of the
Internet include: 1) the law of the sea; 2) air law; 3) space
law; 4) diplomatic and consular law; 5) international human
rights law; 6) international telecommunication law ;
56 7) environmental law; 8) law on international liability; 9) law of
treaties; 10) international trade law; 11) antiterrorist laws and
policies as well as 12) international sports law and policies.
While each of these legal regimes offers interesting insights
that can be useful to Internet governance, the limited scope
of this study encourages a concise and general conclusion,
one derived from all those areas of international law and rela55 NIS Directive, Annex III. 56 Those are discussed in more detail in the Tallinn Manual 2.0,
Schmitt, supra note 45, at 179–298.
computer law & security review 40 (2021) 105531 9
tions. The Tallinn Manual 2.0 indicates that there are overarching international law principles relevant to all those specified regimes: 1) sovereignty, 2) jurisdiction, 3) state responsibility, and 4) due diligence.While the notion of 1) sovereignty and
2) the matrix of jurisdictional principles remain an unresolved
challenge for Internet governance and critical infrastructure
protection, subject to enhanced debate and still far from consensus, the two other principles of international law: 3) state
responsibility and 4) due diligence can be easily applied to the
biggest international open network and its key components –
Internet’s public core.
The law on state responsibility is perceived as a secondary
regime, applicable to all other specified international law
norms imposing obligations upon states. Once an international obligation of a state is breached – be it an obligation of
conduct or one of result – the consequences provided for in the
law of state responsibility entail.57 The principle of due diligence implies a state’s duty to act with due care in preventing
a violation of international law.58 Indications of what is meant
as “due care” in particular circumstances are to be derived
from the law and practice within individual areas of state
practice and international relations. It is therefore only with
e.g. reference to the law of the sea that a standard of due diligence for protecting maritime resources can be established.
Analogically, a due diligence standard for cybersecurity could
serve as a point of reference for state’s responsibility for an
omission resulting in transboundary harm, e.g. a malfunction
of a foreign power plant caused by a cyberattack initiated or
an incident generated from within state territory. The existing
community standards with regard to good business practice
within each ofthe specific sectors (e.g. root zone operation,IXP
operation, DNS and TLD management) could be referred to by
both: the victim state in filing its claims and the adjudicating
court. Due diligence appears in all the regimes named above,
and is also relevant, as argued by Heintschel von Heinegg, for
the law on neutrality in armed conflicts, which “is, in principle, applicable to cyberspace”. He goes on to argue that “governments should closely cooperate in a continuing effort to
arrive at an operable consensus that takes into consideration
global interoperability, network stability, reliable access and
cybersecurity due diligence.59
A closer look at individual regimes and their accompanying
practice lead to the identification of specific, necessary efforts
57 This is notto imply the law on state responsibility is unambiguous or a binding character of the 2001 ILC Articles on state responsibility for internationally wrongful acts. This phrasing refers to
the general applicability of recognized customary norms on state
responsibility for a acts prohibited by international law. For a detailed discussion on state responsibility, international liability and
due diligence see: J. Kulesza, Due diligence in international law (2016),
at 115–221.
58 See: Kulesza, supra note 57, at 262–270. The perspectives of the
respective discussions should also be widened looking at strategies of connection and global political economy; for these aspects
see: A.-M. Slaughter, The Chessboard and the Web, Yale University
Press (2017); D. Kennedy, A World of Struggle. How Power, Law, and
Expertise Shape Global Political Economy, Princeton University Press
(2016).
59 W.Heintschel von Heinegg,Territorial Sovereignty and Neutrality in Cyberspace, 89 International Legal Studies (2013) at 34–35.
to protect particular resources. They are usually the result of
consensus on the object and scope of its needed protection,
at times facilitated by specialized bodies (e.g.the International
Maritime Organization). Similar mechanisms could be applied
to cyberspace, its fundamental resources and procedures necessary to protect them. When seeking similarities between
Internet governance with regard to protecting the Internet’s
public core and other areas of international law, the need to
identify a central arena for focused debates becomes apparent.Within the Internet governance landscape itis ICANN that
is arguably the most representative forum for a multistakeholder debate, yet, as already discussed above, not only is it
not the exclusive venue for Internet governance related debates, but, more significantly, it lacks the power to set internationally binding obligations, other than those imposed by its
contracts upon contracted parties – operators of generic Top
Level Domains (gTLDs)60 and the five Regional Internet Registries (RIRs).61
By its design, however, ICANN lacks the necessary international recognition to ensure an effective diplomatic dialogue
and the following, binding international obligations. The role
of the Governmental Advisory Committee (GAC), although increasing, remains advisory. ICANN’s Root Server System Advisory Committee (RRSAC) and Security and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC) together with its Security, Stability
and Resiliency Framework (SSR), while offering a possible avenue to pursue the purpose of protecting the Internet’s core,
remain a primarily technology-focused forum, with little involvement from governments and civil society.The GAC Public
Safety Working Group lacks the needed multistakeholder representation, operating as a temporary, internal GAC structure
for pursuing dialogue between governments, law enforcement
and the technical community, with a strong representation
from the United States governmental sector. While either of
these venues might be modified to have an enhanced impact
and offer a versatile platform for further discussion on protecting Internet’s public core, their current position falls short
of a truly representative and influential international forum.
If international legal methods are to be applied to secure
the Internet’s core, significant action on the part of states,
rather than other stakeholders, must be taken, as they are the
only ones directly bound by international law and in the position to secure enforcement of agreed principles and codes
of conduct. The traditional international law approach is to
operate on state level through international treaties, entailing state duties that are to be later implemented against private actors by national laws. This traditional model of international law-making as of its definition fails to directly address duties of private parties. Instead it is focuses on the duties of states, both positive and negative, with the latter resulting in state responsibility for omissions in securing particular duties to be met by private parties, as is the case with
environmental law or protection of aliens or diplomatic staff,
required from states within their territories. This model can
60 It’s worth noting that country-code Top Level Domain registrars
are under no contractual obligation with ICANN. 61 Those include: AFRINIC for Africa, APNIC for Asia-Pacific, ARIN
for North America, LACNIC for Latin America and the Caribbean
and RIPE NCC for Europe.
10 computer law & security review 40 (2021) 105531
be applied to Internet’s public core, obliging states to introduce particular obligations onto operators of individual services (DNS) or infrastructures (root zone). The discussion on
the need for a relevant Internet convention precising these
duties has been present in academic debates and political dialogues for decades, yet has thus far been futile due to lack of
political incentives.62 2019 could be the year when the discussion on a cybersecurity framework convention becomes more
tangible, with a contractual regime for cyberspace building
upon the lessons of the GGE and regional cooperation.63
A particularly interesting proposal for attempting to this
challenge was offered in 2017 by Microsoft – a private “global
governance actor”64 – suggesting adopting an international
treaty to guarantee the peaceful use of cyberspace.65 As the
company argues, “the world needs [new] (emphasis added)
international rules to protect the public from nation-state
threats in cyberspace”, being contained in a “Digital Geneva
Convention”, referring to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and the Chemical Weapons Convention as examples of successful international, treaty-based
regimes limiting vital threats to human existence. As the policy brief explains, “a Digital Geneva Convention would create a legally binding framework to govern states’ behavior
in cyberspace”.66 Microsoft facilitates its proposal with the
suggestion of setting up a global center for attribution of
cyberattacks, relying on international, independent experts
in cyber-forensics. This proposal seems tempting to international lawyers – treaties have, arguably, thus far proven to be
the most reliable international law making tools. And while
the concept is not new,the key argument against any Internetrelated treaty remains: states, including key players like US,
China, Russia and the EU, are not ready to even start negotiations on the issues primarily due to the lack of consensus on the limits of state sovereignty and responsibility in
cyberspace. It is far more than just a questions of trust – it
is the lack of existing, trustworthy cooperation mechanisms
that proves the primary challenge. All the Internet governance
venues discussed above might facilitate taking the bumpy
road towards a Digital Geneva Convention, an Internet framework convention or any other cyberspace treaty.
Another possibility would be to offer a novel approach to
traditional international treaty making by including particular
62 M. Mueller et al., ‘The Internet and Global Governance: Principles and Norms for a New Regime’, 13 Global Governance (2007) at
237–252; J. Kulesza, Towards and Internet Framework Convention:
the State of Play, in: N. Lavranos, R. Kok (Eds), Hague Yearbook of
International Law (2013) at 84–115; R.H. Weber and R.S. Gunnarson,
‘A Constitutional Solution for Internet Governance’, 18 Columbia
Science and Technology Law Review (2012), at 1–254. 63 V. Radunovic, ‘Towards a secure cyberspace via regional
co-operation’ (2017) (Diplo Foundation policy paper) available
at https://www.diplomacy.edu//sites/default/files/Diplo-Towards_
a_secure_cyberspace-GGE.pdf (last visited 31 December 2020). 64 E. Benvenisti, ‘Upholding Democracy Amid the Challenges of
New Technology: What Role for the Law of Global Governance’, 29
European Journal of International Law (2018) at 9–18. 65 B. Smith, A Digital Geneva Convention to protect cyberspace (2017)
available at https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/cybersecurity/
content-hub/a-digital-geneva-convention-to-protect-cyberspace
(last visited 31 December 2020). 66 Idem, 1.
private operators as signatories of a cybersecurity convention.
This would allow to apply the existing international law mechanisms of state responsibility vis-a-vis states as well as to codify the rules of international liability with regard to Internet’s
public core. Should ICANN and, optionally, the five RIRs enter an international cybersecurity treaty, they would obtain
a framework of reference for designing contractual compliance with network operators (short of ccTLD registrars who,
as noted above, are not ICANN contracted parties). It would
be directly through contracts with private parties that ICANN
and RIRs could demand a particular standard of care in securing the network’s core services and infrastructures.67 This
would discard the need for harmonizing almost two hundred
national laws on securing Internet’s public core, yet would require a novel,flexible approach to traditional international law
making. The concept of Global Administrative Law (GAL), discussed below, might provide for a broader perspective on this
issue.
6. Governing the core vs the multistakeholder
challenge
The academic discourse on various governance models has
put Internet governance into a broader context of Global Administrative Law, drawing analogies to contracts, laws, regulations and principles within sports law, trade law or human rights law, reflecting the complex, comprehensive institutional settings.68 Kingsbury, Krisch and Stewart identified
five types of global administration:
1 administration by formal international organizations;
2 administration based on collective action by transnational
networks of cooperative arrangements between national
regulatory officials;
3 distributed administration conducted by national regulators under treaty, network, or other cooperative regimes;
4 administration by hybrid intergovernmental–private arrangements;
5 administration by private institutions with regulatory
functions.
They locate ICANN and its multistakeholder model
of governance within the fourth category: the hybrid
intergovernmental-private administration, next to e.g. the
Codex Alimentarius Commission, which operates based on
consensus and adopts standards on food safety. While their
original observations echo the GAC enhancement of 2002,
they remain even more relevant for the internationalized
ICANN oversight following the IANA functions transition in
2016. Its decisions, similarly to those within ICANN, are made
67 The concept of ICANN contractual framework as a constitutional order for Internet governance has been discussed in: R. H.
Weber, R. S. Gunnarson, supra note 62. 68 B. Kingsbury, N. Krisch, R. B. Stewart, ‘The Emergence of Global
Administrative Law’, 14 New York University Public Law and Legal
Theory Working Papers (2005), paper 17; R. B. Hall,T. J. Biersteker (Eds)
The Emergence of Private Authority in Global Governance (2002); R. H.
Weber, supra note 2, at 111.
computer law & security review 40 (2021) 105531 11
Table 1 – Comparison of fora debating various elements of protecting Internet’s public core.
Organization/characteristics ICANN ITU IGF ISOC IETF NMI NATO
Multistakeholder X X X
Bottom-up model of governance X X X X X
Standard setting X X X
Operates based on contractual compliance X
Governmental X X
Sets internationally enforceable obligations for states X X
with a significant participation of private actors, working
together with state representatives. It produces standards
that have a “quasi-mandatory effect” as per the SPS Agreement under WTO law. As Kingsbury, Krisch, Stewart observe,
the participation of state actors, as shaped by national and
international law, acting next to private actors who are not
directly, legally bound by international law and “who may
indeed have conflicting duties such as commercial confidentiality, threatens a very uneven and potentially disruptive set
of controls”.69
The concept of Global Administrative Law (GAL) remains
disputed, with some academics arguing it is more of an idealistic attempt at categorizing certain trends that an actual
policy or regulation trend. The GAL project offers, however,
some interesting insights into the Internet governance domain and options for administering the Internet’s public core.
Krisch uses it as the background for a discussion on the changing models of governing “global public goods”.70 As he argues,
the “dynamics of multilateral treaty-making, including the decline in recent decades, take a similar form across issue areas, whether these areas are dominated by club goods, like
trade, or public goods, like the environment”.71 Also Broeders and DeNardis locate the need to protect Internet’s universality, interoperability and accessibility within the category
of “non-excludable” and “non-rivalrous” “global public goods”
that “provide benefits to everyone in the world”,to be attained
only through targeted, public-private cooperation.72
While the shared use remains a valid argument, the two
traits indicated as fundamental to the Internet as a global
good – non-exclusion and non-rivalry – do not hold true.73
These observations alone imply that the global public goods
dogmatic applies only partially to Internet governance and administering the network’s core. This is not to imply, however,
that international law has nothing to offer to solve this challenge – the link to club goods, administered within contractual
international regimes like environmental law,may prove help69 Kingsbury, Krisch, Stewart, supra note 68, 11. An interesting argument for applying global governance norms and principles towards private “global governance actors” (such as Google or Facebook) was presented recently by E. Benvenisti, supra note 64, at
9–18.
70 N. Krisch, supra note 25, at 1–40. 71 N. Krisch, supra note 25, at 37. 72 For a comprehensive discussion on the role of infrastructure
in Internet governance see: L. DeNardis, Protocol Politics: The Globalization of Internet Governance, 2009. The concept and significance
of global public goods is discussed in more detail at 181 ff. 73 D. Broeders, supra note 22, at 19–20.
ful.74 As the case of environmental law, antiterrorist law or
trade law and policies proves, administering a public resource
can be done with the help of informal, polycentric regimes.
Thus far ICANN remains the contemporary paradigm multistakeholder governance model. The constitution and evolution of ICANN follows the policy trend of “presence and prominence of informal institutions and norms in global governance”.75 As discussed above it still fails to address the needs
of international law making, one that could be used to implement effective protection of Internet’s public core. Yet none
of the organizations named in part one of this article paper
ideally meets the needs of multistakeholder Internet governance and effective international law making. Below is their
brief comparison (Table 1):
In this context ICANN meets the needs of the dialogue on
protecting the Internet’s public core in many aspects, yet fails
the most significant prerequisite – the power to introduce internationally enforceable norms. That is rightfully so as the
corporation was designed to avoid all political conflict. While
"public interest" has been discussed within ICANN, in the context of "public interest commitments" in registrar accreditation agreements, such references have been rejected by the
community as a possible incentive for undesired governmental oversight.
The current Internet governance landscape fails to offer an
ideal venue for discussing means of protecting Internet’s public core. Contemporary debates on the issue are distributed
among various fora, ranging from the dispersed ISOC community to the highly organized NATO. While there exists an
international law framework to be referred to, one relying on
state responsibility and due diligence, the precise reiteration
of its applicability to Internet’s key resources has not yet been
addressed in a coordinated manner. This approach has been
reflected in the 2017 communique from the Global Commission on the Stability in Cyberspace, an international expert
based body, administered by the Hague Centre for Strategic
Studies and the East-West Institute, who proposed a first international cybersecurity norm, one focused on protecting the
“public core of the Internet” through diligent precaution.76
74 N. Krisch, supra note 25, at 4. 75 N. Krisch, supra note 25, at 29. 76 The brief wording of the proposed norm calls for “(…) state
and non-state actors should not conduct or knowingly allow activity that intentionally and substantially damages the general
availability or integrity of the public core of the Internet, and
therefore the stability of cyberspace.” Global Commission on the
Stability of Cyberspace, “Call to Protect the Public Core of the
12 computer law & security review 40 (2021) 105531
7. Recommendations and foresight –
governing shared Internet resources
There seems to be little debate on the need to protect the
stability and security of the “Internet’s public core” seen as
its protocols and standards. The short list of Internet’s core
resources includes 1) Internet backbone networks, 2) DNS
servers, 3) IXPs and 4) TLD related services (registries and registrars). Legal tools to govern Internet’s public core can be derived from general international law, in particular the principles of due diligence and state responsibility. With reference
to existing practice within other areas of international law, a
cybersecurity due diligence standard can be identified based
on good business practice, benchmarking and exchange of information. Other areas of international law allow to anticipate
direct next steps in the evolution of this area of international
relations. Those will likely include 1) cybersecurity audits for
all critical Internet infrastructures operators and 2) testing the
preparedness of the organizations managing the infrastructure against best available practices.
Other areas of international law, in particular maritime
oil transportation and nuclear energy production indicate the
need to account for mandatory insurance of all such operators. It is therefore to be anticipated that similar obligations will be introduced also for critical Internet infrastructure operators. Uniform, universal standards of protection for
all networks and services recognized as fundamental to the
global networks’ stable and reliable operation are to be identified through 1) international cooperation, 2) exchange of good
practices and 3) benchmarking.77 States must facilitate the
creation and support the maintenance of international forum/fora for cybersecurity practice and experience exchange,
either within existing specialized organizations (dealing with
e.g. energy supply or air transportation) or within a separate,
Internet-focused venue.
The multistakeholder model of Internet governance necessitates the transposition of international norms on protecting
the Internet’s core onto national laws, regulations and sanctions for any protection of this global asset to be effective.
This might prove the most challenging item on the agenda,
as the experience of e.g. international environmental law has
shown. While there is a broad international consensus on the
Internet,” 2017, 1, https://cyberstability.org/wp-content/uploads/
2017/11/call-to-protect-the-public-core-of-the-internet.pdf (last
visited 31 December 2020). The Final Report of the Global Commission on the Stability of Cyberspace was published at the occasion
of the IGF 2019 (November) in Berlin. 77 For a general overview see also R.H. Weber, Internet Governance
at the Point of No Return (2021), chapter 5.
need to protect the natural environment and a series of international agreements to put this consensus into detail, effective enforcement of environmental standards remains low. It
is however likely that the Internet’s multistakeholder model,
as defined in the Tunis Agenda, with its unique distribution of
power and authority will help to better enforce private obligations among various actors. As discussed in detail above, the
international community can consider one of the two following scenarios: 1) traditional international law making through
a treaty (e.g. a cybersecurity framework convention) effective
against all signatories, necessitating its transposition onto national laws; 2) a novel approach to international law making,
inclusive of non-state actors, in particular open to ICANN and
RIRs, which could use the conventional framework as a point
of departure for their contractual compliance mechanisms.
From among the existing venues useful for enhancing
the Internet stability and security debate, ICANN seems best
equipped to fuelthe discussion on technical standards for protecting the Internet’s core. Yet by its very design it lacks effective tools to make any technical compromise internationally binding. With that in mind it can serve as a discussion
platform, but not a diplomatic venue for advancing intergovernmental dialogue in its traditional sense. The contemporary
international landscape lacks one venue where pertaining issues of protecting Internet’s key resources can be discussed.
It is therefore to be recommended for the existing venues to
continue their work, aiming to ensure a coherent approach to
cybersecurity. As has been the case with the law of the sea
or, more recently, environmental law, the principles shared
among those dispersed initiatives may serve as a foundation
for a comprehensive customary framework, later to be transposed onto an international contractual compromise.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Data Availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.