Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
Available online 28 July 2021
Informing cybersecurity strategic commitment through top management
perceptions: The role of institutional pressures
Obi Ogbanufe a
, Dan J. Kim b,*
, Mary C. Jones c
a Department of Information Technology and Decision Sciences, G. Brint Ryan College of Business, University of North Texas, USA b Department of Information Technology and Decision Sciences, G. Brint Ryan College of Business, University of North Texas, 1307 West Highland Street, Denton, TX
76201, USA c Department of Information Technology and Decision Sciences, G. Brint Ryan College of Business, University of North Texas, USA
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Risk management
Cybersecurity strategy
Cyberinsurance
Top management
Upper echelons theory
Institutional theory
ABSTRACT
Given the financial consequences of security breaches, security risk management has gained more attention in
board rooms and garnered more involvement from top management. We undertake a study to understand the top
managers’ role in cybersecurity strategy, specifically with cyberinsurance. This study draws from institutional
and upper echelons theories to explain how top managers’ values and perceptions mediate the impact of external
institutional pressures on the commitment to use cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy. We empirically
test proposed hypotheses using data collected from executive-level managers of various firms and perform semistructured interviews of six case sites as post hoc analysis. The results suggest that institutional pressures
positively affect top managers’ perceptions of job security, breach risk, financial risk, transaction cost, and
regulatory oversight. In turn, these perceptions influence their commitment to cyberinsurance. We find that
values and perceptions of personal relevance have a significant impact on their strategic decisions. The findings
emphasize the critical role that top management plays in mediating the influence of institutional pressures on
cybersecurity strategy. Implications for research and practice, along with limitations and future directions, are
discussed.
1. Introduction
Cybersecurity breaches often result in the compromise of customer
data that are ultimately very costly for organizations. Costs include
notifying the individuals who are impacted by the security breach as
well as legal fees, fines, and recovering from the breach [1]. For
example, the security breach at Target in 2013 costs the company an
estimated US$293 million, with over US$18 million in legal settlements
[2]. Because of these high-profile breaches and the resulting costs,
organizational board members and senior management have begun to
pay more attention to them [3,4]. Thus, organizations are not only using
traditional security risk management strategies (risk mitigation, risk
acceptance, and risk avoidance), but also focusing on risk transfer
strategies that can offer an even stronger overall cybersecurity solution
[1]. The traditional approaches focus largely on deterrence, prevention,
detection, and response [2,3] and have informed our understanding of
managing security risk. However, these approaches do not help organizations address breach-related losses and residual security risks after a
breach has occurred [4].
Risk transfer is a risk management approach that does address these
types of losses. Research has shown that risk transfer through cyberinsurance provides a more comprehensive solution for cybersecurity [1,
5]. Cyberinsurance protects organizations from risks incurred through
internet and information systems (IS) usage [6,7] by mitigating the
financial impact of a cybersecurity breach. Cyberinsurance allows the
companies to transfer security risks to the cyberinsurance provider [5].
In fact, many government standards and regulatory agencies now
require the use of cyberinsurance. For example, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requires publicly traded firms to disclose the
type of insurance used in their cybersecurity plans [14]. As such, the
purchase of such insurance is a decision made by an organization; thus
choosing to use cyberinsurance is a strategic decision [15].
Although there is ample literature on IS-related strategic decisions
[e.g., 8–12], IS strategy within the cybersecurity context is a relatively
underdeveloped topic. A close examination of the strategic choice and
decision-making literature in IS indicates that there are few studies that
have specifically examined the cybersecurity strategic decision (see
Appendix A). Studies have examined information technology (IT)/IS
* Corresponding author.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Information & Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/im
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2021.103507
Received 25 July 2020; Received in revised form 10 July 2021; Accepted 22 July 2021 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
2
management and IT strategic management [12,13]. However, we found
only one study that specifically examines IS strategy within the context
of cybersecurity, Angst et al. [14].
Researchers have explored theories that explain organizations’
strategic choices or decisions. Among them is an institutional theory
[15], which posits that external institutional pressures influence organizational decisions. In the IS field, several researchers have examined
the role of institutional pressures on an organization’s decision to adopt
or assimilate technological innovations [16,17]. In addition, top echelons theory [18], which suggests that organizational outcomes are reflections of the values and perceptions of the organization’s top
executives, has been used in IS to examine strategic innovations and
security investments in healthcare [10,14].
There has been little research, however, that uses the lens of both
institutional theory and upper echelons theory (UET) to focus specifically on cybersecurity strategy. Fewer still are studies that unpack the
top manager’s values and perceptions of personal relevance with respect
to the strategic decisions surrounding cybersecurity. This research gap
should be addressed because a more detailed understanding of how
institutional pressures and top manager’s values and perceptions affect
cybersecurity as an organizational strategy could be very useful for
practice and could provide theoretical implications as well. Drawing
from UET, institutional theory, and the cybersecurity literature, we
propose a conceptual model to better understand how organizations
commit to cybersecurity strategies in response to institutional pressures,
values, and perceptions. Extending the findings from Liang et al. [16]
who suggest that institutional pressures are mediated by top manager
perceptions1 in their effect on strategic enterprise resource planning
(ERP) assimilation, we argue that institutional pressures influence
cybersecurity strategic decisions. Due to the forces surrounding the
cybersecurity landscape, not only are organizational decisions subject to
the normative, mimetic, and coercive pressures exerted by other organizations, institutions, partners, and vendors, but the decisions are also
subject to the top managers’ values and perceptions. These assertions
are supported by the top echelons theory that argues that external and
internal stimuli are mediated by the top manager’s perceptions [18].
While one can assume that institutional pressures and managerial
perceptions may influence commitment to using cyberinsurance as a risk
management strategy, there are currently few studies that have theoretically and empirically integrated these perspectives within the
cybersecurity context. As such, more theory-based IS strategic studies in
cybersecurity are important and timely in the currently fast-evolving
cybersecurity landscape, especially since cybersecurity has moved to
the top of the management agenda as a strategic issue [19,20] and occupies top managers’ attention [21,22].
This research makes several contributions. First, by incorporating
UET and institutional theory to study cybersecurity risk management
strategy, this study complements prior integrative framework approaches to understanding top manager perspectives [e.g., 16]. Also,
because this study bridges several perspectives in institutional theory
[15], top echelons theory [18], and cybersecurity literature [22], we
believe that it provides comprehensive insight and evidence of the top
management decision-making towards a cybersecurity strategy. Second,
and more importantly, by examining the values and perceptions that
have personal relevance (e.g., job security and breach risk severity) to
top managers, this study highlights how these factors could be leveraged
to change and influence their commitment to a cybersecurity strategy.
To our knowledge, no other study has employed UET and institutional
theory to examine cybersecurity strategy and especially focused on individual risk factors that may affect organizational decisions. Thus, this
study presents a novel inquiry into the use of UET in IS strategy.
2. Theoretical background
The foundation of our theoretical framework is made up of two elements: UET and institutional theory. UET argues that an organization’s
strategies, performance, and outcomes are reflections of the values and
perceptions of the organization’s top executives [18]. The values and
perceptions of top executives (e.g., CEO) differ from one another, which
results in differences in their estimation of organizational needs and
leads to different organizational strategies [23]. Furthermore, top executives’ strategic choices are based on their perceptions, which are
influenced by internal and external stimuli [18]. UET provides theoretical
explanations connecting top executive perceptions to strategic choice
and suggests those perceptions are influenced by internal and external
stimuli. Given that commitment is a strategic factor that provides evidence of how strategies evolve over time [24], we adopt commitment as
a strategic decision. External stimuli also referred to as external pressures are expected to influence commitment through top manager’s
perceptions and values. The institutional theory became primary
reasoning for the effect of such external stimuli on organizational
decision-making [15]. External pressure (e.g., partner coercive practices, normative pressures from industry) affect organizational
decision-making and strategic choice through the perceptions of top
executives in the organizations [16]. The theoretical foundation of this
study is shown in Fig. 1.
2.1. External institutional stimuli and cybersecurity strategy
Institutional theory [15] supports the influence of social, political,
and technical factors on organizational behavior [16]. Institutional
theory suggests that the need for legitimacy is the main driver for
organizational behavior, more so than efficiency. The notion is that
institutional pressures lead top managers to make strategic decisions
that are similar to those of other reference organizations such as partners
and others in their industry [14]. That is, to maintain legitimacy in their
industry, organizations are inclined to conform to prevailing institutional norms to look like other firms [15]. This process is referred to as
Fig. 1. Conceptual framework depicted from Hambrick and Mason’s [18] UET.
1 This study uses top managers, top executives, and executive-level managers
interchangeably as the same meaning of position.
O. Ogbanufe et al. 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
3
institutional isomorphism. There are three categories of institutional
isomorphism: mimetic, coercive, and normative [15].
Coercive isomorphism is a combination of external pressures from
other organizations on which the firm depends [25] and the expectations of other organizations in the industry [15]. It can be argued that
the use of cyberinsurance arose from external pressures and expectations of others in the industry. Its use was first proposed in the financial
sector [26,27]. Soon, it was argued that cybersecurity should be run by
the insurance industry [28]. That argument was that in the same manner
that organizations install sprinklers and alarms following insurance requirements, organizations will also invest in security management tools
and procedures following insurance industry requirements. The insurance industry is one of the industries on which organizations depend for
the protection of assets. The industry expectation to adopt business insurance is not new; however, the expectation has extended to cyberinsurance as cyber risks increase.
Mimetic isomorphism is the pressure to mimic other organizations as
a result of uncertainties in the industry. Because cybersecurity is often a
moving target, organizations may model their cybersecurity strategies
similar to organizations they believe are legitimate [15], whether as a
symbolic or substantive activity [14]. Several studies in IS use mimetic
isomorphism to understand organizational and top management
decision-making processes [16]. Normative isomorphism reflects a collective expectation within the industry of what is an appropriate,
legitimate behavior [15]. Normative pressures have been described as a
process of professionalism whereby industry participants are exposed to
third parties, professional and trade organizations, and vendors that set
the tone for expectations and best practices in a particular area. Thus,
top managers and organizations may form perceptions and act based on
these suggested norms.
2.2. Executives’ perceptions
The processes through which executives make decisions have been
described as complex and ill-defined, reflecting their beliefs, assumptions, and preferences [18]. Because the top manager’s attention is
limited and cannot include all aspects of the organization, their perceptions are also limited and selective [18]. In order to include managerial perceptions that are of value to them, we use the
expectancy–valence framework to conceptualize factors that are of
value. The expectancy–valence (value) framework posits that the action
or choice of an individual is related to the individual’s perceived benefits
and risks of an expected outcome [29]. Researchers in a variety of disciplines have used this framework to better understand how the simultaneous assessment of risk and benefit affects behavior [30,31].
Expectancy–valence (value) is a function of three main factors: individual, organizational, and situational factors [32].
Strategic management research has found that top management
discretion arises from individual, organizational, and environmental
concerns [33]. These studies suggest that research about top manager’s
decision-making should address the role of three concentric factors: the
environment, the organization, and the individual executive [34]. IS
research has used a similar concentric approach and suggests that individuals’ decisions are formed from three different factors: the individual, the social context within which the individual is situated, and
external institutional pressures [e.g., 35]. Cybersecurity researchers
have specifically called for an approach that examines three different
aspects of the managers’ decision-making. Ransbotham and Mitra [22]
argue that more research in cybersecurity should seek to understand
factors that enable more proactive organizational responses, including
managerial, environmental, and organizational factors.
IS researchers have examined the role of institutional stimuli on an
organization’s decision to adopt technology innovations [e.g., 24, 25,
42]. A close examination of the literature in Appendix A reveals no
integrative framework of both institutional theory and UET that incorporates values of personal relevance in depicting the top management’s decision towards cybersecurity strategies.
2.3. Upper echelons theory and strategic commitment
Top executives have a critical role in firm performance overall
[37–39]. These managers also provide an overarching assessment of the
impact of cyber-related risk on their organization. A firm’s approach to
cybersecurity management requires careful managerial attention
through a commitment to the inclusion of cybersecurity issues in the
strategic decision-making that is related to the firm’s overall performance [46]. Top management commitment is a key piece of the foundation on which organizational strategy is built, and it contributes to
differences in organizational performance [24]. As a result, successful
strategies tend to require top-level commitment to sustain them over
time. Executive commitment indicates purposeful determination to
pursue a business strategy that is challenging to attain yet essential for
the growth or continued survival of the organization (e.g., for ethics,
safety, service quality, sustainability, IS development, project implementation). Research suggests that top management commitment is
critical in IS planning and strategy [40], service excellence [41], project
management and IS implementations [42], and technology use [35].
Although cybersecurity is a strategic issue [20], few studies explore
the drivers of top management commitment to cybersecurity strategies.
This kind of commitment has been described as a state of mind that
Fig. 2. Research model.
O. Ogbanufe et al. 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
4
holds individuals to a line of behavior [43]. It has also been described as
the state of being dedicated to a goal, activity [44], or relationship [45].
Furthermore, it represents an obligation to continuously engage and
perform in a future action [46]. Commitment in this study represents
doing what is necessary throughout the adoption and use of cyberinsurance to manage cybersecurity risks.
2.4. Hypotheses development
From the discussions above, institutional pressures are posited to
affect strategic choice through the top manager’s concentric values and
perceptions that are personally, organizationally, and situationally
relevant to the cybersecurity context. Personal factors include job security and breach risk. Organizational factors include financial risk and
transaction cost, and situational factors include regulations and ambiguity.
Fig. 2 presents the research model for this study.
2.4.1. Personal relevance factors
The personal relevance factor represents the extent to which the
strategic decision towards cyberinsurance is relevant to the personal
well-being of the top manager [47]. The literature on strategic management suggests that failure to include individual factors and perspectives in organizational performance has weakened our ability to
correctly interpret the role or function of the individual in influencing
firm performance [37]. Personal relevance addresses the extent to which
an individual has a personal stake in the decision or outcome of the
decision process [54]. Research indicates that when a person relates the
relevance of their decision-making to their own personal interests (e.g.,
job security, reputation), that person will be more likely to make a decision that supports their own interests [57]. Top managers vary in how
they relate strategic decisions to personal interests, thus the nature of
their decisions also varies, particularly with regard to risk management.
For example, top managers that have more at stake may focus on a risk
management strategy that will improve their job outlook, livelihood,
performance, or other factors they perceive as being at stake [18,48,49].
In today’s environment, top managers are often held accountable for
cybersecurity breaches. Deciding not to purchase cyberinsurance could
greatly negatively impact a top manager’s professional and personal life
if a breach occurs. Thus, top managers may opt for cyberinsurance to
protect the factors that are personally relevant to them. Therefore, we
hypothesize:
Hypothesis 1: Top managers’ perceptions of personal risks and benefits
are strongly related to their commitment to using cyberinsurance as a risk
management strategy.
In this study, the personal relevance factors examined are related to
how committing to cyberinsurance personally affects the top manager.
We examine personal relevance factors that are not only important to
the top management, but also relevant to the cybersecurity domain. One
such factor is job security. Job security is an individual moor and has
since been associated with long-term financial security and employment. IS research on job security has demonstrated its influence on
behavioral intention to leave [50,51]. Also, studies have found that
there is a relationship between an individual’s perception of job security/insecurity and his or her commitment to a course of action [52].
Furthermore, decision-makers in IT believe their jobs would be lost
as a result of a security breach [53]. Top managers in organizations have
been demoted or fired due to security breaches [64,65,66]. For example,
Sony fired its CEO as a result of a 2014 security breach in that company
[65], and the chief security officer, chief information officer (CIO), and
CEO of Equifax all retired following that firm’s 2017 security breach
[54]. Because top manager jobs and pay are often tied to how well they
manage firm assets, especially in publicly traded firms, these managers
focus on protecting assets, and thus their own jobs and pay [67]. This
includes utilizing risk management if they see it as strengthening their
job security [58,59]. Top management risk tolerance or engagement in
risk mitigation is influenced by their perceptions of job security [55].
UET suggests that because the top managers’ livelihoods come from the
organization, they are motivated to preserve its continued performance
and well-being [18]. Thus, if a top manager believes that risk management activities will provide job security, the likelihood increases that
they will engage in those activities. Therefore, we hypothesize:
Hypothesis 1a: Top managers’ perceived job security is positively related
to their commitment to using cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy.
Although the impact of security breaches on the organization has
been established in the literature [56–58], this section’s focus is primarily on the personal relevance of the breach to the top manager. There
are a few ways that the top manager’s perception of the risk severity of a
security breach could have personal relevance to the top manager.
Perceptual assessment of risks is an important part of the top manager’s
role [59]. Specifically, assessing the risk of a cybersecurity breach has
become one of the most important tasks for top managers [60]. CEOs
and boards of directors now have direct oversight of cybersecurity in
many organizations [61]. Hence, a cybersecurity breach to an organization might indicate that the top executive does not have a sufficient
understanding of security risks. This could be perceived as failed fiduciary responsibility and could impact future employment opportunities
for the executive. In addition, cybersecurity breaches often negatively
impact a firm’s market value and stock prices [56–58], and in turn, the
top manager’s stock options. Top executives who perceive the severity of
the risk of cybersecurity breaches to their personal stock options have
been known to take extreme actions, such as dumping their stocks ahead
of a breach announcement by their firm [62]. Indeed, top manager’s
aspirations are largely tied to the amount of their income that is derived
from the organization’s performance [18]. If a top manager believes that
the consequences of a security breach are severe, that manager will seek
and use strategies to alleviate the likelihood of a breach. Given that
cyberinsurance is known to help organizations recover from security
breaches, we expect that top manager’s perception of breach risk
severity influences commitment to cyberinsurance. Therefore, we
hypothesize:
Hypothesis 1b: Top managers’ perceived breach risk severity is positively
related to their commitment to using cyberinsurance as a risk management
strategy.
2.4.2. Organizationally relevant factors
Organizationally relevant factors are organizational risks that top
managers interpret to be likely incurred by the organization. Financial
losses incurred from cybersecurity breaches come from both direct and
indirect costs [76–78]. Damage to the firm’s reputation is an example of
an indirect cost [63–65]. An example of direct cost is the cost to notify
individuals affected by the breach, which can be quite expensive.
Notification cost is a key driver of the decision to invest in cyberinsurance [79]. One study argues that cyberinsurance could reduce the cost of
data breaches by up to US$4.40 for each record breached [83]. This is a
substantial potential cost-saving, and could even mean the difference in
a small or medium firm’s ability to survive a breach [84].
In addition to notification and reputation costs, organizations incur
costs for such things as detection and escalation costs (e.g., forensics,
assessment, and audits) and post-breach activities such as remediation,
legal fees, and identity protection services. Firms also often incur lost
business during and after a breach. It is estimated that by the end of
2021, financial losses due to cyber-attacks will reach $6 trillion per year
[66]. As organizations face financial risks, top managers may look for
strategies to help their organizations cover these costs. Given that
cyberinsurance is known to cover such costs [67], top managers’ beliefs
about organizational risks and costs pertaining to cybersecurity may
influence their commitment to cyberinsurance as a risk management
strategy.
Hypothesis 2: Top managers’ organizational risks perceptions are strongly
related to their commitment to using cyberinsurance as a risk management
strategy.
Perceived financial risk refers to top managers’ assessment of the
O. Ogbanufe et al. 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
5
potential for financial loss associated with security breaches. Cybersecurity is a key element of financial risk for most organizations [68].
Thus, top managers must make decisions and take actions to prevent
long-term financial losses that may result from cybersecurity breaches
[69]. The top manager’s role in a firm includes responsibility for
assessing and managing risks that could affect the firm’s financial performance [70]. Thus, people in this position are increasingly being
tasked to assess and understand their organization’s financial risks
related to cyber-attacks and security breaches. CEOs and top management should be acutely aware of the financial risk involved with
cyber-attacks. As the cost of security breaches continues to increase and
the costs of managing them also continue to rise, an increasingly prevalent risk management solution is cyberinsurance [69]. Insurance decisions are typically directly related to financial risk, and cyberinsurance
is a solid approach to managing and recovering from
cybersecurity-related financial losses [71,72]. We argue that when top
managers assess the financial risks associated with cybersecurity incidents, it is likely that they will commit to using cyberinsurance as a
risk management strategy.
Hypothesis 2a: Top managers’ financial risk perception is positively
related to their commitment to using cyberinsurance as a risk management
strategy.
Transaction costs represent the energy, time, and costs associated
with finding, transferring expertise, negotiating, supervising, and
establishing a contract between clients and vendors [73,74]. Researchers have explicitly assessed transaction cost (e.g., search cost)
from a top manager’s viewpoint [17]. Top managers are expected to
understand the impact of transaction costs and they often have the ultimate responsibility to determine whether the effort and cost incurred
in sourcing, coordination, and monitoring are too costly for their organizations. Transaction costs associated with cyberinsurance may be
viewed as expensive, and it is the top manager who decides whether
their organization is better off committing or not committing to
cyberinsurance.
It is important to consider relevant cyberinsurance transaction cost
information because not doing so could lead to decisions that could
harm the organization and incur additional costs [92]. Because insurance is a contract between the insurer and the insured, the transaction
costs incurred include those generally encountered in the execution of a
contract [91]. IS research has examined these costs in other contexts (e.
g., outsourcing contracts) and has identified specific categories of relevant transaction costs [91,93]. Drawing on transaction cost theory, we
combine ex-ante transaction costs (e.g., negotiating) and ex-post transaction costs (e.g., haggling, claims) to examine whether transaction cost
affects top managers’ cyberinsurance decisions.
Ex-ante transaction cost includes search, knowledge transfer, and
negotiating costs during the time that the parties to the contract develop
a general understanding of contract requirements [91]. This involves the
time and effort to identify a vendor, to transfer and integrate knowledge
between the insured organization and the insurance provider, and to
actually negotiate the contract. Even if others in the organization
actually conduct the transaction, it is generally the top manager who
makes the final decision. Significant time and effort are required to
integrate knowledge during knowledge transfer [91,94], and to draft
and negotiate the final contract [95]. If top managers believe that the
costs related to searching for an appropriate cyberinsurance product, are
too great, they are less likely to commit to cyberinsurance.
Hypothesis 2b: Top managers’ cyberinsurance transaction cost perception
is negatively related to their commitment to using cyberinsurance as a risk
management strategy.
2.4.3. Situationally relevant factors
Situational factors are those outside the control of an individual or
organization, and as such, can pose serious constraints on a firm’s ability
to thrive [72]. Top managers may spend a great deal of time addressing
these, especially those related to government regulations [96] and to
market uncertainty or ambiguity [97,98]. A top manager’s ability to
assess these factors helps them to make informed strategic decisions
about their firms [72, 98]. Cybersecurity-related situational factors
include government regulations that require organizations to disclose
cybersecurity breaches [75]. Perceptions of uncertainty and ambiguity
are situational factors that have been demonstrated to significantly
affect top managers’ strategic decisions [59,76]. The cyberinsurance
market typically has limited standard pricing models or policies and is
often volatile and ambiguous [77,78]. Thus, top managers will likely
consider such uncertainty when deciding whether to commit to a
cyberinsurance strategy. Overall, a top manager who assesses security
breach regulatory requirements and the uncertainties surrounding the
cyberinsurance market related to security breaches will be influenced in
their commitment to using cyberinsurance as a risk management
strategy.
Hypothesis 3: Top managers’ situational perceptions are related to their
commitment to using cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy.
Ambiguity is the perceived extent of uncertainty in the environment
[76]. Ambiguity arises from a lack of understanding about the implications of specific events or business situations [79]. Environments that
are novel or highly complex generally present the greatest levels of
ambiguity [80]. Following previous literature [76], we define cyberinsurance coverage ambiguity as the extent of uncertainty embedded in
the top manager’s perceptions of the environmental conditions in the
cyberinsurance market. This includes such issues as unclear information,
uncertainty about how important particular environmental conditions
are, and uncertainty about the future and its impact on the business
[81]. Ambiguity is often associated with equivocality, which is a state of
misunderstanding, ambivalence, and discrepancies that leave managers
uncertain about the inquiries to make [82]. In the cyberinsurance
context, for example, top managers may be uncertain about the policies
and the types of coverages. Because the cyberinsurance market is relatively new compared with other insurance products, it may lack sufficient actuarial data that insurers routinely use to adequately insure
against losses [83]. Furthermore, the content and terminology of
cyberinsurance policies are often neither uniform nor consistent [84].
Besides, the emergence of new technologies and markets increases
the ambiguity of environments in which organizations operate [79,85].
In the face of emerging technologies and their associated risks, the
ambiguity in cyberinsurance policies is also likely to increase. In fact,
models have been created to provide guidance on effectively choosing a
cyberinsurance product [86]. Therefore, we propose that ambiguity is a
barrier to top managers’ commitment to cyberinsurance.
Hypothesis 3a: Top managers’ perceived cyberinsurance coverage ambiguity is negatively related to their commitment to using cyberinsurance as a
risk management strategy.
Regulatory oversight is another situational factor that may be relevant to top managers’ commitment to cyberinsurance. For example, the
regulatory influence of Sarbanes–Oxley has been known to motivate top
managers to require information security-related changes across the
organization [8]. Regulatory oversight serves to ensure that people with
delegated authority (e.g., top managers) are held responsible [87]. It
enables the correction of failures in the market arising out of such things
as health, safety, and environmental risks [88]. Regulatory oversight is
usually conducted through a government agency that has the ability to
supervise organizational actions [88]. Therefore, we define regulatory
oversight as the extent to which the actions of an organization are supervised by a government body. Previous research links it to regulatory
expectations or the extent to which regulators can mandate rules to
guide the relationship between sellers and their customers [89]. Under
regulatory expectations, enforcement deters violations, increases the
likelihood of fines for violations, and decreases incidents of negative
publicity from violations [88]. For example, the prevalence of
cyber-attacks and security breaches has led to legislation mandating
organizations to disclose security breaches involving data of individuals
[75]. Organizations that are subject to regulatory oversight tend to pay
O. Ogbanufe et al. 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
6
more attention to their internal controls [90]. Requirements for disclosure of security breaches have led to increased investment in cybersecurity [75] and the transfer of breach-related costs to third parties
through cyberinsurance policies [91]. Thus, we expect that the top
manager’s perceptions of regulatory oversight influence their commitment to cyberinsurance. If there were no regulations, there might be
little incentive to disclose, thereby limiting the expense associated with
disclosure. For organizations that must disclose the breach, top managers are more likely to turn to cyberinsurance to cover the expense.
Hypothesis 3b: Top managers’ perceived regulatory oversight is positively
related to their commitment to using cyberinsurance as a risk management
strategy.
2.4.4. Institutional pressures
According to institutional theory, organizational decisions are subject to many institutional pressures that constrain their behaviors [15].
We define institutional pressures as the extent to which top managers
experience the need to commit to cyberinsurance as a cybersecurity
strategy by responding to mimetic, coercive, and normative pressures
exerted by the institutional environment [92]. We argue that top management perceptions mediate the effect of institutional pressures
(mimetic, coercive, and normative) on using cyberinsurance as a risk
management strategy when it copies, is coerced by, and embraces as
norms the choices other firms, vendors, suppliers have made in their
efforts to address cybersecurity risks.
Using cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy often incurs
costs and requires that the organizations devote time and effort in understanding their cyberinsurance needs, and continually monitor the
cyberinsurance contract [73,74]. There is also uncertainty, ambiguity,
and complexity in the extent of the contract’s coverage in the event of a
security breach [93]. In addition, it may require changes in the organization’s cybersecurity structure. For example, organizations have
been required to hire chief information security officer (CISO) [94] and
maintain certain cybersecurity controls and procedures [1,95]. Given
these uncertainties, costs, and structural changes, organizations may not
consider committing to cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy
unless it senses strong institutional pressures to do so. Using cyberinsurance to protect firms’ financial assets and recover from security
breach incidents is becoming an institutional requirement [96] for firms
that collect, store, or transfer personally identifiable information
through a website or application. Indeed, it is common for service
contracts to require vendors to carry their own cyberinsurance, especially in IT vendor agreements. Such institutional environments are
recognized as informing the organization’s strategic decisions through
the top manager’s perceptions [18].
Although the extant literature has described how top manager’s
perceptions mediate the impact of institutional pressures on strategic
decisions such as ERP assimilation [16] and integrated information
delivery [92], it is unclear how such pressures impact cybersecurity
strategies through top managers’ perceptions. With respect to the top
manager’s perceptions (e.g., job security, breach risk, financial risk
surrounding security breaches), we argue that they are influenced by
pressures from the institutional environments. For example, firms from
industries, such as financial services and retail (e.g., Equifax, Target)
that have experienced security breach incidents have fired their top
executives or accepted their subsequent resignations [97]. This implies
that organizations mimic, are coerced by, or embrace the norms of other
organizations’ practices in how they respond to breach incidents. Top
managers are the focal point of these institutional pressures, which
inform their perceptions and may lead them to re-evaluate their overall
perceptions on job security, breach risk, financial risk surrounding security breaches, transaction cost, the ambiguity of coverage, and
cybersecurity-related regulations.
Hypothesis 4a–f: Institutional pressures positively influence top managers’ perception of (a) job security, (b) breach risk, (c) financial risk, (d)
transaction cost, (e) coverage ambiguity, and (f) regulatory oversight.
3. Methodology
This study used a cross-sectional survey method. We tested the
proposed model through survey data collected from CEOs from diverse
organizations. We also conducted semi-structured interviews of top
managers from different organizations to validate the study results. Most
constructs are measured using multiple items and with a 7-point Likert
scale ranging from 1—strongly agree to 7—strongly disagree. Some
open-ended questions were also used to better access respondents’ understanding of the research constructs.
3.1. Measurement
All measurement items are summarized in Table B1 in Appendix B.
Table B2 in Appendix B shows the operationalization of the constructs.
We use previously validated measures, however, one of the constructs
required new items that capture the content, context, and domain of the
study. Following the Moore and Benbasat [98] procedure, we constructed measures for regulatory oversight by drawing on the regulatory
provisions by both the Office of National Coordinator for Health Information Technology and National Transportation Safety Board. The
former provides regulatory oversight for health information, and the
latter provides oversight for transportation regulation. We used Cohen’s
kappa to assess inter-rater reliability [119]. Cohen’s kappa was 0.93,
which indicates adequate agreement.
The survey items were pretested by asking university students who
were also asked to provide feedback about the questions, voice concerns,
and describe perceived ambiguities in wording. In addition, at the
request of one of the authors during a work-study program, a panel of
experts in the cybersecurity risk and cyberinsurance domain reviewed
the measurement items and suggested updates. Survey questions were
revised based on comments received.
We also measured several control variables: organizational tenure,
industry, organization size (number of employees, revenue), and experience in technology management. Organization tenure is included
because research indicates that it may impact outcomes and commitment [99]. Prior research has included similar control variables in
studies about management commitment and support [121, 122]. We
include industry because top management commitment to security risk
mitigation may differ if their industry is regulated such as in the finance
or healthcare industries [see 100]. Given that organizations usually use
alternative vehicles to mitigate cybersecurity risk, we also include these
as controls in the model: other types of insurance products (e.g., general
insurance), technology controls, and processes (e.g., backup, encryption, security policy, governance). Two dummy variables are used for
measuring these two categories: technology alternatives (TALT) and
other insurance alternatives (IALT). Each of the model’s control variables is a single-item measure.
3.2. Data collection
A field survey was administered to executive-level managers to understand the factors that facilitate their commitment to cyberinsurance.
They are the most likely people in their organizations to be knowledgeable about the positioning strategy of cyberinsurance in the organization. This is consistent with the key informant approach, in that, the
most knowledgeable individual in the organization with regard to the
topic studied is surveyed [101]. Furthermore, because security risks
have risen in importance to organizations [20], the expectation is that
top managers should understand how to manage cybersecurity risks
[102].
Response rates for surveys involving top managers have declined
over the years for many reasons including lack of time or lack of interest
in the topic [103]. Despite this, there have been studies that have successfully surveyed executives with adequate response rates [e.g., 104].
Evidence also suggests that several factors increase the likelihood of
O. Ogbanufe et al. 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
7
responses from top executives including interest in the topic [103],
monetary incentives, legitimate authority, and the low number of survey
items [105]. In light of these, survey participants were recruited through
a paid Qualtrics Panel. This is a service that matches researchers’ sampling requirements to willing survey participants. Monetary incentives
were offered through Qualtrics, and the number of survey items was
reduced. Because cybersecurity is a top strategic issue facing executives
[20], the salience of the topic of our study—cybersecurity and cyberinsurance—may have influenced and increased the visibility of our
study, and in turn, the number of responses received [103]. A total
number of 151 CEOs in the US participated.
To address possible concerns about social desirability and reporting
their behavior, the survey stated that there were no right or wrong answers and asked participants to answer as honestly as they could. They
were also informed that their responses were anonymous and that they
would be aggregated for analysis and reporting. Table 1 summarizes the
sample demographics. The survey respondents represent a broad sample
of industries, the number of employees in the organization, and annual
organizational revenue.
4. Data analysis and results
Using SmartPLS 3.0 as one of partial least squares (PLS) techniques
[106], we analyzed the model. PLS is suited for testing reflective and
formative factors in the same model [107]. Prior to examining the
structural model, we evaluated the measurement model. We performed
analyses to check the reliability and convergent validity of the measurement model. The results are summarized in Table 2. Cronbach’s α
for each construct is above the recommended value of 0.70 [108] and
ranges from 0.908 (FIN) to 0.956 (COMM). Composite reliability ranges
from 0.931 (FIN) to 0.968 (COMM). Average variance extracted (AVE) is
greater than 0.50 for each of the constructs [109,110], ranging from
0.650 (INSP) to 0.885 (COMM), which provides support for adequate
convergent validity. We used multiple approaches to evaluate discriminant validity. First, we used the approach recommended by Fornell and
Larcker [110] and determined that the square root of each construct’s
AVE to be higher than the correlations between each pair of constructs in
rows and columns in Table 3. Second, we used the heterotrait–monotrait
(HTMT) ratio approach suggested by Henseler et al. [111]. Finally, we
compared the loadings of an item on its hypothesized construct to its
cross-loading on other constructs. All items loaded on their hypothesized
constructs more strongly than they cross-loaded on other constructs (see
Appendix C). The results of these methods suggest that there are no
major measurement issues in the research constructs.
The variance inflation factor (VIF) was used to assess the extent to
which multicollinearity was present. The VIF values are below the most
conservative threshold of 3.00 [135] (AMB - 1.48., FIN - 1.95, JSEC -
2.07, REG - 1.57, SEV - 2.25, and TXNC - 1.45). In addition, we performed a test of autocorrelation using the Durbin–Watson statistic. The
resulting value of 1.94 is well within the 1.5 and 2.5 rule-of-thumb, and
thus, the data are likely not autocorrelated.
4.1. Common method bias
To assess common method bias (CMB), we used Harman’s one-factor
Table 1
Profile of respondents.
Category Frequency
(%)
Category Frequency
(%)
Industry Employees
Manufacturing 13 (8.6) 10,000 or more 4 (2.6)
Banking 4 (2.6) 5000–9999 14 (9.3)
Finance 8 (5.3) 1500–4499 7 (4.6)
Insurance 3 (2.0) 500–1,499 16 (10.6)
Retail 19 (12.6) 100–449 32 (21.2)
Transportation 2 (1.3) 50–99 19 (12.6)
Education 4 (2.6) 10–49 59 (39.1)
Technology 26 (17.2)
Health 7 (4.6) Previous Knowledge
Government 2 (1.3) Yes 127 (84.1)
Services 47 (31.1) No 24 (15.9)
Other 16 (10.6)
Revenue (U.S. million dollars) Other controls
$5 Billion or More 3 (2.0) Self-insurance 66 (43.7)
$1 Billion–Under $5
Billion
13 (8.6) Technology 122 (80.8)
$250 Million–Under $1
Billion
7 (4.6) Other insurance 67 (44.4)
$100 Million–Under
$250 Million
6 (4.0) Security policies and
governance
57 (37.7)
$50 Million–Under $100
Million
9 (6.0) None 2 (1.3)
$15 Million–Under $50
Million
6 (4.0)
$10 Million–Under $15
Million
11 (7.3)
$5 Million–Under $10
Million
20 (13.2)
$1 Million–Under $5
Million
48 (31.8)
Under $1 Million 28 (18.5)
Table 2
Reliability and convergent validity.
Construct Cronbach’s α Composite Reliability AVE
AMB 0.948 0.960 0.828
COMM 0.956 0.968 0.885
FIN 0.908 0.931 0.729
INSP 0.941 0.949 0.650
JSEC 0.943 0.959 0.854
REG 0.946 0.957 0.787
SEV 0.908 0.936 0.784
TXNC 0.944 0.958 0.851
Note: AVE = average variance extracted;;COMM= commitment to using
cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy; AMB = ambiguity of cyberinsurance; FIN= financial risk; REG = regulation oversight risk; TXNC =
transaction cost; SEV = breach risk severity; JSEC = job security; INSP= institutional pressures
Table 3
Convergent validity and correlations.
Construct AMB COMM FIN INSP JSEC REG SEV TXNC
AMB 0.91
COMM 0.11 0.94
FIN 0.21 0.60 0.85
INSP 0.34 0.76 0.60 0.81
JSEC 0.11 0.77 0.51 0.72 0.92
REG 0.14 0.49 0.45 0.58 0.51 0.89
SEV 0.24 0.67 0.65 0.66 0.63 0.34 0.89
TXNC 0.55 –0.03 0.16 0.29 0.04 0.27 0.16 0.92
Note: COMM = commitment to using cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy; AMB = ambiguity of cyberinsurance; FIN= financial risk; REG = regulation
oversight risk; TXNC = transaction cost; SEV = breach risk severity; JSEC = job security; INSP= institutional pressures
O. Ogbanufe et al. 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
8
test [136] and a factor-based partial least squares structural equation
modeling (PLS-SEM) full collinearity test [137]. Using Harman’s
one-factor test, we included all reflective items in a principal components factor analysis. The largest factor variance of 38.4% indicates that
no one factor accounted for a majority of the variance. The factor-based
PLS-SEM algorithm accounts for measurement errors to assess variance
maximization issues that are often found in classic PLS-SEM assessments. This test resulted in VIF values below the threshold of 5 [112,
113]. A fuller explanation of the tests is provided in Appendix C. Overall,
these tests support that the measurement model meets the standards
expected in IS research [114].
4.2. Structural Model Results
We applied bootstrap resampling to estimate structural model path
coefficients using 5000 resampling cases and the bias-corrected bootstrap confidence interval. Results, including the standardized regression
weights and significance levels, are provided in Table 4.
Findings indicate that the relationship between job security (JSEC)
and commitment to cybersecurity (COMM) is statistically significant
(p<0.001), supporting H1. The relationship between the individual
factor of security breach (SEV) and COMM is also significant (p < 0.01),
which lends support for H2. The significant relationship between the
organization risk factor (FIN) and COMM (p < 0.05) lends support for
H3. The organizational factor, transaction cost (TXNC), is significantly
related to COMM (p < 0.05), which lends support to H4. The situational
factor, the ambiguity of cyberinsurance (AMB), however, is not significantly related to COMM. Thus, results do not support H5. Regulatory
oversight (REG) and COMM are significantly related (p < 0.05), lending
support for H6. Finally, there is a significant relationship between
institutional pressures (INSP) and job security (p <0.001), breach risk
severity (p <0.001), financial risk (p <0.001), transaction cost (p
<0.01), ambiguity (p <0.001), and regulatory oversight (p <0.001),
which lends support to H4a–H4f. The final paths are provided in Fig. 3.
COMM has an R2 of 0.726 and an adjusted R2 of 0.710.
We assessed effect sizes for each significant relationship. With regard
to the effect of top managers perceptions on commitment, JSEC had a
medium-high effect size (f 2 = 0.333) followed by small effect sizes for
TXNC (f 2 = 0.086) and SEV (f 2 = 0.074). Thus, these seem to be of
greater importance than the other effects. With regard to the effect of
Table 4
Path analysis results.
Path Coeff. f
2 S.D. t-stat p-value CI
2.5 %
CI
97.5 %
Result
H1: Individually relevant factors
H1a: JSEC → COMM 0.438 0.333 0.076 5.778 0.000 0.283 0.581 Accept
H1b: SEV → COMM 0.217 0.074 0.079 2.749 0.006 0.056 0.365 Accept
H2: Organizationally relevant factors
H2a: FIN → COMM 0.179 0.059 0.075 2.399 0.016 0.049 0.338 Accept
H2b: TXNC → COMM –0.199 0.086 0.061 3.256 0.001 –0.316 –0.074 Accept
H3: Situationally relevant factors
H3a: AMB → COMM 0.051 0.006 0.058 0.877 0.381 –0.063 0.165 Reject
H3b: REG → COMM 0.129 0.038 0.058 2.218 0.027 0.021 0.247 Accept
H4: Institutional pressures
H4a: INST → JSEC 0.722 1.086 0.047 15.501 0.000 0.625 0.805 Accept
H4b: INST → SEV 0.660 0.770 0.056 11.876 0.000 0.542 0.759 Accept
H4c: INST → FIN 0.604 0.575 0.064 9.386 0.000 0.475 0.729 Accept
H4d: INST → TXNC 0.270 0.079 0.105 2.565 0.010 0.010 0.433 Accept
H4e: INST → AMB 0.323 0.117 0.073 4.425 0.000 0.191 0.475 Accept
H4f: INST → REG 0.578 0.503 0.060 9.589 0.000 0.457 0.694 Accept
Controls
TECHEXP → COMM 0.097 0.028 0.050 1.940 0.052 –0.006 0.19 -
TENURE → COMM –0.190 0.103 0.073 2.592 0.010 –0.313 –0.028 -
Note: COMM= commitment to using cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy; AMB = ambiguity of cyberinsurance; FIN= financial risk; REG = regulation
oversight risk; TXNC = transaction cost; SEV = breach risk severity; JSEC = job security; INSP= institutional pressures
Fig. 3. Structural model paths.
Note: ***p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, †
p < 0.10, NS: not significant
O. Ogbanufe et al. 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
9
institutional pressures on top managers’ perceptions, the effect sizes for
JSEC, SEV, FIN, and REG were large (> 0.4), and the effect sizes for
TXNC and AMB were small (0.1).
In our assessment of the role of control variables, findings indicate
that technology experience is marginally significant in its relationship to
COMM, which provides support that top managers’ technology management experience may influence their commitment to cyberinsurance.
Tenure also is significantly related to COMM, but the relationship is
negative. This suggests that the more years a top manager has worked,
the less likely they are to commit to cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy. Using confidence intervals in the bootstrap method, we
tested for mediation of top managers’ perceptions [115]. Doing this
allows testing of mediation as opposed to testing indirect relationships
[116]. The coefficients for the values between the independent variables
and dependent variables are calculated simultaneously. We looked to
see whether there was a value of zero in the confidence interval; if not
present, there is 95% confidence that mediation exists [116]. The results
indicate that institutional pressures are indeed mediated by perceptions
of job security, breach risk, financial risk, transaction cost, and regulations, but are not mediated by the ambiguity of coverage (Table 5).
4.2.1. Post hoc interviews with senior executives
We performed post hoc interviews with top managers of different
organizations to further explore their views related to the nomological
network in our study. The qualitative interviews include top executives
outside of the survey sample, which reduces the possibility of influencing the original survey instruments on the interviewers as well as
supports the external validity of our study [92] The interviewees are
from medium to large organizations from different sectors. We conducted seven semi-structured interviews with six case sites. The executives include CEO, vice president, chief privacy officer, etc (see Table 6
for their demographics).
Overall, the interviews support our hypothesized relationships.
Specifically, the interviews confirmed that forces surrounding
organizational decisions regarding cybersecurity strategies are subject
to the normative, mimetic, and coercive pressures exerted by other organizations, institutions, partners, and vendors. In addition, organizations effectively use cyberinsurance as a cybersecurity strategy.
“Essentially, how we implement security strategies is driven by three
things, regulatory environment, commercial environment (i.e., customer
contracts), and industry standards, that is we look at the minimum required
to be considered reasonable. Doing a true assessment to mitigate threat involves technologies, training, and cyberinsurance. ” (VP of Information Security of Healthcare Software Company)
“With PCI, there are fines and penalties associated with it. Insurance is a
requirement to do business. HIPPA 162–164 are also requirements. Sometimes, we are driven by best practices from other organizations and the industry. For example, NIST drives a lot of the things we do here. In addition, it
needs to align with the corporate strategy. ” (Executive Director, Financial
Services)
“Cyberinsurance is a business requirement. You have to have it. It became
a service level agreement.” (CEO, Healthcare Consulting)
When asked about the role of personal risks such as job security in
their cybersecurity strategies, especially cyberinsurance, these senior
executives note the following:
“It is at the back of everyone’s mind. Anything that catastrophic will
weigh on people and should affect one’s job.” (CIO MSSP)
“The role of the CIO and CFO is to present the risk exposure to the CEO
and the board. They present the options to close the gap. If they don’t, their
job should be on the line. Anyone with a C in their title is paid to manage the
risks and the issues in the organization. Their jobs are on the line to manage
the risk. ” (CEO, Healthcare Consulting)
“Anthem breach got our leadership to invest money into security. OPM
breach also helped in pushing our CEO and the board. If the consequences are
severe, they should lose their jobs. Some of them deserve to lose their jobs
because of a breach. Some of the breaches are based on incompetence of the
leadership and so they need to lose their jobs.” (Executive Director, Financial
Services)
“My experience with breaches in organizations where top people were
impacted was because the organization wanted to show that the organization
was doing something or making a change, and not necessarily because the
organization actually made a change.” (Vice President, PharmA)
Consistent with our argument earlier about the perception of organizational risks, these executives indicated that the high implications
and the financial cost of breaches are the reasons for using cyberinsurance risk management. They also note that these implications can be
especially devastating for smaller firms.
“We leverage cyberinsurance because the cost of breaches can be high. In
the healthcare space there are legacy systems that don’t necessarily have
testing and validations completed on them. My organization is also performing acquisitions and mergers with organizations that do not have
expertise in security or how to address the issues that arise out of it.” (Vice
President, PharmA)
“Financial risk has to feature into the decision for cybersecurity strategy.
Because of the integration of cloud, IoT, and legacy systems that are
expensive to evolve and maintain, the financial risks would feature in the
cybersecurity strategy. These fit into the strategy of the organization and it is
up to the board.” (Executive Director, Financial Services)
“The risk of a breach exceeds the dollar value and equity value of organizations we do business with today. The challenge of data breach is with big
and small organizations. However, the smaller the organization, the harder it
is, in fact, the breach can put them out of business. In 2006, we had a
multimillion-dollar contract with another healthcare organization. Today,
our organization would not have been able to sign that deal because of the
requirements to comply with security requirements. Don’t know how we
would have been able to do it if this was now.” (CEO, Healthcare Consulting)
“We do security to protect ourselves, we might be sued if our customers
loose data through a breach. So it weighs on us. Assuming it costs $0.50c to
mail letters to their 40 thousand customers, that is a lot of money. Also,
assuming that it cost $50 per person to pay for monitoring services after a
Table 5
Mediation analysis.
Coeff. S.D. T Stat PValue
CI
2.5 %
CI
97.5 %
Zero
INST → JSEC
→ COMM
0.334 0.066 5.037 0.000 0.207 0.467 No
INST → SEV
→ COMM
0.158 0.056 2.842 0.005 0.050 0.273 No
INST → FIN
→ COMM
0.100 0.055 1.821 0.069 0.012 0.233 No
INST →
TXNC →
COMM
–0.047 0.024 1.937 0.053 –0.102 –0.006 No
INST → AMB
→ COMM
0.013 0.021 0.603 0.546 –0.020 0.063 Yes
INST → REG
→ COMM
0.084 0.039 2.126 0.034 0.013 0.164 No
Table 6
Interviewee demographics.
Company
name
Industry Users Tenure
(year)
Job Title
Pharma Pharmaceuticals 5500 17 Vice president
Health
Consulting
Healthcare 500 20 CEO
Healthcare Healthcare 5,000 5 Senior vice
president
Financial Financial 100,000 4 Executive director
Health
Software
Healthcare 500 3 Chief privacy
officer
Health
Software
Healthcare 500 4 VP information
security
Managed IT Managed Serv. 7000 1 CIO
O. Ogbanufe et al. 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
10
breach, that is a lot of money. We don’t want to be sued. We definitely discuss
these things with our clients. The thing is that it can cost about $50,000 to
implement and protect their organization but may cost $5,000,000 to recover
from a breach. We have cyberinsurance. We have to cover for us and our
customers as well. We took out a coverage of $2 million per incident for our
customers. We also have cyberinsurance of $4M for our own organization.
We offer cyberinsurance to our customers, but many of them say they don’t
want it.” (CIO MSSP)
More importantly, their perceptions of regulations also played a
critical role in their cyberinsurance and overall cybersecurity strategies.
“HIPAA establishes the baseline. We then go above HIPAA. We also adopt
the recommendations from NIST. We generally default to HIPAA and NIST. I
would say that SOX (802/1102) is where we started seeing key leadership
individuals liable for records retention. In a previous experience, part of my
job was to keep the CEO out of jail. When the CEO is held liable for proper
security strategies, this is when it becomes important.” (VP of Information
Security of Healthcare Software Company)
“Regulations drive strategies. It drives a lot of strategies. The penalties can
be high especially for health care related organizations.” (CIO MSSP)
“The board should make the decision and not the government on whether
to purchase cyberinsurance” (CEO, Healthcare Consulting)
When asked about uncertainties around the events covered by
cyberinsurance, some senior executives confirmed the influence of
coverage ambiguity and uncertainty on their commitment to using
cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy, while others expressed
general unconcern.
“A lot of people don’t understand what’s covered in their policy and
what’s not. Organizations need to be careful when they look at plans, because
they may have exposure because of not carefully looking at their plans. They
should read the policies to understand the exposures and whether not
applying MFA, for example can constitute a denial. Organizations have been
denied payment because they did not implement certain practices in their
organizations. Insurance companies decline payment because the insured do
not read the policies. Nobody knows what’s included and excluded in these
policies. I review the cyberinsurance policies to ensure that they provide
adequate coverage” (CIO MSSP)
The senior executives that expressed general unconcern about
cyberinsurance coverage noted the following:
“With a company of our size, we have no power to negotiate our coverage.
I am not worried about coverage. Our cyberinsurance policy exists to check
the box that we carry insurance.” (VP of Information Security of Healthcare
Software Company)
Our real risk is reputational risk and no amount of insurance coverage can
cover reputational risk. Anthem had cyberinsurance when they were
breached. This impacted their assets. If our organization has that kind of
breach, it would kill us. Size matters. With a large company like Anthem, a
breach may not affect them as much, but with a company of our size, we
would die. (Chief Privacy Officer, Healthcare Software Company)
5. Discussion
We sought to understand top managers’ commitment to cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy. The empirical results confirm
most of the predictions in our model and highlight the importance of
individual, organizational, and situational factors in top managers’
commitment. Specifically, findings suggest that top managers’ perceptions mediate the influence of institutional pressures on their commitment and use of cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy.
Individual factors (i.e., job security and perceived breach risk
severity) were more strongly related to this commitment than either
organizational or situational factors. In other words, top managers’
desire to protect their personal well-being [47] seems to have the
greatest impact on their commitment to a cyberinsurance risk management strategy. Our findings confirm agency and expectancy theories that
suggest that managers are interested in investments that protect the
firm’s assets and, therefore, that also protects their personal interests
such as job security and salary [68]. This highlights the importance of
personal relevance in the top manager’s commitment to risk management approaches, which is different from personal relevance in
employee security behaviors [47,117]. Top managers have different
inherent responsibilities than other employees, and the severity of the
consequences of failure to ensure a good security risk management
strategy may be more severe. Most employees do not have security risk
management responsibilities in their job descriptions, and sanctions for
them are often social sanctions as opposed to sanctions involving future
careers and income that top managers face. Top managers have fiduciary responsibilities and are often held directly accountable to organizational stakeholders; thus, the consequences are more severe. This
work provides new insights into top managers’ roles in the context of
cybersecurity research. It also provides a foundation to conduct future
research that explores and theorizes the characteristics of top managers’
roles and responsibilities in order to more fully understand the severity of
the threat to their employees and why it may or may not affect their
decisions.
Concerning organizational factors, financial risk and transaction cost
significantly influence commitment to cyberinsurance. Security issues
pose a substantial financial impact on organizations [e.g., 64]. Indeed,
financial losses incurred from security breaches have remained a primary motive for cybersecurity research [118]. This study, however,
takes a different perspective and specifically examines potential financial loss from the perspective of the top manager who is responsible for
managing all cybersecurity risks, including financial risks that may
affect the performance of the organization. Our findings provide a
foundation on which to further build the cybersecurity risk management
research stream, one that focuses on the top manager’s perspective.
Future research is also needed to examine the influence of financial risk
perception on other security risk management strategies. Transaction
cost was particularly salient, reflecting that transactional cost saving is a
strong rationale for a risk management strategy. The evidence of the
strong influence of transaction cost on strategic commitment is consistent with prior research that has examined the influence of transaction
cost on strategic contracting and outsourcing decisions [119,e.g., 120].
For example, Ang and Straub [120] argue that top managers should be
aware of the need to factor in the effort, time, and costs involved in
assessing the benefits the organization may receive from cyberinsurance. Top manager commitment to cyberinsurance is expected to be
tempered by the extent of transaction costs incurred in searching for,
negotiating, and monitoring a cyberinsurance contract.
Concerning situational factors, cyberinsurance ambiguity was not
significantly related to commitment. This suggests that decision-makers
do not consider cyberinsurance ambiguity as a factor in their commitment to cyberinsurance. Though surprising, this result was confirmed
through post hoc interviews of some senior executives who expressed
unconcern over the uncertainty of cyberinsurance coverage. The interviews also suggest that irrespective of the cyberinsurance ambiguities, using cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy is fueled more
by other factors such as appeasing investors and regulators (regulatory
oversight). Contrary to previous notions that cyberinsurance market
conditions (characterized by difficulty in estimating cyber losses and
risks) are related to reduced cyberinsurance use by managers [4], our
results indicate that individual factors (such as job security and regulatory oversight) are key determinants of commitment. Thus, our findings lend support to the notion that cyberinsurance market conditions
alone (situational factors) do not drive strategic commitment to cyberinsurance. More research is needed that explores the effects of other
aspects of cyberinsurance market conditions.
The strong relationship between regulatory oversight and commitment to cyberinsurance confirms previous findings about the effect of
regulatory compliance and requirements on strategic decision-making
[e.g., 59,121]. In comparison, Kwon and Johnson [75] find that regulations can result in counterintuitive reactions in firms. For example,
regulations can be effective in providing problem-solving strategies, yet
O. Ogbanufe et al. 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
11
they can also reduce an organization’s ability to be pre-emptive in
making decisions. An environment with no regulatory requirement for
breach disclosures means that few organizations will disclose breaches.
Hidden breaches mean less actuarial data available for insurance companies to draw upon in setting rates, and thus lead to higher insurance
premiums. On the other hand, regulatory requirements ensure that organizations disclose security breaches. When organizations disclose
breaches, they might as well acquire cyberinsurance to cover the losses
incurred from the breach. As such, regulatory requirement and oversight
prompts top managers to expose breaches and motivates their commitment to cyberinsurance. Furthermore, when an organization submits a
cyberinsurance claim, this decreases its ability to hide the breach [4],
which may correct the perception of an overpriced cyberinsurance
market and decrease information asymmetry between the insured organization and the insurance companies. It is important to note that just
because an organization adopts cyberinsurance does not mean that they
will file claims when they suffer a security breach. Indeed, organizations
do not often file cyberinsurance claims [77] because doing so might
expose their security operations and damage the organization’s reputation. Even though an organization has acquired cyberinsurance to
assuage investors and regulators, they might choose to not file claims. As
such, in order to more fully understand the top manager’s commitment
to cyberinsurance, future research could expand on commitment by
including items that account for extent of claim filings.
Our results also confirm that institutional pressures from other organizations, vendors, and partners affect top management perceptions.
Thus, it is consistent with findings reported by Kettinger et al. [92] and
Hsu et al. [25]. In addition, our findings support Angst et al. [122], that
note that institutional pressures are predictive of technology-related
practices in an organization. This study also contributes to the integration of both UET and institutional theory in a single research [e.g., 16],
confirming that top management perceptions and values mediate institutional pressures in strategic decision-making. Our qualitative interviews further reinforce the quantitative results. Regarding control
variables, technology management experience significantly (marginal)
influenced commitment. This finding supports prior literature that
suggests that the top manager’s technology experience affects the performance of their organization and especially regarding monitoring and
reporting security breaches [123]. As more top executives are expected
to commit to cybersecurity strategies [124], prior IT experience may
become an asset or requirement for top managers. We also find that
longer tenure is negatively related to commitment, indicating that top
managers who have spent a long time at their jobs tend to not commit to
cyberinsurance.
5.1. Theoretical implications
This study has some implications for future research. First, by
incorporating multiple dimensions of the values and perceptions (individually related, organizationally related, and situationally related), this
study extends beyond traditional conceptualizations of upper echelons
in IS research. This is one of few studies that empirically investigates
how values and cognitive elements of top managers lead to cybersecurity strategies—which are strategic choices made by top executives.
Most scholarly research on UET in IS has focused on the effects of top
executive background (demographic and experiential) characteristics on
strategic choice [e.g., 12]. In addition, this research follows previous
recommendations to evaluate these three components in cybersecurity
research. For example, the literature on top manager decision-making
[33] argues that because executives are constrained by environmental,
normative, and inertial limitations, an investigation into the executives’
decision-making should be determined by three sets of factors: the
environment, the organization, and the individual executive [34].
Because this study bridges UET, institutional theory, perspectives
from the expectancy-valence framework [32], and the cybersecurity
literature [22], we believe that it provides more comprehensive insight
and evidence of the top manager’s decision-making towards a cybersecurity strategy. As such, in order for decision-makers to commit to
cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy, their commitment should
be based on these components (individual, organizational, and situational). Consequently, we believe that this study will have an impact on
future studies in the area of cybersecurity strategic decisions by top
managers.
Individual, organization, and situational factors may all be required
to increase the top manager’s commitment to cyberinsurance. Considering only the organization-related risks alone or situational risks alone
without the individual aspect may decrease the strength of commitment,
and may not fully capture the concentric factors surrounding the top
manager’s decision-making. The expectation is that when upper echelons or top management decisions are used to explain a phenomenon,
researchers should consider incorporating these three value and cognitive components as they may provide a more comprehensive view of
what and how the decision-maker arrives at a certain decision. Also, as
more studies are conducted that examine the top manager’s perspective
in cybersecurity, it should include this concentric view.
Second, cybersecurity research has often examined security behaviors from the perspective of employee behavior, such as compliance with
security policies. By examining the top manager’s perspective, we
demonstrate that cybersecurity decisions should also highlight the top
managers who are responsible for the strategic decisions utilized by
employees. Top managers’ commitment influences the risk management
strategies that their organizations pursue. Consequently, we add insight
about top manager decision-making to the cybersecurity literature [e.g.,
125], and we extend this literature by positing a risk transfer strategy.
With employee perspectives predominant in the literature, top managers’ views on cybersecurity create a balanced research agenda.
Furthermore, it may be important to examine both views in a single
study because the two views do not always correspond or complement
each other. Such research could help top managers find and close gaps
where their cybersecurity impact communications fall short. Accordingly, using our model and findings as a backdrop, future research could
empirically examine both the top manager and employee views.
Third, much of the cybersecurity research has focused on deterrence,
prevention, and responses to security issues through the examination of
related procedures, processes, or technologies [e.g., 2,3,126]. These,
however, are primarily mitigation-based risk management approaches,
and as such, they are limited in providing an overall solution [127,128].
This study extends the literature about security risk transfer strategies
such as pooling, hedging, and relying on insurance [12].
5.2. Practical implications
An organization’s shareholders may generate insights from the
finding that individual factors such as job security are more strongly
linked to top manager’s commitment to a risk management strategy,
than situational and organizational influences. Shareholders may
leverage this insight to incentivize top managers’ decisions about
managing security risks by focusing more on the job security of the top
manager than situational or organizational factors.
With respect to the influence of financial risk and breach risk severity
on commitment, the outcome of this study should be interesting to CIOs
and CISOs who have technology and security responsibilities. Considering that top managers (e.g., CEOs) are concerned about the financial
impact and severity of cybersecurity breaches, being able to capture the
severity of breaches in monetary and business-relevant terms (e.g., the
effect on customer purchase, subscription, safeguarding contracts,
mergers and acquisitions (M&A), intellectual property) that relate to the
CEO’s fiduciary responsibilities [124] may garner more attention and
commitment from the CEO. Thus, CIOs and CISOs looking to engage the
CEO to commit or make cybersecurity investments should do so using
language (e.g., financial risk) that elicits attention and commitment. Our
findings also show that transaction cost served as a formidable barrier to
O. Ogbanufe et al. 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
12
commitment, thus, suggesting that lower transaction costs in searching
and contracting with cyberinsurance carriers may present an opportunity for insurance companies to seek better ways to streamline the
acquisition and contracting of their services. Furthermore, our findings
Table B1
Survey instruments.
Measurement items
Ambiguity AMB1: It is difficult to understand what risks are being
insured through cyberinsurance
AMB2: There is often a lack of common language in the
meaning of cyber incidents covered in cyberinsurance
AMB3: There is difficulty in fully understanding the risk and
appropriate cyberinsurance coverage
AMB4: There is a lack of clarity about the limits of coverage
on cyberinsurance policies
Commitment COMM1: I am committed to supporting efforts in adopting
cyberinsurance for managing security risks
COMM2: I encourage the use of cyberinsurance for managing
security risks
COMM3: I am committed to a vision of adopting
cyberinsurance for managing security risks
COMM4: The use of cyberinsurance for managing security
risks is important to our organization
Financial Risk FIN1: Lead to a financial loss due to notifying affected
individuals, public relations, fines, etc.
FIN2: Subject our organization to financial loss
FIN3: Lead to a financial loss due to reimbursing customers
for fraudulent charges
FIN4: Expose our organization to suffer financial loss due to
reporting requirements or legal fines
FIN5: Lead to a financial loss due to lost revenue (dropped)
Job Security JSEC1: Cyberinsurance protection will protect my job
JSEC2: Cyberinsurance protection will help control the
undesirable events that might affect my job
JSEC3: Cyberinsurance protection will offer me continued
long-term job security
Regulatory
Oversight
REG1: Defines specific operational activities that must be
followed by our organization
REG2: Oversees and supervises our organization’s operations
and actions
REG3: Specifies objectives and outcome criteria that govern
our operations (e.g., data breach notification)
REG4: Takes action to hold our firm accountable for the
performance and safety of our products and
REG5: Works closely with our firm to remedy and conform to
regulated actions (e.g., data breach notification)
Security Breach
severity
SEV1 If our organization’s business operations were to be
disrupted from a security breach, it would be severe
SEV2: If our organization were to lose customers from a
security breach, it would be serious
SEV3: If our organization were to cover the costs of a security
breach incident, it would be significant
SEV4: If our organization’s security is breached, it would be
expensive to recover (dropped)
Transaction Cost TXNC1: The cost of negotiating a cyberinsurance contract
would be too much
TXNC2: The cost of monitoring and verifying the
cyberinsurance contract details would be too much
TXNC3: The cost of transferring knowledge about our
organization’s security to the cyberinsurance company would
be too much
TXNC4: In general, it would be a hassle contracting with a
cyberinsurance company
Institutional
Pressures
COE1: Our relationships with business partners may be
threatened, if we are not willing to adopt cyberinsurance
COE2: We may be willing to adopt cyberinsurance, because
we are subject to contractual obligations or negative sanctions
COE3: If we are willing to adopt cyberinsurance, concessions
may be granted, or desirable consequences may arise
COE4: If we are willing to adopt cyberinsurance, we may
receive support and assistance in technological aspects
MIM1: Our organization may follow our competitors’ actions,
and adopt cyberinsurance
MIM2: Our organization follows or imitates the behavior of
other firms within our network
MIM3: Our organization tends to follow our main competitors
in engaging in collective sense-making
MIM4: Our organization follows the trend of our main
competitors
NORM1: Participating in some cyberinsurance promotion
events generates some pressures on our organization to adopt
cyberinsurance
Table B1 (continued )
NORM2: Other organizations may exert some pressures on
our organization to adopt cyberinsurance
Control Variables InfoSec Management: How many years of experience do you
have in information security management?
Technology management: How many years of experience do
you have in technology management?
Tenure: How many years have you been in your current
position?
Table B2
Construct measurement and indicator type.
Construct Operationalized Definition Type Items adapted
from
Commitment to
cyberinsurance
The extent to which the top
manager is committed to the
use of cyberinsurance to
manage security risks in their
organization.
R [35]
Regulatory
oversight
The extent to which the
individual believes that a
government agency has
regulatory oversight over the
organization’s activities
R Developed in
relation to
previous
literature
Job security The perception of whether
cyberinsurance will protect
their job, offer continued longterm job security, and control
the undesirable events
affecting the job.
R [133,51]
Breach risk The degree to which the top
manager believes that the
consequences of the security
breach would be severe
R [134]
Financial risk The degree to which there is
potential for financial loss
associated with security
breaches
R
Transaction cost The effort, time, and costs
associated with searching,
knowledge transfer, creating,
negotiating, monitoring, and
enforcing a cyberinsurance
contract between the
organization and insurance
vendor.
R [135]
Cyberinsurance
coverage
ambiguity
The degree of uncertainty
inherent in perceptions of the
state of cyberinsurance
coverage.
R [76,92]
Institutional
pressures
The degree that commitment
to cyberinsurance is based on
mimetic, coercive, and
normative pressures exerted
by the institutional
environment.
F [17]
Note: R = reflective, F = formative
Table C1
HTMT ratio of the correlations.
AMB COMM FIN JSEC REG SEV
COMM 0.119
FIN 0.221 0.638
JSEC 0.102 0.795 0.521
REG 0.156 0.516 0.445 0.549
SEV 0.274 0.675 0.72 0.639 0.361
TXNC 0.586 0.091 0.15 0.075 0.274 0.17
O. Ogbanufe et al. 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
13
highlight that regulations requirements are at the core of the top manager’s decision. Regulatory agencies such as the SEC require firms to
disclose cybersecurity risks. If regulatory agencies are interested in the
viability of an organization by looking at their cybersecurity risk management strategies, chances are that investors and potential business
partners may seek similar risk management information from firms that
are not listed on the stock market (e.g., small and medium enterprises).
We hope that this study encourages organizations with or without regulatory oversight from a government agency to commit to
cyberinsurance.
5.3. Limitations and future research
This study, like most research, is subject to limitations. The survey
participants (CEOs of their respective firms) were ideal as key informants, yet including other top managers may have provided different
insights. Another limitation is that study focused on a limited number of
organizational and situational factors. Future research could investigate
the role of additional organizational factors such as litigation risks or
sanctions. In addition, future research could include other individual
factors such as reputation or executive litigation that might influence the
top manager’s commitment to cyberinsurance. Building on the findings,
we argue that incorporating job security as a personal relevance factor in
future research on security motivation is key to additional insight on the
role of job security in employee security behavior.
Another avenue for further research is the role of cyberinsurance use
as a cybersecurity best practice. Cyberinsurance companies require their
Table C2
Confidence intervals of HTMT.
Original Sample Sample Mean 2.50% 97.50%
COMM → AMB 0.119 0.145 0.05 0.296
FIN → AMB 0.221 0.238 0.086 0.423
FIN → COMM 0.638 0.639 0.463 0.793
JSEC → AMB 0.102 0.127 0.04 0.284
JSEC → COMM 0.795 0.794 0.69 0.885
JSEC → FIN 0.521 0.522 0.344 0.678
REG → AMB 0.156 0.169 0.057 0.331
REG → COMM 0.516 0.518 0.393 0.629
REG → FIN 0.445 0.444 0.259 0.62
REG → JSEC 0.549 0.55 0.416 0.674
SEV → AMB 0.274 0.281 0.105 0.478
SEV → COMM 0.675 0.675 0.561 0.779
SEV → FIN 0.72 0.726 0.588 0.858
SEV → JSEC 0.639 0.639 0.498 0.765
SEV → REG 0.361 0.363 0.179 0.529
TXNC → AMB 0.586 0.585 0.447 0.698
TXNC → COMM 0.091 0.119 0.061 0.217
TXNC → FIN 0.15 0.178 0.073 0.331
TXNC → JSEC 0.075 0.114 0.055 0.225
TXNC → REG 0.274 0.277 0.121 0.447
TXNC → SEV 0.17 0.182 0.068 0.351
Note: COMM= commitment to using cyberinsurance as a risk management
strategy; AMB = ambiguity of cyberinsurance; FIN= financial risk; REG =
regulation oversight risk; TXNCN = transaction cost; SEV = breach risk severity;
JSEC = job security, COE = coercive pressure, MIM = mimetic pressure, NORM
= normative pressure
Table C3
Loadings and cross loadings result.
AMB COE COMM FIN JSEC MIM NORM REG SEV TXNC
AMB1 0.90 0.19 0.08 0.19 0.06 0.22 0.34 0.16 0.18 0.52
AMB2 0.94 0.32 0.18 0.25 0.16 0.36 0.43 0.17 0.28 0.50
AMB3 0.93 0.23 0.11 0.18 0.07 0.28 0.33 0.11 0.24 0.52
AMB4 0.94 0.27 0.11 0.19 0.07 0.27 0.37 0.17 0.25 0.52
COE1 0.29 0.88 0.74 0.54 0.61 0.53 0.65 0.46 0.60 0.11
COE2 0.23 0.90 0.63 0.48 0.57 0.58 0.67 0.58 0.48 0.03
COE3 0.25 0.90 0.66 0.52 0.54 0.62 0.65 0.52 0.54 0.13
COE4 0.08 0.82 0.68 0.55 0.57 0.63 0.55 0.55 0.51 –0.02
COMM2 0.16 0.73 0.97 0.58 0.72 0.61 0.56 0.42 0.61 –0.04
COMM3 0.06 0.67 0.91 0.54 0.72 0.55 0.54 0.46 0.58 –0.09
COMM4 0.14 0.76 0.97 0.56 0.70 0.61 0.60 0.48 0.56 –0.02
COMM5 0.08 0.71 0.90 0.56 0.68 0.59 0.53 0.46 0.56 –0.08
FIN1 0.17 0.58 0.57 0.87 0.47 0.45 0.46 0.41 0.62 0.13
FIN2 0.25 0.41 0.47 0.89 0.35 0.31 0.33 0.27 0.56 0.12
FIN3 0.13 0.53 0.52 0.85 0.42 0.41 0.45 0.40 0.51 0.12
FIN4 0.18 0.62 0.54 0.83 0.52 0.48 0.57 0.48 0.54 0.19
FIN5 0.15 0.40 0.44 0.83 0.29 0.28 0.27 0.21 0.52 0.01
JSEC1 0.11 0.61 0.68 0.44 0.95 0.63 0.52 0.50 0.52 0.07
JSEC2 0.09 0.61 0.73 0.48 0.91 0.60 0.52 0.41 0.59 –0.05
JSEC3 0.09 0.62 0.68 0.42 0.95 0.62 0.56 0.50 0.51 0.04
MIM1 0.23 0.65 0.64 0.48 0.65 0.84 0.51 0.34 0.61 0.15
MIM2 0.35 0.58 0.51 0.36 0.53 0.92 0.62 0.36 0.47 0.34
MIM3 0.25 0.57 0.57 0.37 0.61 0.92 0.61 0.42 0.47 0.28
MIM4 0.24 0.59 0.59 0.42 0.62 0.93 0.61 0.41 0.51 0.29
NORM1 0.35 0.71 0.54 0.45 0.48 0.59 0.93 0.47 0.45 0.32
NORM2 0.37 0.73 0.59 0.51 0.58 0.61 0.90 0.46 0.47 0.31
REG1 0.14 0.48 0.38 0.37 0.49 0.34 0.42 0.90 0.30 0.19
REG2 0.20 0.54 0.42 0.36 0.44 0.39 0.46 0.93 0.27 0.29
REG3 0.11 0.55 0.47 0.37 0.50 0.44 0.45 0.93 0.32 0.30
REG4 0.15 0.55 0.44 0.39 0.41 0.36 0.41 0.88 0.28 0.17
REG5 0.07 0.53 0.48 0.36 0.50 0.39 0.46 0.87 0.31 0.23
SEV2 0.19 0.58 0.59 0.58 0.53 0.52 0.50 0.28 0.86 0.17
SEV3 0.26 0.49 0.42 0.53 0.45 0.45 0.34 0.24 0.90 0.11
SEV4 0.24 0.60 0.66 0.64 0.59 0.56 0.49 0.35 0.93 0.14
TXNC3 0.52 0.07 –0.08 0.11 –0.03 0.26 0.30 0.26 0.14 0.91
TXNC4 0.52 0.13 0.00 0.14 0.07 0.32 0.40 0.24 0.14 0.95
TXNC5 0.50 0.19 0.05 0.20 0.10 0.37 0.44 0.31 0.22 0.93
TXNC6 0.50 –0.04 –0.15 0.06 –0.05 0.17 0.22 0.15 0.07 0.91
Note: COMM= commitment to using cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy; AMB = ambiguity of cyberinsurance; FIN= financial risk; REG = regulation
oversight risk; TXNCN = transaction cost; SEV = breach risk severity; JSEC = job security, COE = coercive pressure, MIM = mimetic pressure, NORM = normative
pressure
O. Ogbanufe et al. 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
14
insured to undergo initial and periodic assessments so they can determine the presence of specific security controls in order to certify that the
organization is eligible to be insured [1,95]. Thus, cyberinsurance could
act as an incentive to increase cybersecurity best practices in organizations [71,129]. Insurance providers routinely offer reduced premiums if
the insured has increased levels of self-protection (e.g., house insurance
discounts for the installation of home security systems or smoke detectors). If cyberinsurance carriers offered such incentives to organizations, this could promote increased security best practices [58]. Thus,
future research should investigate the effect of cyberinsurance on security practices in organizations.
6. Conclusion
This study examined top managers’ perspectives of a cybersecurity
strategy. We drew from institutional theory and UET to test a model that
links top managers’ values and perceptions as mediators between
external institutional pressures and the commitment to use cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy. Both quantitative and post-hoc
qualitative (through interviews of top executives) analyses provide a
comprehensive insight of the top manager’s decision-making towards a
cybersecurity strategy, which is a departure from employee security
perspectives. Findings provide a framework within which future
research may examine organizational cybersecurity strategy by incorporating top manager perceptions into the theoretical lens through
which the strategy is examined. Several directions for future research
using this framework are suggested. Findings also provide guidance for
practitioners in framing top IT manager conversations with other top
managers, such as the CEO or chief financial officer (CFO), from the
perspective of how cybersecurity strategy may impact those top managers personally and professionally. In sum, this study better informs our
collective understanding by providing evidence about the influences on
top managers when making organizational cybersecurity strategy
decisions.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Obi Ogbanufe: Conceptualization, Data curation, Methodology,
Writing – original draft. Dan J. Kim: Data curation, Supervision,
Writing – review & editing. Mary C. Jones: Writing – review & editing.
Appendix A: Selected studies related to IS strategic choice/decision
Table A1
Reference/
Strategic choice
Summary Theory Key drivers/factors Sampling frame/#
[13]
IT management
The study seeks to understand, which
technology management responsibilities that
particular senior executives are held
accountable for when there are serious IT
deficiencies.
Upper echelons perspective IT material weakness, CEO and CFO
turnover
Organizational level
278 firm-year
observations
[17]
Inter-organization
system
To understand the institutional pressures
organization leaders faced and their
intentions to adopt inter-organizational
systems for financial electronic data
interchange
Institutional theory Mimetic, coercive, and normative
pressures
Organizational level
CEOs, CFOs, and CIOs of
222 organizations
[130]
Trucking supply
chain
Examines environmental benefits and
institutional pressures that influence the
continued use of bypass systems by truck
drivers.
Institutional theory Competitive pressure, organizational
pressure, industry pressure,
participation among other drivers,
financial benefits and environmental
benefits
Individual level
212 truckers
[122]
Healthcare EHR
sourcing
Examines how antecedents such as strategic
orientation (mission), formal structure (size),
and internal dynamics (patient case mix
complexity) influence whether hospitals
utilize single-sourcing configuration.
Institutional theory Closeness to single-sourcing, hospitalage, for-profit, teaching, hospital-size
Organizational level.
2,824–3,417 hospitals
[16]
ERP system
assimilation
Examines how top management mediates the
impact of external institutional pressures on
the assimilation of enterprise systems within
organizations
Institutional theory, top
management (upper echelons
theory)
Coercive, mimetic, normative factors,
top management beliefs, top
management participation, assimilation
Individual level.
77 ERP project
supervisors as key
informants
[12]
IS strategic
Posits that shared understanding between the
CIO and TMT regarding the role of IS in the
Upper echelons theory Shared language, Shared
understanding, CIO business
knowledge, TMT IS knowledge,
Individual level.
Matched-pair surveys of
(continued on next page)
Table C4
Full collinearity VIF test using factor-based PLS.
AMB COE COMM FIN JSEC MIM NORM REG SEV TXNC
AMB 1.49 1.62 1.58 1.36 1.59 1.58 1.56 1.58 1.30
COMM 3.77 3.40 3.69 3.11 3.72 3.76 3.74 3.79 2.93
FIN 2.03 2.07 2.02 2.11 2.10 2.11 2.11 1.74 2.10
JSEC 2.88 2.96 2.58 3.01 2.68 2.90 2.75 2.92 2.01
MIMIC 2.61 2.60 2.63 2.77 2.41 2.65 2.67 2.73 2.31
NORM 2.92 2.49 2.71 2.95 2.85 2.86 2.89 2.88 2.63
REG 1.82 1.67 1.89 1.94 1.69 1.94 1.94 1.88 1.68
SEV 2.33 2.32 2.38 2.02 2.28 2.34 2.36 2.29 2.31
TXNC 1.66 1.91 1.78 2.16 1.61 2.00 1.95 1.91 2.14
Note: COMM= commitment to using cyberinsurance as a risk management strategy; AMB = ambiguity of cyberinsurance; FIN= financial risk; REG = regulation
oversight risk; TXNCN = transaction cost; SEV = breach risk severity; JSEC = job security, COE = coercive pressure, MIM = mimetic pressure, NORM = normative
pressure
O. Ogbanufe et al. 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
15
(continued )
management organization is an important antecedent for IS
strategic alignment
demographic similarity, experiential
similarity, structural
systems of knowing, Social systems of
knowing, IS strategic alignment
621 CIOs and 243 TMT
executive
[92]
Integrative
information delivery
Examines how external and environmental
pressures influence the manager’s decision
for integrative information delivery.
Institutional theory External pressure (coercive, mimetic,
normative)
Individual level.
103 non-IS top executives
CEOs, CFOs, and vice
presidents, key
informants.
Semi-structured
interviews with 8
executives.
[131]
Organization agility
Examines how technology, organizational,
and environmental elements combine to
produce agility. Specifically, the role that
business intelligence and communication
technologies play in how firms achieve
organizational sensing agility, decisionmaking agility, and acting agility in different
organizational and environmental contexts.
Organizations as information
processing framework
Sensing agility, Top management team
energy, decision-making agility, acting
agility, unpredictability,
communication
Organizational level.
218 managers from 106
firms.
[11]
IS strategy
Examines the relationship between IS
strategy and firm performance, as well as the
environmental conditions surrounding how
an IS strategy might outperform others.
IS strategy and firm
performance
Technological turbulence, Market
uncertainty, firm performance,
innovative IS strategy, conservative IS
strategy, undefined IS strategy,
Organizational level.
263 executives using one
highest ranking executive
the organization.
[10]
IT innovation in
healthcare
Investigates IT innovation by examining the
factors that influence a hospital’s strategic
choice to be an IT innovator and the influence
of IT innovation on hospital performance.
Visionary leadership, upper
echelons theory,
organizational climate theory,
and resource-based view
CIO strategic leadership, IT innovation,
TMT attitude towards IT, IT impact,
hospital climate, hospital performance
70 matched pairs of
hospital CIOs and
executives.
Semi-structured
interviews with 10
executives.
[14]
IT security
investment in
healthcare
Investigates the role that symbolic versus
substantive adoption of IT practices plays in
the effectiveness of IT security through
reducing the likelihood of data security
breaches.
Institutional theory IT security investments, symbolic/
substantive adoption, likelihood of data
breach
Organizational level.
5,882 hospitals
[132]
Inter-organization
business process
Investigates differential effects of relational,
institutional, and inertial mechanisms on the
assimilation of inter-organizational business
process in dominant and non-dominant firms.
Relational view of the firm,
institutional theory, and
organizational inertia theory
Relational view: relational specificity,
relational depth, relational
extendibility
Institutional theory: coercive pressure,
mimetic pressure, and normative
pressure
Inertial theory: resource rigidity,
routine rigidity
Cross-case analysis on
data from 11 firms in the
high-tech industry
(Hsu, Lee, & Straub,
2012)
Security management
Explores information security management as
administrative innovation, with a focus on
economic efficiency and internal
organizational capability resulting from
institutional pressures to conform.
Institutional theory Perceived environmental uncertainty,
perceived gain in
competitive advantage, top
management support, it capability,
cultural acceptability, institutional
influences (peer influence, supervisory
authority influence),
adoption of security
management, assimilation of security
management
Individual level.
140 top IS managers in
Korea
[36]
Web assimilation
Examines organizational factors that
influence the achievement of web
assimilation within the organization for its ecommerce activities.
Institutional theory Top management championship,
strategic investment rationale, and
extent of coordination, web
assimilation
Organizational level.
62 match pairs of top
executives and IT
professionals.
Note: TMT = top management team; ERP = enterprise resource planning; ERP = enterprise resource planning; CIO = chief information officer; CFO = chief financial
officer.
Appendix B: Survey instruments and operationalization of constructs
.
Appendix C: Discriminant validity test using the Heterotrait–Monotrait (HTMT) Ratio approach
There are two ways of assessing discriminant validity using the HTMT method [111]. First, assess whether the value of HTMT below a recommended threshold. Second, use a confidence interval to test whether an HTMT null hypothesis of equal to or more than 1. From the first test, the result
shows that the highest absolute value for our measures is 0.79 (see Table B1), thus, satisfying the 0.85 threshold [111]. From the second test, we find
that all upper confidence intervals are below the value of 1. Thus, suggesting that HTMT values are significantly different from 1 (see Table C2). The
combination of the test results leads us to conclude that discriminant validity is achieved in our measurement model.
O. Ogbanufe et al. 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
16
Testing common methods bias
Common methods bias (CMB) is addressed in multiple ways. First, in the survey design process, we followed recommendations and psychologically
separated the measures by using dissimilar response format, such as Likert scales and open-ended questions. Using different format is beneficial in
reducing context-related cues [136]. Also, following Podaskoff et al. [137], we informed participants about the anonymity of the survey and reminded
them that their responses are neither right nor wrong. Secondly, we assessed the CMB in the data using two methods. We performed Harman’s [138]
one-factor test that assessed all reflective items using principal components factor analysis. Six factors were revealed and the largest factor variance
was 38.5%, indicating that a single factor did not account for most of the variance. Also, we used a factor-based partial least squares structural
equation modeling (PLS-SEM) full collinearity test to assess CMB [139]. The factor-based PLS-SEM process integrates measurement errors that address
issues with variance maximization, which are inherent in standard PLS-SEM. The assessment revealed variance inflation factor (VIF) values that are
below the threshold of five [112,113]. A summary of the results from the CMB analysis is depicted in Table C1. These results suggest that CMB is not a
major problem in this study.
Tables C3 and C4
Reference
[1] R.P. Majuca, W. Yurcik, J.P. Kesan, The Evolution of Cyberinsurance, 2006.
http://arxiv.org/ftp/cs/papers/0601/0601020.pdf.
[2] D.W. Straub, R.J. Welke, Coping with Systems Risk: Security Planning Models for
Management Decision Making, MIS Q, 1998, pp. 441–469.
[3] R. Willison, M. Warkentin, Beyond Deterrence: An Expanded View of Employee
Computer Abuse, 37, MIS Q, 2013, pp. 1–20.
[4] T. Bandyopadhyay, V. Mookerjee, R. Rao, Why IT managers don’t go for cyberinsurance products, Commun. ACM. 52 (2009) 68–73.
[5] C.A. Siegel, T.R. Sagalow, P. Serritella, Cyber-risk management: technical and
insurance controls for enterprise-level security, Inf. Syst. Secur. 11 (2002) 33–49.
[6] R. Bohme, ¨ G. Kataria, On the limits of cyber-insurance. Trust and Privacy in
Digital Business, Springer, 2006, pp. 31–40.
[7] S. Romanosky, L. Ablon, A. Kuehn, T. Jones, Content analysis of cyber insurance
policies: how do carriers price cyber risk? J. Cybersecur. 5 (2019) 1–19, https://
doi.org/10.1093/cybsec/tyz002.
[8] Q. Hu, P. Hart, D. Cooke, The role of external and internal influences on
information systems security - a neo-institutional perspective, J. Strateg. Inf. Syst.
16 (2007) 153–172.
[9] J. Leonard, H. Higson, A strategic activity model of Enterprise System
implementation and use: Scaffolding fluidity, J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 23 (2014)
62–86.
[10] D.E. Leidner, D. Preston, D. Chen, An examination of the antecedents and
consequences of organizational IT innovation in hospitals, J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 19
(2010) 154–170, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2010.07.002.
[11] D.E. Leidner, J. Lo, D. Preston, An empirical investigation of the relationship of IS
strategy with firm performance, J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 20 (2011) 419–437.
[12] D.S. Preston, E. Karahanna, Antecedents of IS strategic alignment: a nomological
network, Inf. Syst. Res. 20 (2009) 159–179, https://doi.org/10.1287/
isre.1070.0159.
[13] A. Masli, V.J. Richardson, W.W. Marcia, R. Zmud, Senior Executives’ IT
Management Responsibilities: Serious IT-Related Deficiencies and CEO/CFO
Turnover, MIS Quarterly 40 (3) (2016) 687–708.
[14] C. Angst, E.S. Block, J. D’Arcy, K. Kelley, When do it security investments matter?
Accounting for the influence of institutional factors in the context of healthcare
data breaches, MIS Ouarterly 41 (2017) 893–916.
[15] P.J. DiMaggio, W.W. Powell, The iron cage revisited : institutional isomorphism
and collective rationality in organizational fields, Am. Sociol. Rev. 48 (1983)
147–160.
[16] H. Liang, N. Saraf, Q. Hu, Y. Xue, Assimilation of Enterprise Systems: The Effect of
Institutional Pressures and the Mediating Role of Top Management, 31, MIS Q,
2007, pp. 59–87.
[17] H.H. Teo, K.K. Wei, I. Benbasat, Predicting Intention to Adopt Interorganizational
Linkages: An Institutional Perspective, 27, MIS Q, 2003, pp. 19–49. http://www.
jstor.org/stable/30036518 (accessed March 7, 2017).
[18] D. Hambrick, P.A. Mason, Upper echelons: the organization as a reflection of its
top managers, Acad. Manag. Rev. 9 (1984) 193–206.
[19] K. Hedstrom, ¨ E. Kolkowska, F. Karlsson, J.P. Allen, Value conflicts for information
security management, J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 20 (2011) 373–384, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jsis.2011.06.001.
[20] L. Kappelman, R. Torres, E. Mclean, C. Maurer, V. Johnson, K. Kim, The 2018 SIM
IT Key Issues and Trends Study, 18, MIS Q. Exec, 2018, pp. 237–263.
[21] Experian, Experian Data Breach Industry Forecast, Experian, 2015. http://www.
experian.com/assets/data-breach/white-papers/2015-industry-forecast-experian.
pdf.
[22] S. Ransbotham, S. Mitra, Choice and chance: A conceptual model of paths to
information security compromise, Inf. Syst. Res. 20 (2009) 121–139.
[23] D. Hambrick, Upper echelons theory : an update, Acad. Manag. Rev. 32 (2007)
334–343.
[24] P. Ghemawat, Commitment: The Dynamic of Strategy, Free Press, New York,
1991.
[25] C. Hsu, J.N. Lee, D. Straub, Institutional influences on information systems
security innovations, Inf. Syst. Res. 23 (2012) 918–939, https://doi.org/10.1287/
isre.1110.0393.
[26] G. Medvinsky, C. Lai, B.C. Neuman, Endorsements, licensing, and insurance for
distributed system services, in: Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Conference ACM
Computer and Communications Security Conference, ACM, 1994: pp. 170–175.
[27] D. Geer, Risk management is still where the money Is, Comput. (Long. Beach.
Calif). 36 (2003) 129–131.
[28] B. Schneier, Insurance and the computer industry, Commun. ACM. 44 (2001)
114–115.
[29] N.T. Feather, Values, valences, and course enrollment: Testing the role of
personal values within an expectancy - valence framework. J. Educ. Psychol. 80
(1988) 381–391.
[30] J.P. Peter, L.X. Tarpey, A comparative analysis of three consumer decision
strategies, J. Consum. Res. (1975) 29–37.
[31] D.J. Kim, D.L. Ferrin, H.R. Rao, Trust and satisfaction, two stepping stones for
successful e-commerce relationships: A longitudinal exploration, Inf. Syst. Res. 20
(2009) 237–257, https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1080.0188.
[32] G.L. Desanctis, An Examination of an Expectancy Theory Model of Decision
Support System Use, Texas Tech Univeristy, 1982.
[33] D. Hambrick, E. Abrahamson, Assessing managerial discretion across industries,
Acad. Manag. J. 38 (1995) 1427–1441.
[34] C. Crossland, D. Hambrick, Differences in managerial discretion across countries:
how nation-level institutions affect the degree to which CEOs matter, Strateg.
Manag. J. 32 (2011) 797–819, https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.
[35] W. Lewis, R. Agarwal, V. Sambamurthy, Sources of Influence on Beliefs About
Information Technology Use: An Empirical Study of Knowledge, 27, MIS Q, 2003,
pp. 657–678.
[36] D. Chatterjee, R. Grewal, V. Sambamurthy, Shaping up for E-Commerce:
Institutional Enablers of the Organizational Assimilation of Web Technologies,
26, MIS Q, 2002, pp. 65–89.
[37] E. Mollick, People and process, suits and innovators: The role of individuals in
firm performance, Strateg. Manag. J. 33 (2012) 1001–1015.
[38] M. Bertrand, A. Schoar, Managing With Style: The Effect of Managers on Firm
Policies, 2002. https://ssrn.com/abstract=376880.
[39] D. Hambrick, T.S. Cho, M. Chen, The influence of top management team
heterogeneity on firms competitive moves, Adm. Sci. Q. 41 (1996) 659–684.
[40] M. Newman, R. Sabherwal, Determinants of Commitment to Information Systems
Development: A Longitudinal Investigation, MIS Q, 1996, pp. 23–54.
[41] E. Babakus, U. Yavas, O.M. Karatepe, T. Avci, The effect of management
commitment to service quality on employees’ affective and performance
outcome, J. Acad. Mark. Sci. 31 (2003) 272–286, https://doi.org/10.1177/
0092070303253525.
[42] R.P. Marble, A system implementation study: Management commitment to
project management, Inf. Manag. 41 (2003) 111–123, https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0378-7206(03)00031-4.
[43] T.D. Clark, M.C. Jones, C.P. Armstrong, The Dynamic Structure of Management
Support Systems: Theory Development, Research Focus, and Direction, 31, MIS Q,
2007, pp. 579–615.
[44] B.M. Staw, Counterforces to change, in: P.. Goodman (Ed.), Change in
Organizations, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, 1982, pp. 87–121.
[45] J. Goo, R. Kishore, R.H. Rao, K. Nam, The Role of Service Level Agreements in
Relational Management of Information Technology Outsourcing: An Empirical
Study, 33, MIS Q, 2009, pp. 119–145.
[46] J.S. Coleman, Foundations of Social Theory, The Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1990.
[47] R.S. Lazarus, C.A. Smith, Knowledge and appraisal in the cognition—emotion
relationship, Cogn. Emot. 2 (1988) 281–300.
[48] N. Doherty, Integrated Risk Management: Techniques and Strategies for
Managing Corporate Risk, McGraw Hill, New York, NY, 2000.
[49] M. Adams, C. Lin, H. Zou, Chief executive officer incentives, monitoring, and
corporate risk management: evidence from insurance use, J. Risk Insur. 78 (2011)
551–582.
[50] M. Hsu, J. Jiang, G. Klein, Z. Tang, Perceived career incentives and intent to
leave, Inf. Manag. 40 (2003) 361–369.
[51] D.H. McKnight, B. Phillips, B.C. Hardgrave, Which reduces IT turnover intention
the most: Workplace characteristics or job characteristics? Inf. Manag. 46 (2009)
167–174.
O. Ogbanufe et al. 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
17
[52] F.V. Fox, B.M. Staw, The trapped administrator: effects of job insecurity and
policy resistance upon commitment to a course of action, Adm. Sci. Q. 24 (1979)
449–471, https://doi.org/10.2307/2989922.
[53] Absolute, IT Confidential - The State of Security Confidence, 2016. https://blogs.
absolute.com/it-professionals-share-bad-habits-in-new-absolute-survey/(.
accessed January 31, 2017).
[54] J. Russell, Equifax CEO Richard Smith has ‘retired’ following huge data breach,
TechCrunch, 2017. https://techcrunch.com/2017/09/26/equifax-ceo-richardsmith-has-retired-following-huge-data-breach/ (accessed April 30, 2018).
[55] Y.H. Kwak, K.S. LaPlace, Examining risk tolerance in project-driven organization,
Technovation 25 (2005) 691–695.
[56] I. Bose, A.C.M. Leung, Do phishing alerts impact global corporations? A firm
value analysis, Decis. Support Syst. 64 (2014) 67–78, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
dss.2014.04.006.
[57] S. Goel, H.A. Shawky, The Impact of federal and state notification laws on
security breach announcements, Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 34 (2014) 37–50.
[58] L.A. Gordon, M.P. Loeb, L. Zhou, The impact of information security breaches: has
there been a downward shift in costs? J. Comput. Secur. 19 (2011) 33–56.
[59] B.K. Boyd, J. Fulk, Executive scanning and perceived uncertainty: a
multidimensional model, J. Manage. 22 (1996) 1–21, https://doi.org/10.1177/
014920639602200101.
[60] R. McCullen, The CEO’s critical role in driving cybersecurity readiness, Forbes
(2018). https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2018/01/05/th
e-ceos-critical-role-in-driving-cybersecurity-readiness/#1a09f7094170 (accessed
October 2, 2019).
[61] K. Bissell, R. LaSalle, F. van den Dool, J. Kennedy-White, Gaining ground on the
cyber attacker: 2018, State Cyber Resil. (2018) https://www.accenture.com/_
acnmedia/PDF-76/Accenture-2018-state-of-cyber-resilience.pdf#zoom=50.
[62] SEC, Former Equifax Executive Charged With Insider Trading, SEC, 2018. https
://www.sec.gov/news/press-release/2018-40 (accessed August 7, 2019).
[63] Ponemon, Cost of Cyber Crime Study: United States, 2016 (2015), 2015. htt
p://www.ponemon.org/library/2015-cost-of-cyber-crime-united-states.
[64] K. Campbell, L.A. Gordon, M.P. Loeb, L. Zhou, The economic cost of publicly
announced information security breaches: empirical evidence from the stock
market, J. Comput. Secur. 11 (2003) 431–448.
[65] H. Cavusoglu, B. Mishra, S. Raghunathan, The effect of internet security breach
announcements on market value: Capital market reactions for breached firms and
internet security developers, Int. J. Electron. Commer. 9 (2004) 70–104.
[66] CybersecurityVentures, Cybercrime Damages $6 Trillion by 2021,
CybersecurityVentures. (2017). https://cybersecurityventures.com/hackerpoca
lypse-cybercrime-report-2016/ (accessed April 30, 2018).
[67] R. Bohme, ¨ G. Schwartz, Modeling Cyber-Insurance: Towards a Unifying
Framework, WEIS, 2010.
[68] B. Srinidhi, J. Yan, G.K. Tayi, Allocation of resources to cyber-security: The effect
of misalignment of interest between managers and investors, Decis. Support Syst.
75 (2015) 49–62.
[69] S. Ingram, The Financial Risk of Cyber Security Breaches, PwC. (2014). htt
ps://www.digitalpulse.pwc.com.au/financial-risk-cyber-security/ (accessed
August 6, 2019).
[70] S. Jaatinen, A Guide to Financial Risk for CEOs, EUROMONEY. (2016). https://
www.euromoney.com/article/b12knynhdntf4n/a-guide-to-financial-risk-for-ceos
(accessed August 6, 2019).
[71] L.A. Gordon, M.P. Loeb, T. Sohail, A framework for using insurance for cyber-risk
management, Commun. ACM. 46 (2003) 81–85.
[72] J. Bolot, M. Lelarge, A new perspective on internet security using insurance, in:
Proceedings of the INFOCOM 27th Conference on Computer Communications
IEEE, IEEE, 2008.
[73] S. Dhar, B. Balakrishnan, Risks, benefits, and challenges in global IT outsourcing,
J. Glob. Inf. Manag. 14 (2006) 59–89.
[74] M. Benaroch, L. Fink, Contract Design Choices and the Balance of EX Ante and Ex
Post Transaction Costs in Software Development Outsourcing, 40, MIS Q, 2016,
pp. 57–82.
[75] J. Kwon, M.E. Johnson, Proactive Versus Reactive Security Investments in the
Healthcare Sector, 38, MIS Q, 2014, pp. 451–472.
[76] S.J. Carson, A. Madhok, W. Tao, Uncertainty, opportunism, and governance: the
effects of volatility and ambiguity on formal and relational contracting, Acad.
Manag. J 49 (2006) 1058–1077, https://doi.org/10.5465/AMJ.2006.22798187.
[77] T. Bandyopadhyay, V. Mookerjee, A model to analyze the challenge of using
cyber insurance, Inf. Syst. Front. 21 (2017) 301–325, https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10796-017-9737-3.
[78] M. Eling, W. Schnell, What do we know about cyber risk and cyber risk
insurance? J. Risk Financ. 17 (2016) 474–491, https://doi.org/10.1108/JRF-09-
2016-0122.
[79] F. Santos, K. Eisenhardt, Constructing markets and shaping boundaries:
Entrepreneurial power in nascent fields, Acad. Manag. J. 52 (2009) 643–671.
[80] N.Y. Stanley Budner, Intolerance of ambiguity as a personality variable, J. Pers.
30 (1962) 29–50, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6494.1962.tb02303.x.
[81] R. Daft, N. Macintosh, A tentative exploration into the amount and equivocality
of information processing in organizational work units, Adm. Sci. Q. 26 (1981)
207–224.
[82] R. Daft, R. Lengel, L.K. Trevino, Message Equivocality, Media Selection, and
Manager performance : Implications for Information Systems, 11, MIS Quartely,
1987, pp. 355–366.
[83] P. Naghizadeh, M. Liu, Opting out of incentive mechanisms : a study of security as
a non-excludable public good, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 11 (2016)
2790–2803.
[84] P.H. Meland, I.A. Tondel, B. Solhaug, Mitigating risk with cyberinsurance, IEEE
Secur. Priv. 13 (2015) 38–43, https://doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2015.137.
[85] A.P. Petkova, A. Wadhwa, X. Yao, S. Jain, Reputation and decision making under
ambiguity : a study of US. Venture capital firms ’ investments in the emerging
clean energy sector, Acad. Manag. J. 57 (2014) 422–448.
[86] A. Mukhopadhyay, S. Chatterjee, D. Saha, A. Mahanti, S.K. Sadhukhan, Cyber-risk
decision models: to insure IT or not? Decis. Support Syst. 56 (2013) 11–26.
[87] M. Ogul, B. Rockman, Overseeing oversight: new departures and old problems,
Legis. Stud. Q. 15 (1990) 5–24.
[88] M. Collins, C. Urban, The dark side of sunshine: Regulatory oversight and status
quo bias, J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 107 (2014) 470–486.
[89] T. Dinev, H. Xu, J. Smith, P. Hart, Information privacy and correlates : an
empirical attempt to bridge and distinguish privacy-related concepts, Eur. J. Inf.
Syst. 22 (2012) 295–316.
[90] E. Boo, D. Sharma, Effect of regulatory oversight on the association between
internal governance characteristics and audit fees, Account. Financ. 48 (2008)
51–71.
[91] UK Marsh, The Role of Insurance in Managing and Mitigating the Risk, Cyber
Security, 2015, https://www.marsh.com/uk/insights/research/uk-cyber-securit
y-role-of-insurance-in-managing-mitigating-risk.html (accessed September 5,
2016).
[92] W. Kettinger, C. Zhang, K.C. Chang, A view from the top: integrated information
delivery and effective information use from the senior executive’s perspective,
Inf. Syst. Res. 24 (2013) 842–860, https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1120.0473.
[93] Deloitte, Cyber Insurance a key element of the corporate Risk Management
Strategy, 2017. https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/cy/Document
s/risk/CY_Risk_CyberInsurance_Noexp.PDF (accessed February 13, 2020).
[94] Pireg, What regulations require the designation of a chief information security
officer (CISO), (2020). https://piregcompliance.com/ciso-as-a-service/what-reg
ulations-require-the-designation-of-a-chief-information-security-officer-ciso/
(accessed February 16, 2020).
[95] D. Young, J. Lopez, M. Rice, B. Ramsey, R. McTasney, A framework for
incorporating insurance in critical infrastructure cyber risk strategies, Int. J. Crit.
Infrastruct. Prot. 14 (2016) 43–57.
[96] W. Wagner, Cyber insurance: why you should require certain vendors to have it,
Priv. Data Secur. Insight. (2015). https://www.privacyanddatasecurityinsight.co
m/2015/05/cyber-insurance-why-you-should-require-certain-vendors-to-h
ave-it/ (accessed February 5, 2020).
[97] P. Ziobro, J. Lublin, ISS’s View on Target Directors Is a Signal on Cybersecurity,
Wall Str. J. (2014). https://www.wsj.com/articles/iss-calls-for-an-overhaul-of-tar
get-board-after-data-breach-1401285278 (accessed January 30, 2018).
[98] G.C. Moore, I. Benbasat, Development of an instrument to measure the
perceptions of adopting an information technology innovation, Inf. Syst. Res. 2
(1991) 192–222.
[99] S. Finkelstein, D. Hambrick, Top-management-team tenure and organizational
outcomes: the moderating Roie of managerial discretion, Adm. Sci. Q. 35 (1990)
484–503.
[100] R. Sen, S. Borle, Estimating the contextual risk of data breach: an empirical
approach, J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 32 (2015) 314–341.
[101] R. Sabherwal, Y.E. Chan, Alignment between business and IS strategies: a study of
prospectors, analyzers, and defenders, Inf. Syst. Res. 12 (2001) 11–33.
[102] Experian, Data Breach Response, 2015 (2014). https://www.experian.com/assets
/data-breach/brochures/response-guide.pdf.
[103] C. Cycyota, D. Harrison, What (Not) to expect when surveying executives: a metaanalysis of top manager response rates and techniques over time, Organ. Res.
Methods 9 (2001) 133–160, https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428105280770.
[104] M.L. Mcdonald, J.D. Westphal, Access denied : low mentoring of women and
minority first-time directors and its negative effects on appointments to additional
boards, Acad. Manag. J. 56 (2013) 1169–1198.
[105] M.K. Bednar, J.D. Westphal, Surveying the corporate elite: theoretical and
practical guidance on improving response rates and response quality in top
management survey questionnaires. Research Methodology in Strategy and
Management, Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 2006, pp. 37–55, https://doi.
org/10.1016/S1479-8387(06)03004-9.
[106] Ringle, Christian M., Wende, Sven, & Becker, Jan-Michael. (2015). SmartPLS 3.
Boenningstedt: SmartPLS. Retrieved from https://www.smartpls.com.
[107] W. Chin, P.R. Newsted, Structural equation modeling analysis with small samples
using partial least squares. Statistical Strategies for Small Sample Research, Sage
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, 1999, pp. 307–341.
[108] J.F. Hair, W.C. Black, B.J. Babin, R.E. Anderson, R.L. Tatham, Multivariate Data
Analysis, Pearson Prentice Hall Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2006.
[109] W. Chin, Issues and Opinion on Structural Equation Modeling, 22, MIS Q, 1998
vii–xvi.
[110] C. Fornell, D.F. Larcker, Structural equation models with unobservable variables
and measurement error: algebra and statistics, J. Mark. Res. (1981) 382–388.
[111] J. Henseler, C.M. Ringle, M. Sarstedt, A new criterion for assessing discriminant
validity in variance-based structural equation modeling, J. Acad. Mark. Sci. 43
(2014) 115–135.
[112] R. Kline, Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling, Guilford Press,
New York, 1998.
[113] N. Kock, Common method bias in PLS-SEM: a full collinearity assessment
approach, Int. J. Collaborat. 11 (2015) 1–10.
[114] D.W. Straub, M.-C. Boudreau, D. Gefen, Validation guidelines for IS positivist
research, Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 13 (2004) 380–427.
[115] K.A. Bollen, R. Stinet, Direct and indirect effects: classical and bootstrap estimates
of variability, Sociol. Methodol. 20 (1990) 115–140.
O. Ogbanufe et al. 
Information & Management 58 (2021) 103507
18
[116] A.F. Hayes, Beyond baron and Kenny: statistical mediation analysis in the new
millennium, Commun. Monogr. 76 (2009) 408–420, https://doi.org/10.1080/
03637750903310360.
[117] A.C. Johnston, M. Warkentin, M. Siponen, An Enhanced Fear Appeal Rhetorical
Framework: Leveraging Threats to the Human Asset Through Sanctioning
Rhetoric, 39, MIS Q, 2015, pp. 113–1A7.
[118] K. Bagchi, G. Udo, An analysis of the growth of computer and Internet security
breaches, Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 12 (2003) 46.
[119] C. Koh, S. Ang, D.W. Straub, IT outsourcing success: a psychological contract
perspective, Inf. Syst. Res. 15 (2004) 356–373.
[120] S. Ang, D.W. Straub, Production and Transaction Economies and IS Outsourcing:
A Study of the U. S. Banking Industry, 22, MIS Q, 1998, p. 535.
[121] P. Hough, N. Duffy, Top management perspectives on decision support systems,
Inf. Manag. 12 (1987) 21–30.
[122] C. Angst, K. Wowack, S. Handley, K. Kelly, Antecedents of information systems
sourcing strategies In U.S. hospitals: a longitudinal study, MIS Ouart. 27 (2017)
1–14.
[123] J. Haislip, J.-H. Lim, R. Pinsker, Do the Roles of the CEO and CFO Differ When it
Comes to Data Security Breaches? AMCIS, 2017, pp. 1–10.
[124] K. Bissell, R. Lasalle, K. Richards, The cyber-committed CEO and Board, 2017.
https://www.accenture.
com/_acnmedia/pdf-42/accenture-cyber-committed-ceo-and-board-pov.
pdf#zoom=50 (accessed August 5, 2019).
[125] Y. Lee, K.R. Larsen, Threat or coping appraisal: determinants of SMB executives’
decision to adopt anti-malware software, Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 18 (2009) 177–187.
[126] H. Cavusoglu, B. Mishra, S. Raghunathan, The value of intrusion detection
systems in information technology security architecture, Inf. Syst. Res. 16 (2005)
28–46.
[127] P. Ifinedo, Information systems security policy compliance: an empirical study of
the effects of socialisation, influence, and cognition, Inf. Manag. 51 (2014) 69–79.
[128] T. Herath, R. Rao, Protection motivation and deterrence: a framework for security
policy compliance in organisations, Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 18 (2009) 106–125.
[129] J. Bolot, M. Lelarge, Cyber insurance as an incentivefor internet security, Manag.
Inf. Risk Econ. Secur. (2009) 269–290.
[130] K. Marett, R. Otondo, S. Taylor, Assessing the Effects of benefits and institutional
influences on the continued use of environmentally munificent bypass systems in
long-haul trucking, MIS Ouart. 37 (2013) 1301–1312.
[131] Y. Park, O.A. El Sawy, P.C. Fiss, The role of business intelligence and
communication technologies in organizational agility: a configurational
approach, J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 18 (2017) 648–686, https://doi.org/10.17705/
1jais.00001.
[132] H. Bala, V. Venkatesh, Assimilation of interorganizational business process
standards, Inf. Syst. Res. 18 (2007) 340–362, https://doi.org/10.1287/
isre.1070.0134.
[133] S.J. Ashford, C. Lee, P. Bobko, Content, cause, and consequences of job insecurity:
a theory-based measure and substantive test, Acad. Manag. J. 32 (1989) 803–829,
https://doi.org/10.2307/256569.
[134] S. Milne, S. Orbell, Can protection motivation theory predict breast
selfexamination? A longitudinal test exploring the role of previous behaviour,
Underst. Chang. Heal. Behav. Heal. Beliefs Self-Regulat. (2000) 51–71.
[135] M. Jones, D. Mothersbaugh, S.E. Beatty, Switching barries and repurchase
intentions in services, J. Retail. 76 (2000) 259–274.
[136] P.M. Podsakoff, S.B. MacKenzie, J.-Y. Lee, N.P. Podsakoff, Common method
biases in behavioral research: a critical review of the literature and recommended
remedies, J. Appl. Psychol. 88 (2003) 879.
[137] B. Jarvis, Cheryl, B. MacKenzie, Scott, P.M. Podsakoff, A critical review of
construct indicators and measurement model misspecification in marketing and
consumer research, J. Consum. Res. 30 (2003) 199–218.
[138] P.M. Podsakoff, S.B. MacKenzie, N.P. Podsakoff, Sources of method bias in social
science research and recommendations on how to control it, Annu. Rev. Psychol.
63 (2011) 539–569.
[139] N. Kock, G. Lynn, Lateral collinearity and misleading results in variance-based
SEM: an illustration and recommendations, J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 13 (2012)
546–580.
Obi Ogbanufe is an Assistant Professor of Information Technology and Decision Sciences at
the University of North Texas. She is a recipient of the NSF CyberCorps Scholarship for
Service award. She has published in Information Systems Journal, Decision Support Systems
and the International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction. Her research interests include
information security, cybercrime, health information technology, risk management, and
smart devices.
Dan J. Kim is a Fulbright Sr. Scholar and Professor of Information Technology and Decision
Sciences at the University of North Texas. His research interests are in multidisciplinary
areas, such as information security and privacy, business and intlligence analytics, trust in
electronic commerce, and others. His research work has been published or forthcoming in
more than 180 papers, in refereed journals, peer-reviewed book chapters, and conference
proceedings including ISR, JMIS, JAIS, EJIS, CACM, DSS, I&M, etc. His publications have
been cited more than 9,000 times over the last five years and he is ranked top 1.2% of
most-cited worldwide researchers in the information systems area. He has been awarded
several research grants for multi-years including NSF, NSA, and Core Fulbright Scholarship
grant. He serves or served as a guest, senior, and associate editor for several top journals,
including MISQ, I&M, ISF, ISM, and ECRA.
Mary C. Jones is a Professor of information systems in the Information Technology and
Decision Sciences Department at the University of North Texas. Her work appears in
numerous journals, including MIS Quarterly, European Journal of Information Systems,
Behavioral Science, Decision Support Systems, System Dynamics Review, and Information and
Management. Her research interests are primarily in the impact on organizations of large
scale, organizational spanning information systems, and in organizational-level IT management issues. She teaches a variety of courses, including enterprise applications of
business intelligence/analytics, IT project management, and doctoral seminars in general
systems theory and in research methods.
O. Ogbanufe et al. 