The Good, The Bad and The Missing: A
Narrative Review of Cyber-security
Implications for Australian Small Businesses
Tracy Tam, Asha Rao and Joanne Hall
RMIT University,
124 Latrobe St,
Melbourne 3000,
Australia.
Abstract
Small businesses (0-19 employees) are becoming attractive targets
for cyber-criminals, but struggle to implement cyber-security measures
that large businesses routinely deploy. There is an urgent need for
effective and suitable cyber-security solutions for small businesses as
they employ a significant proportion of the workforce.
In this paper, we consider the small business cyber-security challenges not currently addressed by research or products, contextualised
via an Australian lens. We also highlight some unique characteristics
of small businesses conducive to cyber-security actions.
Small business cyber-security discussions to date have been narrow in focus and lack re-usability beyond specific circumstances. Our
study uses global evidence from industry, government and research
communities across multiple disciplines. We explore the technical and
non-technical factors negatively impacting a small business’ ability to
safeguard itself, such as resource constraints, organisational process
maturity, and legal structures. Our research shows that some small
business characteristics, such as agility, large cohort size, and piecemeal IT architecture, could allow for increased cyber-security.
We conclude that there is a gap in current research in small business cyber-security. In addition, legal and policy work are needed to
help small businesses become cyber-resilient.
1
arXiv:2109.00733v1 [cs.CR] 2 Sep 2021
Keywords: Cyber-security, Small Business, SME, Security Culture, Literature Review
1 Introduction
Businesses around the world are under pressure to use and adopt technology,
with the COVID-19 pandemic accelerating this need [1]. At the same time,
cyber-crimes are becoming increasingly sophisticated [2] with the Australian
Government [3] estimating the cost of cyber-crime to the Australian economy
at over AU$15 billion annually. Small businesses employ nearly half of the
Australian private sector workforce [4] and need to be supported against
cyber-criminals.
Anecdotes [5, 6, 7], industry [8, 2] and government [9] studies indicate
that small businesses and individuals are increasingly becoming cyber-crime
targets. A small business can lose data and customers, and incurs compliance
penalties from a cyber-security incident. These penalties include fines greater
of 4% of global turnover or 20 million for non-compliance to the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) [10] in the European Union, and levies up to
US$1.8 million per violation [11] of HIPAA [12] in the US. In Australia, most
small businesses with less than AU$3 million turnover are exempt from the
Privacy Act [13], but this exemption may not remain in the future [14, 15].
Beyond these penalties, the importance and practicalities of small businesses
preparing for and recovering from cyber-incidents are still poorly articulated
and communicated.
Previous research has considered the Australian small and medium enterprise (SME) cyber-security situation from different perspectives. Valli et
al [16] survey Western Australian SMEs and call for cyber-security education for SMEs, while Dojkovki et al. [17, 18, 19] highlight the influence of
Australian culture on SME cyber-security. Internationally, reviews of SME
cyber-security (albeit with different size definitions) emphasise ineffective security management practices [20] and differences between SMEs and large
corporations [21, 22]. Other research offers global insights into culture [23],
strategies [24], policies [25] and specific technologies [26]. Several surveys on
cyber-security, for example [9, 27, 28], focus on self-reported data on cybersecurity from Australian SMEs.
This paper uses existing global research as well as evidence from multiple
disciplines to identify gaps and opportunities for Australian small business
2
cyber-security. We look in detail at the characteristics of Australian small
businesses that may be impeding their cyber-security posture. We find that
certain characteristics could help small businesses better secure themselves.
The definition we use here, of 0-19 employees, covers a significant proportion of business communities around the world. In 2015, around 29 million
US firms employed 0-19 employees [29, 30], while in 2019, in the UK over
98% of private sector businesses employed 0-49 people [31]. Thus, this research has relevance to small businesses from other countries with similar
societal profiles to Australia [32, 33], since human owners run small businesses [34, 35].
This paper is structured as follows: In the next section we examine the
background to business cyber-security and the Australian small business context. Section 3 looks at existing review articles and compares them to our
study. Section 4 discusses the difficulties in research and data collection for
small business cyber-security. Section 5 looks at the constraints faced by
small businesses in implementing cyber-security, while section 6 highlights
potential opportunities that unique small business characteristics present
with respect to cyber-security. We end with a conclusion and suggestions
for future work.
2 Background to Small Business Cyber-security
Small business cyber-security has some commonalities with large business
cyber-security. The traditional aim of cyber-security is to protect business
IT infrastructure, and the information essential for the business’ day to day
operations. However evidence has since emerged that the benefit of business
cyber-security extends beyond this, to its people, processes and assets.
The cyber-security industry is currently worth over US$100 billion globally [36]. While cyber-security previously focused on maintaining the confidentiality, integrity and availability [37] of information systems and data,
current best practice includes non-technical aspects such as the people using
the information (security culture) [38, 39]. A one-size-fits-all cyber-security
solution does not exist [40, 41, 42]. Large businesses have adopted a variety of
measures to secure their information and IT assets [43] against cyber-security
threats.
The benefits of securing a business extends beyond protecting the assets
owned directly by the business. The disruptions to individuals from data
3
breaches such as Equifax [44] and Ticketmaster [45] highlight the societal
cost. The financial cost of an incident can severely disrupt the personal lives
of small business owners, putting livelihoods in jeopardy [46]. The high level
of codependency between people, technologies and processes has resulted in
modern security standards/frameworks including “processes, organisational
structures, policies and procedures, information flows, culture and behaviors,
skills and infrastructure” [47, P.13].
2.1 The Australian Small Business Context
In Australia, over 40% of private sector employment is from micro (0-4 employees) and small (5-19 employees) businesses [4]. The Australian Bureau
of Statistics (ABS) defines a small business as one with 0-19 employees [48].
In 2016, 42% of Australian small businesses believed limiting online presence
protected their business [28]. In the 2018/19 financial year, only 40.3% of
small businesses received orders via the Internet1
[49].
Technology avoidance is no longer a feasible strategy for managing cybersecurity risks. Online sales are becoming more attractive, influenced by market forces and official bodies [50] with the social distancing requirements of
COVID-19 only hastening this [1, 51].
With nearly half of Australian small businesses allocating less than AU$500
annually to cyber-security [9], they cannot afford cyber-security expertise.
Without external help, small businesses cannot secure themselves, and not
just in times of emergency [52].
3 Existing Reviews
There is considerable literature, both academic and industry, on small and
medium business (or SME) cyber-security. Here we identify the literature
examining cyber-security challenges.
3.1 Search Method
A keyword search was conducted within 5 academic search engines, namely
Scopus, ProQuest, Science Direct, SpringerLink and IEEE Xplore. The key1Note: This includes any sale of services or goods that have been committed to/ordered
via the Internet.
4
words used were kept broad to maximise the number of results returned and
constructed from the core concepts of “small business”, “cyber-security” and
“literature review”. These are listed below:
1. Small business - “small business”, “small enterprise” or “SME”.
2. Cyber security - Various spellings of “cyber-security”, “IT security” or
“information security”.
3. Literature review - “review” or “survey” with “literature”
The keyword pertaining to “literature review” (3) was replaced with a search
filter of review articles where this option was offered by the database. Where
possible, the search was limited to title, abstract and keywords. To ensure
relevance to today’s context, the search was restricted to publications dated
on or after 2016. No filtering was done based on journal or conference ranking.
Due to the general nature of the keywords, the initial searches returned
a total of 2759 papers. Each of these papers was examined to determine
whether the primary focus was small business (or SME) cyber-security. Most
importantly, we looked for papers that exclusively discussed their cybersecurity topic in a small business/SME context, rather than treating the
cohort as a sub-discussion. Based on this criteria 22 papers were shortlisted.
A detailed examination of these papers gave us one very relevant review
paper [20], and three partially relevant papers [21, 53, 26].
3.2 Comparing Research Aims
Table 1 compares the aims of our paper to the selected review papers, based
on the following contexts:
A Restricts context to small business.
B Critical examines landscape of existing small business cyber-security
research.
C Examines potential technical issues with small business use of cybersecurity solutions.
D Examines potential human issues for small business.
E Identifies structural opportunities for small businesses.
5
Table 1: Existing Literature, Reviews and Focus Comparison on Small Business Cyber-security. (denotes areas addressed. ˜denotes areas partially
addressed. Blank denotes areas not addressed.)
See page 5 for criteria used for comparison.
Paper Literature
Type
Focus A B C D E
Alahmari &
Duncan [20]
Academic Review  ˜
Heidt et al.
[21]
Academic IT Security Investment
˜
Suryotrisongko
& Musashi
[53]
Academic Cyber-security
Research Taxonomy Review
˜ ˜
Salleh et al.
[26]
Academic Cloud Adoption
in SME
˜
Our Paper Academic
& Industry
Small Business
Cyber-security
    
From Table 1, the shortlisted reviews do not distinguish small business
as a separate cohort, despite the large proportion of small businesses present
in global economies. Small business is often grouped together with medium
businesses in the wider cyber-security context. In this article, we examine
the problems arising from such grouping.
Alahmari and Duncan [20] provide an overview of existing research on
cyber-security risk management within the SME cohort. They identify lack
of skills/knowledge, lack of appropriate management behaviours and sub-par
defence as common themes, but do not explore how such situations arise. In
this paper, we trace these symptoms back to possible contributing factors,
which could enable better security solutions.
Heidt et al. [21] point out that differences between SME and their larger
cousins potentially contributes to difficulties in generalising cyber-security re6
sults to SMEs. They find that data is often obtained from non-representative
enterprises (e.g. larger or industry specific groups). We re-examine the sampling issue within the industry context and find this trend extends beyond
academia to industry and government. Given the lack of industry standard
terminologies, we discuss how both cyber-security self-reporting and lack of
agreed definitions are contributing to confusion.
As demonstrated by Suryotrisongko & Musashi [53], there are a wide
variety of topic areas and technologies within the study of cyber-security.
Reviews that focus on specific topics [24, 23, 25, 26] provide little room for
exploration of alternative solutions, e.g. a technical problem solved via a
process. In this paper, we explore cross field opportunities in the context of
small business cyber-security.
In conclusion, there are no broad-based reviews exploring small business
organisational characteristics that can impact their cyber-security posture,
both negatively and positively. We address these gaps in this paper.
4 Research Data Challenges
Given the importance of micro/small business in global economies, there is
limited research into the cyber-security posture of, and corresponding solutions for small businesses in the 0-19 employee range. While there is much
research in large enterprise cyber-security from various countries, the transferability of this research to small business is problematic.
Each developed country is at a different stage in the small business cybersecurity research journey. In the USA, CISA (Cyber-security and Infrastructure Security Agency) conducted an online survey in 2019, on providing
assistance with cyber-security issues, to small businesses [54], but results
are still awaited. In Europe, Eurostat breaks down enterprise size across
multiple variables in its most recent 2020 ICT Security in Enterprise security report [55]. Businesses with 0-9 employees are excluded from the above
Eurostat report, highlighting the research data gap within the small business cohort. This lack of inclusion also occurs in the Australian Bureau of
Statistics’ business characteristics surveys [48]. These surveys ask IT and
cyber-security questions, but explicitly exclude non-employers/sole traders
from the respondent pool.
The cyber-security surveys conducted in Australia include:
• The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) annual business character7
istics survey asks detailed IT usage and cyber incident questions [48].
• The NSW small business commissioner CyberAware survey studied
SME cyber-security [28] in 2017, in collaboration with various small
business related commissions around Australia.
• The Australian Cyber Security Centre’s (ACSC) online survey in 2019,
looked at the usage of IT, security incidents and knowledge [9].
Each of the above surveys has its own focus, producing results within its
own scope. Some of these scopes overlap. Some results appear to contradict
others. For example, in answer to whether small businesses have encountered
a breach/attack/cyber-crime, the percentage of people that answered in the
affirmative varied based on the survey (Table 2).
Table 2: Small Business Self-Reported Breach Results.
Source Percentage of respondents answering affirmative/neutral for experiencing breaches
Reference
ACSC Small Business Survey
62% [9]
Business Characteristics Survey
Micro Businesses: 8.7%
(+17.4% “Don’t know”) [48]
Small Businesses: 13.4%
(+17.1% “Don’t know”)
The discrepancies are not necessarily due to deliberate actions or errors.
They appear to be a symptom of the difficulty in reaching and obtaining
comparable data from the disparate and technically inexperienced cohort
that is small business.
Discrepancies in the survey results also extend past national borders. In
the Hiscox report [8], the average business cyber-security spend in European countries for organisations with 9 or less employees was US$7,000. In
contrast, the ACSC survey [9] found close to half of Australian small businesses spent less than AU$500 annually on cyber-security. This order of
magnitude difference in expenditure from seemingly similar socio-economic
8
cohorts requires further analysis. While there is speculation [56] that complexity within the cyber-security field accounts for the disparity in results,
it is possible these are due to challenges in getting accurate data from small
businesses.
4.1 The Elusive Cohort
The inability to gather data from diverse small businesses is a significant
barrier to cyber-security research [16, 57, 58, 59, 22]. Consistently low response rates to broad-based voluntary surveys highlight the difficulty in obtaining a comprehensive sample. This is exacerbated by a lack of public
domain data, especially where mandatory breach reporting regulations are
immature. There is dis-incentive to self-reporting due to fear of reputational
damage [60], given the low possibility of prosecution [61, Fig 6.7].
This difficulty in reaching the small business cohort could result in convenience sampling, which is known to introduce its own set of limitations and
challenges [62, 63]. The impact and bias arising from such sampling must be
accounted for and discussed in research findings.
4.2 Disparate Technical Terms
Numerous industry cyber-security reports address the gap in business cybersecurity [43, 64, 8, 2, 65]. However, there are few standard definitions, structures and classifications within cyber-security. Data and findings are often adhoc, incomplete and focused on headline worthy items. For example,
Symantec reports [2] that globally, in 2018, small and medium businesses were
more likely to be hit with “Formjacking”. Formjacking is Symantec’s term
for “use of malicious JavaScript code to steal credit card details and other
information from payment forms on the checkout web pages of e-commerce
sites” [2]. Formjacking is a subset of code injection attacks [66], where code
is injected for various purposes, and not just on e-commerce sites. The use of
specialised terms such as “formjacking” makes comparisons between different
reports difficult.
4.3 Size Does Matter
The differing definitions of small buisness worldwide makes data comparison
difficult, see Table 3.
9
Table 3: Small Business Definitions Around the World
Official
Business
Labels
0 Employees Micro Business Small Business Sources
Australia Sole Traders 0-4 5-19 [67]
UK NoEmployee
Business
1-9 10-49 [68]
European
Union1
Not Applicable
0-9 10-49 [69]
US Not Applicable
Not Applicable <250 or 1,500 or
industry specific
annual receipt2
[70]
1 Prior to 2020, all European Union data includes the UK. Any data 2020 and beyond,
does not include UK statistics. Where relevant, this is noted in the discussion.
2
Industry dependent.
Each research entity adopts the local small business convention or presents
a brand new definition [58]. This disparity across the globe changes the
context of findings. Clearly, an organisation managing 200 employees operates and communicates very differently to one with less than 10 employees
[71, 72, 73]. Given the significant influence communication and human factors have on attacks such as phishing, email fraud, etc, size matters in any
cyber-security discussion.
Few researchers acknowledge the potential complexity of the large range
of small business sizes. The Ponemon Institute’s data breach report [64] extrapolates small business data breach costs from incident costs for businesses
employing 500-1000. This cost figure is discussed as the cost for “smaller organisations”. The bundling of small businesses with larger (in size) cohorts
hampers the ability to action the lessons learnt.
10
4.4 Self-Reporting Fallacies
Self-reporting of data is another problem. The accuracy of self-reported
cyber-incidents by small business owners needs examining. Non-technical
persons find it difficult to report subtle cyber attacks. In addition, there are
psychological self-reporting biases [74, 75]. Thus, self-reported breaches can
only be a starting point data set for analysis.
Self-reporting surveys require business owners to be aware of cyber breaches.
Common detectable symptoms of an incident, from a non-technical user’s
perspective, are unavailability of computer systems or data. For example,
ransomware renders a computer unusable. Many attacks have no obvious
symptoms. Active monitoring is required for subtle attacks such as data exfiltration, man in the middle, spyware etc. System owners may not be aware
of a breach for months or even years [64, 76, 60]. While large enterprises
can detect subtle attacks using active traffic monitoring systems, few small
businesses can afford this monitoring [9]. The under-detection can be exacerbated by the lack of technical knowledge among small business owners (see
section 5.2).
In Australia, the Privacy Act, the main legislation governing data, does
not apply to organisations with less than AU$3 million annual turnover [13],
i.e. most Australian small businesses. As such there are no legislative repercussions or financial incentives to report any breaches or cyber-incidents.
Embarrassment in victims of online fraud [77] is another powerful reason for
Australian small businesses not reporting incidents.
Symantec [2] avoids this self-reporting gap by using known threat detection software installed within an end user’s computer. Eliminating human
interaction increases accuracy by recording incident details automatically.
However, the proprietary nature of this software and reporting results in
only Symantec customers and devices being included. This leads to a bias
towards people willing (and able) to pay for Symantec’s services. Detailed
analysis and strategy design requires a more comprehensive small business
sector view.
In conclusion, alternative data collection strategies are needed to supplement existing self-reporting surveys.
11
4.5 Business versus IT Perspectives
The under-representation of non-technical respondents in online surveys deserves scrutiny. Studies targeting technically savvy businesses often reach
very different conclusions to those including a broader range.
Cyber-security research relies heavily on online surveys due to logistical
ease, and the assumption potential respondents use the internet for business
purposes. In contrast, less than 40% of Australian small and micro-businesses
used the internet for business development or monitoring market information
in the 2017-18 financial year [48].
Self-selection bias is enhanced by a particular group’s comfort level to a
survey method. More respondents are likely to complete surveys that use familiar technology [78]. Cyber-security studies tracking industry breakdowns
show IT/technical industry respondents are over-represented [8, 28, 22].
Challenges exist around demographic representation in samples with online surveys as the sole method of data collection. “Younger, male, avid
Internet users, and those with greater technological sophistication” [79] are
more likely to complete online surveys compared to surveys done via traditional mail. In contrast, in 2016, over half of small business owners in
Australia were over 45 [80].
A survey with more technically literate respondents can introduce significant biases in results. Studies with input from technical experts [17, 81,
82] identified different concerns compared to general small business owners
[83, 84, 85, 86]. A series of interviews from a single study [87] shows that
small scale IT users have constraints in security decision making that are
not expected by technical security providers. Australian small businesses in
information, media and telecommunication, and professional, scientific and
technical services categories made up less than 14% of all businesses, by
business count, in 2019 [88].
In summary, the majority of small business owners in Australia cannot be assumed to intuitively understand the technical fundamentals central
to cyber-security. Exclusively sourcing data from voluntary online surveys
favours respondents comfortable with technology. Results from surveys must
account for and reconcile any gaps between sample respondents versus small
business profiles, from both demographic and technology literacy perspectives.
12
5 Challenges Faced by Small Businesses
Large enterprises have been amongst the earliest adopters of cyber-security
technologies. Current business cyber-security solutions favour these businesses in terms of scale, cost and usage.
Today’s cyber-security lessons and conventions are a result of early largescale incidents e.g. NotPetya, Equifax, Wikileaks etc affecting mostly large
organisations. With new threats constantly emerging, large enterprises are
ideal customers for vendors, with a higher likelihood of return on investment.
Consequently cyber-security industry best practices, standards and products
are heavily influenced by the needs of larger organisations.
Small business cyber-security cannot be “cut and paste” from large scale
solutions. Resource availability, technical landscape and operational processes of small business need careful consideration. Small businesses face
some common challenges that need to be accounted for in cyber-security
strategies since cyber-criminals are looking for smaller targets [2, 89, 90].
5.1 Technical Challenges
The technical landscape of a small business can potentially be very different
to that of a large enterprise [22], making it impractical to apply solutions for
the larger enterprises to smaller scale users. The small business IT technical
landscape (“architecture”) in which the cyber-security solution must function
is a barrier to adopting a solution.
Current industry practice tests changes in an environment separate from
customer-facing sites and systems to ensure the changes do not impact IT
system availability for live customers. A test or staging environment is a copy
that mirrors the customer-facing (“live”) business system in hardware, software and configuration. Testing in a separate environment is recommended
by many application providers before software upgrade processes [91, 92].
This testing ensures unintended consequences of changes/tests do not affect
the business’ live systems, keeping them “safe” and operational. A test environment can be used to conduct destructive testing such as disaster recovery
scenarios.
Cyber-security solutions designed to test a response to debilitating events
require a safe testing environment. For example, denial of service (DoS) simulation tools [93, 94] simulate a service overwhelmed with requests resulting
in legitimate requests not getting through. A DoS simulator, if implemented
13
on a live system, would render the business IT infrastructure, e.g. website,
unavailable to customers, or worse, jeopardise overall system integrity. Live
environments cannot be used for stress-inducing tests. Consequently, businesses without a test environment will never be able to test the full suite of
catastrophic scenarios as part of their incident response training.
A test environment requires substantial technical knowledge, time and
ongoing maintenance. Australian and New Zealand small and medium enterprises spend only 6% of their total revenue [58] on IT. For 2016, the
median Australian small business had an average turnover of AU$125,000
[80], translating to an annual IT spend of about AU$7,500. This budget
covers all IT spend, including hardware, software, network services, IT personnel and other incidentals, making a test environment just one of many
competing priorities. While cloud technologies have reduced costs associated
with test environments, the technical knowledge required is still substantial.
Less than a quarter of Australian small businesses have in-house, qualified
IT support personnel (with roughly a third using contractors/consultants as
needed) [48]. There is no mention of small business testing environments for
off-line testing in the literature.
The small business move towards cloud infrastructure and services makes
large enterprise cyber-security solutions unsuitable. Over a third of micro
businesses and half of small businesses used cloud based services in 2018
[48]. This demand is expected to increase [95] and accelerated due to the
COVID19 pandemic [96]. While official statistics on cloud services adoption
during the pandemic are still pending, anecdotally the uptake of third party
IT services in general has increased substantially [97], many of which are
enabled through the cloud [98]. This move away from private, or on premise,
infrastructure (i.e. IT equipment set up and owned by the business) is driven
by the associated set-up and maintenance costs [95], a proposition especially
attractive for resource constrained smaller businesses.
Cloud infrastructure presents challenges for traditional cyber-security products. For example, general network scanning [99] assumes the infrastructure
is local and/or reachable for scanning purposes, an assumption valid only for
private infrastructure. The increasing suite of cloud-based network perimeter
scanning services [100, 101, 102] require explicit input from users on the target devices to be scanned. Targeted device scanning is a subset of a complete
network scanning solution and cannot discover private assets (e.g. printers)
with external interfaces left accidentally unsecured. This potential gap could
be addressed by other technical or process remedies, and needs further exam14
ination by individual businesses - a task requiring technical knowledge and
resources that many small businesses do not have.
Scanning in the cloud is a challenge for shared computing resources. Any
customer sharing the same target computing resource will be affected if the
targeted application is overwhelmed. Cloud infrastructure providers impose
strict conditions on security-related testing activities [103, 104], with the
notable exception being Google Cloud [105].
Nearly 90% [48] of small business cloud users utilise software in the cloud.
Many application providers explicitly prohibit activities interfering with their
service, preventing customers from pro-actively discovering any vulnerability
in their service provider. Indemnity and liability around use of an outsourced
function needs clarification [106, 107].
It is necessary to address when testing and monitoring of privately owned
devices is permissible. Mixed-use personal and company-owned assets, e.g.
mobile devices, are common amongst small businesses [108, 85, 22]. Mobile
device management (MDM) software [109, 110] allows businesses to monitor
data and software residing on and transiting through devices. MDM can
freeze certain functions and/or data, and, if needed, reset the entire device.
Many large enterprises routinely deploy MDM on devices issued to staff. The
level of access that MDM requires raises questions of the extent of non-work
information shared with work IT administrators [111] when a device is not a
work exclusive device.
To address the privacy concerns of MDM, mobile application management
(MAM) offers a subset of the functions of MDM [112, 113]. MAM functions
require business trade-offs and must be paired with mitigating policies based
on the sensitivity of business data. This requires expert guidance and is at
odds with other revenue generating priorities for a small business.
Clearly, re-using cyber-security solutions designed for large scale infrastructures is not a feasible strategy for small businesses. More appropriate
cyber-security products are needed for small business given their mix of stand
alone and shared IT resources. The liability arising from small business’ use
of cloud service needs clarification.
5.2 Human Challenges
Small business cyber-security human resources are very different to those of
large enterprises. A qualified and accountable IT department is common in
large enterprises but not in small businesses.
15
In a European & US survey [84] less than 30% of small businesses, and less
than 5% of micro businesses, indicated existence of a security administrator
or any formal IT security qualifications. Approximately 10-25% of Australian
micro and small businesses have no IT support at all [48].
In Australia, most small business support comes from external contractor/consultants, suppliers of software/hardware or non-IT qualified staff [48].
External contractors are engaged for specific tasks. They do not undertake
cyber-security risk assessments unless contracted specifically. Suppliers only
support supplied software and/or hardware, unless an extra support contract has been purchased. Small businesses’ constrained resources and the
low number of devices used imply support contracts are unlikely.
Cyber-security requires risk analysis and mitigation of the entire IT system, not just individual components. The small IT budgets of small businesses do not cover the salary of an IT administrator [114].
Furthermore, small business owners are at a knowledge disadvantage in
advocating for their cyber-security needs. In the start-up phase of a small
business, owner-managers have to perform any functions that they cannot
afford financially, or haven’t had the time, to outsource or hire. As discussed
previously, given small business’ small IT budget, these include being the IT
support person, and by extension the cyber-security person. Some tasks, such
as cleaning, physical security etc. can conceivably be done by a person with
limited experience. A cyber-security assessment cannot be done effectively
by a novice.
The age demographic of Australian small business owners indicates less
exposure to technology. Nearly 60% of Australian small business owners
were born before 1971 [80] - well before publicly available Internet [115].
This technical skills gap is reflected in OECD testing [116] with less than
40% of Australian adults scoring within levels 2 or 3 (out of maximum 3
levels) of OECD’s computer problem-solving skills scale. This percentage
falls to 17.2% within the 55-65 age group.
The timing of technology introduction places Australian business owners
at a disadvantage when dealing with cyber-security. Assistance must be
designed taking into account this lack of experience and cater to non-technical
small business owners. However, training in a receptive format is well received
by small businesses [117]. In section 6.1 we discuss the advantages inherent
in this demographic.
16
5.3 Organisational/Process Maturity
Cyber-security requires ongoing effort in education, process and investment
and is effected by the IT maturity of organisations. In Australia, approximately a third of small businesses operating in June 2015 did not survive to
June 2019 [88]. The small business sector constantly has new entrants. Small
businesses in early inception and survival stages do not focus on processes
[118]. In these early phases, owners/managers usually have direct oversight
of business tasks with formal processes coming in as the business matures
and expands. This is at odds with a well-rounded cyber defence posture [119]
requiring business policies and controls. This lack of clarity on process details
(for example on IT fix times and specific responsibilities around patching)
leaves the organisation exposed to opportunistic cyber-criminals.
Research on small business behaviour in the early stages of business is
required. Any cyber-security solutions or policies for small business must
consider that the business’ focus may not be on the management of cybersecurity processes and rules.
5.4 Industry Standards
The bewildering variety and complexity of industry standards is a challenge
that small business owners face. Some examples of cyber-security standards
and frameworks include:
• NIST [120]
• COBIT [121]
• ISO27001 [122]
• Australian Government Information Security Manual [123]
When used by a technical stakeholder such as a Chief Information Officer,
these guidelines and standards fit any business wishing to protect itself from
cyber attackers. The base assumption of many standards is a technically
literate person being available to guide the business through analysis and
implementation. Few small businesses can justify such a resource especially
in the initial phase of setting up the business. Simplified versions of the
above standards are available [124], for example, the Australian Signals Directorate’s (ASD) Essential 8 [125] and the small business cyber-security
17
guide [126]. However, the range of available summarised resources vary in
depth and format. More importantly, these resources have limited comparability between each other or existing security standards. It is unclear how a
small business’ cyber-security work fits in with other advice and standards
once one list is completed.
The complex relationships between the different standards leaves nontechnical small business owners with a very low sense of self-efficacy, or
sense of control. The relationship between self-efficacy and action is a wellestablished driver of human behaviour [127]. In addition, low self-efficacy in
cyber-security could be a factor in an owner rationalising inaction [128].
Industry bodies have recognised the difficulties faced by small businesses.
ISACA, the governing body for COBIT, indicates small and medium enterprises will be catered for as part of their COBIT 2019 standards [129].
Unfortunately, to date, this focus area is still under review and not available.
Until cyber-security standards recognise small business’ constraints, small
business will find it hard to contextualise cyber-security within their own
business, or implement the necessary controls.
5.5 Cyber Insurance
Cyber insurance is a challenge for smaller businesses. Traditionally, insurance
policies are used to protect a business against disruption or loss, ranging
from natural disasters to theft. Business cyber insurance is a relatively new
phenomenon, with many variations offered by different providers.
Various providers in Australia offer cyber insurance to their small business
customers [130]. Each insurer appears to require slightly different levels of
due diligence from the small business, while each policy provides coverage
based on disparate internal standards and policies [131, 132, 133]. Further
study and research is needed to provide clarity to small businesses around
standards applied across insurers.
Cyber insurance coverage has been called into question. One highly publicised debate [134, 135] surrounds the insurance exemption for “act of war” or
“terrorism”. In most politically stable countries, a clause to exclude coverage
of catastrophic events, e.g. war/terrorism is employed to manage underwriting exposure [135]. Most insurance policy takers usually accept an act of war
in a developed country to be a remote, acceptable business risk.
The effectiveness of such cyber insurance came under scrutiny when Mondelez submitted a claim on suffering US$700 million in damage from NotPetya
18
malware in 2017 [134]. Zurich Insurance denied the claim, citing the attack
as an act of terrorism, as NotPetya was designed to cause maximum damage
as opposed to financial gain. The situation was further exacerbated when
the US government attributed NotPetya to Russian origins. The ongoing
conflict between Russia and Ukraine further strengthened the terrorism case
as Mondelez had infrastructure in Ukraine. The decision by Zurich continues
to be challenged in court by Mondelez, and other insured companies. The
issue of terrorism is so contentious that Lloyd’s of London [136] explicitly
excludes terrorism related scenarios in its cyber insurance cost analysis.
“It is difficult to attribute a cyber-attack to a particular group or actor”
[136, P.17]. The difficulty stems partly from code from one malware author
being reused by another. When malware code is examined forensically, it may
contain artefacts of authors other than the criminal. For example, the NotPetya malware contains code stolen from the US National Security Agency
(NSA) [137]. Thus the malware contains signatures indicative of US origin,
despite the attack being attributed to Russia. Accurate attack attribution is
out of reach of the average organisation, especially small business. This lack
of attribution makes it difficult to prove an insurance claim as non-terrorism.
Small businesses and personal computers are often collateral damage of
large scale cyber-attacks. The NotPetya malware wiped clean 10% of all
computers in Ukraine [134], along with many other international companies
(including bouncing back into a company in Russia itself [137]). Many small
businesses were highly likely to have been caught up in this fallout. Numerous
Australian SME and large corporations were impacted by the 2016 Petya
attack [28], from which the NotPetya malware is derived.
In addition to the Mondolez owned Cadbury factory in Hobart, NotPetya
affected companies with an Australian presence such as DLA Piper, Maersk,
TNT etc [138, 139]. Unfortunately, following the Australian government’s
attribution of NotPetya to Russia, and NotPetya’s classsification as malware
[140], any Australian businesses’ with an act of terrorism insurance exception
would reasonably find themselves not covered by their cyber insurance policy.
The battles still being fought through the international judicial system
indicate that cyber insurance is not mature enough for Australian small
businesses to use effectively. For cyber insurance to be a risk mitigation
tool for small business, significant industry, regulatory and assistance efforts
are needed to clarify and provide adequate coverage to small businesses in
case of a breach.
19
5.6 Legal Remediation
Despite the act of breaking into computers being covered under various legislations in different countries [61], cyber-criminals continue to operate with
impunity. One reason for this perceived lack of consequences is the legal
complexity of investigating and prosecuting cyber-crimes.
Criminal and remediation processes are complicated when the pepetrators
are under a different legal jurisdiction to the victims and properties and
hence, subject to different legal processes and laws. The ease with which
attacks can be launched over the internet makes cross-jurisdictional cybercrime possible for criminals with minimal resources. Over half the countries
responding to a 2013 United Nation’s (UN) survey described a transnational
element in the majority of the cyber-crimes reported [61, P.117].
This cross jurisdictional complication is discussed in the 2014 Australian
government [141] study on online fraud. The negative impact of transnational barriers on investigations and judicial outcomes for victims continues
today [46]. Jurisdictional complications possibly contribute to the overall
low conviction rate (10%) of police recorded cyber-crimes [61, P.172]. However, international co-operation in fighting cyber-crime is beneficial [142] in
overcoming structural barriers to prosecuting international cyber-crime.
The low conviction rate is exacerbated by the low rate of reporting. Most
cyber-crimes are not likely to be reported [61, P.119]. In Australia, the
top 3 reasons [77] for non-reporting of online fraud include embarrassment,
belief police cannot find offender and uncertainty of right reporting authority.
Given these factors, the overall redress that actually occurs is even smaller.
Even in the remote event a cyber-crime results in a conviction, the loss
of confidentiality of data is a major issue. Once a receiver has stolen data,
this knowledge/data cannot be removed from the receiver. Even where data
can be located, the ease with which copies can be made and distributed
makes containment difficult. One such example is the classified data taken
from the United States National Security Agency (NSA) by an insider [143].
Despite investigations and knowledge of the locations of the document caches,
information from this breach is still available on the Internet [144].
Outside of legislative penalties, there is little incentive for Australian
small businesses to report cyber-crime. With low remediation rates and
investigative difficulties, reporting to authorities is replaced by the priority
of recovering from the cyber-incident. Without dedicated legal personnel
to follow up and navigate the complex systems involved, legal remediation
20
remains out of reach of most small businesses.
Substantial work is still needed on the cyber-crime legal framework to
convince small businesses that it is effective in delivering remediation when
needed.
5.7 Cost of a Data Breach
The gap in knowledge of the cost of inaction makes investing in cyber-security
a difficult decision for small businesses. A small business needs to weigh
up each investment decision against perceived benefits/loss. Existing data
breach costing studies around the globe have primarily focused on larger
businesses [43, 60, 64].
Small businesses (1-49 employees) suffer an average loss of US$14,000 per
year per firm [8] across the US and some European countries. Despite a
low small business sample size, a US Government report [60] speculates the
impact/cost of a breach on small business is possibly more devastating than
for a large business due to the loss of customers. There is no data available
for Australian businesses in the 0-19 employee range. In a survey by ACSC
[9], about half of small business owners predicted it would take a few days
to recover from a hypothetical cyber attack.
Until relevant cyber-breach cost data is available, it will be hard to persuade small business owners to invest in managing cyber-security risks [3].
Scientific and industry research is needed to examine ways of determining
actual costs to small businesses from cyber breaches, similar to larger enterprises [60, 64].
6 Advantages For Small Businesses
The small business cohort has advantages over larger enterprises, despite the
many challenges they face. With the right assistance, a small business can
become a less attractive target to cyber-criminals.
6.1 Small Business Agility
Two advantages for small businesses over their larger counterparts are their
flexibility and willingness to learn. The COVID-19 pandemic showcased the
agility with which small businesses adapted to fluid situations [145, 146, 147,
21
148, 149]. Small business owners possess qualities allowing them to react
with agility [150, 151].
The older demographic of small business owners comes with advantages.
Creative and critical thinking related digital skills actually improve faster
within older age groups with this improvement attributed to everyday handson experience of working with technology [152].
Flexibility, willingness to learn and creative thinking are important cybersecurity skills [153, 154, 155]. However small business owners, dominated by
older but adventurous learners [156, 34], still struggle with cyber-security
[86, 128]. Creative thinking skills cannot be used effectively when the basic
information needed to create solutions is unavailable in an accessible format. Unlike conventional IT knowledge, e.g. productivity software and
mass-market hardware, cyber-security knowledge is still highly technical and
inaccessible to the public. In Australia, small business owners are largely
offered adhoc cyber-security workshops and resources via disparate small
business training and communication channels, e.g. [124, 157, 158]. With
research showing that cyber-security needs to be a gradual, ongoing and persuasive effort [159, 160], alternative formats and continuous approaches to
small business cyber-security training need to be examined.
A targeted capacity building curriculum, encompassing both prevention
and response, can be used to take advantage of small businesses’ agility.
Building practical coping skills appeals to creative problem solvers like small
business owners, without relying on formal processes [151]. A good starting
point would be cyber-security advice for small businesses focusing on prevention, e.g. password policies, spotting phishing etc. This advice should
extend to other aspects of a cyber-incident’s lifecycle such as incident response, record keeping, technical recovery strategies etc.
Victim assistance facilities (as part of incident response) like IDCare [161],
ACSC Report [162], Scamwatch [163] etc do exist in Australia but public
awareness is not ubiquitous [77]. Increased education around crime reporting
processes and forensic practices will improve response to breaches by small
business owners.
Further research is needed to enable cyber-security education to take
advantage of small business owners’ agility. Solutions need to be tailored to
[117], and take advantage of, the unique abilities of small business owners.
22
6.2 Small Business Networking and Alliances
An alliance between small business owners would enable data collection and
advanced intelligence sharing, as well as peer support. This real time knowledge of trending threats and attack methods would help small businesses to
be vigilant to emerging threats.
International large enterprises [164, 165] have formed cyber-security alliances allowing members to gain advanced intelligence and work collaboratively, and forming a cyber-security feedback loop. In Australia, alliances between industry, government and research such as AusCERT [166] and ACSC
Partners [167] exist. Unfortunately these alliances target organisations with
dedicated cyber-security IT personnel/budgets. For small businesses such
an alliance would provide easily accessible intelligence and affordable skills.
[168].
A cyber-security alliance of small business owners could allow law enforcement, legislators and technical support companies to respond rapidly to
emerging threats. Each small business could contribute cyber-security incidents and intelligence into a central database providing cyber-security peer
support to each other. Education and awareness act as extensions of such
an alliance, leading to it becoming a trusted authority on small business
cyber-security.
Technical and administrative facilitators are needed to overcome existing
communication barriers between small businesses and facilitate such an alliance. The exact facilitation and support needed to start and maintain such
a new alliance needs to be researched and clarified.
6.3 Advantages of Zero Trust Model
Suitable security models differ due to the scale of organisations. The low
requirement for IT homogeneity makes zero trust security models [169] a
prime framework for small business. Small businesses have limited large
scale technical legacy to undo and their scattered IT operations suit a zero
trust model.
The traditional network perimeter safeguards an IT eco-system that is
relatively obstacle-free internally, leading to the analogy of a hard shell enclosing a chewy centre [170]. The problem of an attacker having free reign
once a perimeter is bypassed has been demonstrated in large scale breaches
[44, 171].
23
Google [172], as well as other stakeholders [173], have recognised the futility of safeguarding an ever changing network perimeter [174, 175], and have
adopted zero trust principles in their services in their BeyondCorp design.
The zero trust security model [176] is a network model for defence that presumes an attacker has gained access inside the hardened perimeter. In a zero
trust model, access control is no longer performed at the network surrounding the IT systems, but focused on authentication and authorisation of user
access to individual services.
Small businesses have difficulty with perimeter defence as they don’t own
many of the IT services used. In many ways, the zero trust architecture is one
small businesses have been managing for many years. Zero trust allows focus
on individual service protection, thus limiting impacts even if an individual
service gets breached.
However, small businesses need assistance with implementing a zero trust
model. Each new device needs arduous processes of set-up for multiple services rather than one perimeter [177]. Abstracting security into a layer/functional
component [178] allows standardisation and re-use across multiple businesses.
This creates an opportunity for a reusable design/platform that small businesses can implement in their unique IT environments.
Currently there are very few products and little research in this context.
Despite implementation within large international companies such as Google
and Akamai, zero trust has yet to see significant momentum within the Australian business landscape. Development of zero trust IT ecosystems for
small business could bring high returns due the large number of end users.
6.4 Open Source Cyber-security Tools
Open source software & hardware (OSSH) is developed and (usually) released
for free by a community of software makers and hardware designers. OSSH is
an option used by IT professionals when paid IT products, including cybersecurity products, do not meet technical or cost requirements. In embracing
OSSH, Australian small businesses would be following in the footsteps of
Australian government authorities. Various Australian government departments have encouraged use of OSS software as well as making software open
source in general [179, 180, 181, 182]. However, a lack of technical expertise
has hampered small business’ ability to take advantage of free OSSH security
solutions [183, 184, 185].
The ethos of open contribution by volunteers results in OSSH products
24
being released under broad licenses (e.g. GNU general public use [186], creative commons license[187] etc.) that permit most uses. In some cases, this
includes commercial use with nothing more than attribution. OSSH has
produced popular projects such as the MySQL database, Fedora Linux operating system, Arduino microcontroller etc which enable the development of
commercial products. A variety of free OSSH cyber-security tools are now
available [188].
However, characterising OSSH as free or low cost ignores the overall cost
of ownership beyond initial financial outlay for supporting equipment and
setup effort [189]. Both the Equifax breach [44] and industry standards like
ITIL [190] have demonstrated the critical role played by post-implementation
operational support in securing an IT environment.
To enable ongoing maintenance, enterprise versions of OSSH are sold
by third party vendors including items such as on-going support, updates,
certifications etc. For example, RedHat Enterprise Linux is based on OSSH
Fedora Linux [191] and offers the support options that Fedora does not. In
larger businesses, where enterprise level OSSH products may not exist, inhouse support is enabled by internal staff with dedicated responsibilities. A
lack of technical expertise and financial resources in a small business is an
impediment to the use of OSSH.
OSSH presents an opportunity for technical security solutions for small
business owners. OSSH provides many benefits for small businesses including:
• On-going reviews minimising security vulnerabilities from human error
[192].
• Reducing vendor lock-in [189].
• Being part of the software community with a stake as users in the
software development [193].
• Encouraging good cyber-security hygiene habits by enabling adoption
in the early stages of the business lifecycle.
Australian small businesses could leverage the expertise of developers active
in open source development. They could participate in local open source
communities like PyCon [194] and Linux Australia [195] to make their business needs met and their voices heard. Building bridges between the OSSH
and small business communities could provide value for both.
25
Given the importance of cyber-security in business, further research is
needed to analyse the suitability of OSSH security products into the Australian small business landscape and the obstacles to be negotiated to remove
entry barriers.
7 Discussion
There are few reviews dedicated to the small business cyber-security landscape. Our research reveals many constraints in small business adoption of
cyber-security practices, but also advantages in the cohort that should be
leveraged.
7.1 Data Collection
As Table 4 illustrates, data collection in small business cyber-security research requires improvements in regards to scope, consistency and respondent
range.
26
Table 4: Cyber-security Data Collection Practice Issues and Desired Outcomes
Section Current Challenge Proposed Solution Proposed
Responsible Bodies
4 &
4.1
Lack of focus [55, 48] on micro businesses in research.
Focused research on <20
employee businesses to capture the operational behaviour of small businesses.
Government;
Research
4.2 Use of novel technical [2]
terminologies.
Standard terminologies
used to ensure language
describes the same phenomenon.
Standards
Bodies;
Industry
4.3 Use of disparate [58] grouping sizes.
Acknowledgement of group
size range impacts in findings.
Industry;
Research
4.4 Unaccounted self-reporting
bias [74, 75] in results.
Social desirability and
awareness adjustments
incorporated into selfreported statistics to
account for bias from
collection method, both
technical and psychological.
Statistical
Collection;
Research
Over reliance on surveys [9,
28, 48] as a data gathering
instrument.
Detection based small business monitoring to reduce
reliance on self-reported
statistics.
Industry;
Government
4.5 Survey instruments [78]
favouring technically savvy
[8, 28] cohorts.
Demographically representative respondents of the
small business landscape
sourced to obtain relevant
understanding of gaps and
priorities.
Government;
Statistical
Collection
Note: In the rapidly evolving field of cyber-security, research is advanced by a combination
of different parties: scientific, government, industry, journalistic etc. The“research” bodies
referenced here, and in subsequent tables, include all who investigate the cyber-security
challenge in question.
27
From our review of the literature, current cyber-security research lacks
representative results and insights on small business only cohorts due to being bundled with better resourced medium businesses. Comparison between
widely disparate groups introduces difficulties in producing focused learnings
that can be applied to micro businesses and sole traders. Further research is
needed on the sub 20 employee cohort to produce targeted findings.
Our research shows that the wide variety of language and definitions
used within the cyber-security industry poses issues with interpretation of
survey/research findings. Mismatched cohort sizes make comparisons difficult, and sometimes misleading. Standardisation of both group definitions
and terminologies is needed within cyber-security research and industry to
enable useful comparison and longitudinal use of research data.
The heavy use of self-reported surveys introduces social desirability and
awareness bias in results. Rather than relying solely on self-reported data for
small business research on quantitative matters e.g. breach rate, technology
involved, we suggest a wider deployment of detection based collection. For
qualitative research, researchers should actively account and compensate for
self-reporting bias, if possible, as part of their results.
Finally as our research highlights, distortion in research results is worsened by the technical methods by which many surveys are conducted. Technical data collection channels such as online surveys, result in samples biased
towards respondents comfortable with using technology. Demographic data
shows small business owners are not all technically savvy. Surveys need to be
accessible and promoted towards both technically savvy and non-technical
respondents to ensure all types of business owners are represented.
7.2 Small Business Challenges
In addition to the research challenges listed above that being a small business
poses many hurdles in understanding and implementing cyber-security, as
summarised in Table 5.
28
Table 5: Cyber-security Challenges for Small Businesses
Section Current Situation The Way Forward Best Responsible
Bodies
5.1 Lack of clarity on application user liability [106, 107]
in the event of a breach.
Clarification of breach liability if small business uses
an external IT service.
Professional
Bodies;
Government
Small number of cybersecurity solutions that take
into account mixed physical
ownership [108, 85] IT environments.
Small business mode of operation research and product development that recognises the need for hybrid IT
environments.
Research;
Industry
Effective reuse of current
cyber-security solutions are
prevented by existing differences between large and
small enterprise IT architectures [Section 5.1].
Small business common
IT architecture research
and tailored resources
built for small businesses
leading to fit-for-purpose
cyber-security tools and
advice.
Research;
Government
5.2 Small business owners have
several challenges in technical knowledge to effectively
use cyber-security information today.
Development of material
suitable for small business
knowledge level and mode
of learning
Government
5.3 Small businesses are likely
to be in an inception state
[88] with immature processes and organisation
[118].
Further development of
standards and tools that
takes organisational immaturity into account.
Industry;
Research
29
Section Current Situation The Way Forward Best Responsible
Bodies
5.4 Industry standards [120,
121, 122, 123] require a high
level of technical expertise
to follow.
Standards that are targeted
towards a small business audience recognising external
constraints [129] with a migration path to existing full
standards.
Standards
Bodies;
Research;
Government
5.5 Lack of clarity [134] around
insurance requirements and
coverage.
Further research, product
development and guidance
for small business on all aspects of cyber insurance to
enable informed choices and
adequate coverage.
Research;
Government
5.6 Lack of small business selfefficacy around legal remediation [61] from cybercrime.
Further clarification, research and development
around legal aspects of
cyber-crime and associated remediation for small
businesses.
Government
5.7 Lack of relevant data [60] on
costs associated with cyber
breaches for small business.
Further research to clarify
the cost of data breaches for
comparable small business
cohort, to enable accurate
risk based decisions making
from small business.
Research;
Statistical
Collection
Our research found that small businesses tend to operate differently from
large corporations due to their size, leading to different IT usage pattern. One
phenomenon is the tendency to mix personal and business use in devices and
securing these devices using traditional security solutions such as MDM and
MAM pose ethical and logistical dilemmas. The rising use of cloud services
by small business also raises questions around liability and the control and
visibility a small business actually has over its IT security.
Through demographic statistics we found that small businesses and their
owners are at a disadvantage in regards to experience with and knowledge
of technology. Given the older demographic, the majority of small business
30
owners have spent a smaller proportion of their working lives on the internet,
when compared to younger generations. This lower level of technical literacy
needs to be accounted for in training and standards. It is unrealistic to
expect non-technical people to self-drive and implement the highly technical
security standards available today.
Small businesses’ tendency to be at an inception stage is also at odds with the
process and oversight driven cyber-security standards, with research showing
early stage businesses do not have many established processes and management practices. Standards and solutions for small businesses need to factor
in this mode of operation.
The general lack of maturity around cyber insurance, judicial processes and
cost data all contribute to the state of confusion in cyber-security for small
businesses. The ongoing litigation between insurance providers and larger
corporations shows cyber insurance is not yet an effective risk management
tool for small business. Furthermore, the lack of comparable cyber-incident
data leaves business owners with little understanding of the potential loss
they are insuring against. Compounding this are the general difficulties in
successfully prosecuting cyber-criminals, leaving small business owners with
a lack of self-efficacy in the judicial system. The low sense of self-efficacy
leads to inaction and is reflected in the low rate of reporting. Unfortunately,
a low rate of reporting leads to cyber-criminals continuing to operate with
impunity.
Our examination reveals the need to better understand small business IT
usage, demographics, mode of operation and structural constraints. By understanding the differences and challenges involved, the discussion around
cyber-security could match small business users’ needs and expectations.
7.3 Opportunities
By taking a step back to look at small business as a whole, our research (summarised in Table 7) found opportunities for small business with regards to
cyber-security. These opportunities take advantage of the unique landscape
and characteristics of small businesses and their owners, and if leveraged,
would lead to more resilient small businesses.
31
Table 7: Small Business Cyber-security Advantages
Section Advantages Opportunities Best Responsible Bodies
6.1 Agility and resilience of
small businesses [150, 151]
in the face of challenges
- take advantage of traditional flexibility that small
businesses present.
Support [117] for small business to develop capabilities around ongoing cyber
hygiene and response to
breaches.
Government
6.2 Cohort size - leverage the
large number of small businesses.
Further research into feasibility and assistance required in forming networks
[164, 165] that can be an
early warning system within
small business cohort. Sharing of knowledge to enable
peer support.
Government
6.3 Zero Trust Model [170] -
make use of similarities between zero trust model and
common small business architecture.
Further technical research
to clarify how the use of zero
trust principles can fit into
small business’ highly hybridised IT environments;
Identification of opportunities and development of solutions to leverage overlaps.
Research; Industry
6.4 Open Source Security Products [183, 184, 185] - repurpose existing low cost solutions to fit small business
needs.
Further research into the
possibilities and logistics required to leverage open
source security products to
match small business’ operating model and constraints, making use of advantages [192, 189, 193] that
open source offers.
Research
32
Our research found a small business owner’s agility and responsiveness could
lead to better cyber-security responses. Rather than focus on formal and
process based security standards, a more effective method would be to teach
the skills/capabilities a small business needs to both protect itself as well as
respond to an incident. Focusing on the skills needed taps into the natural
ways in which small businesses excel at solving problems.
Small businesses could use their large numbers to their advantage by establishing alliances. Cyber-security alliances are not new and have been shown
to benefit members. To date, alliances have formed between large organisations. Small business would obtain definite advantages from such an alliance,
especially in terms of peer support, early intelligence and education.
Our research identified a couple of technical cyber-security solutions that
could be leveraged for small business cyber-security with the right collaboration and product development. A zero trust model, by assuming no safe
network boundaries, aligns the base IT architecture closer to the small businesses mode of operation. By discarding a need to ring-fence disparate IT
systems, a zero trust model would drive a realistic security architecture plan
to protect small businesses. In a similar manner, open source cyber-security
software would give small businesses opportunities both in overcoming financial barriers to entry and having their needs met.
7.4 International Implications
In this study we detailed the effects of cyber-security decisions/actions by
organisations (legal or otherwise) on countries outside their geographical
boundaries. Within countries with similar societal profile to Australia, such
as UK and US, a similarity in cyber-security has been observed in the evidence produced. The parallels ranged from research approaches e.g. survey,
interviews, sole trader/micro business exclusion, to government actions e.g.
advisories, frameworks etc. These similarities extended to small business
dominance of economy, owners’ awareness of cyber-security knowledge gaps,
as well as comparable technology skill levels.
Given technology landscapes are also very similar across these countries, it is
not inconceivable that small businesses in other countries with similar societal
profiles to Australia, such as the UK and US, share similar human struggles
with cyber-security. As such any solutions shown to work in Australia would
merit further examinations in other such countries.
The important role of human influence on small business cyber-security leads
33
us to conclude that the small business challenges and characteristics discussed
in this paper are not unique to Australian small businesses.
8 Conclusion
The urgent need to protect small businesses from cyber-criminals is driven
by increasing pressures on small businesses to use technology. Small businesses face pressure to adopt technology from multiple fronts, ranging from
customer expectations to world events. Through our examination of evidence
from both research and industry, we have identified gaps in the pursuit of
cyber-security for small businesses at multiple levels.
At a data level, further efforts are needed to clarify and improve understanding around small and micro businesses’ ways of working, their IT architecture
and real world small business breach loss statistics. The understanding must
be gained through representative small and micro business samples and communicated using standardised security terminologies, so that data and lessons
can be transferred in a wider context.
In addition, we discussed small business constraints that impacts on small
business’s ability to protect themselves. These range from availability of
technical knowledge within the business, organisational maturity and mixed
IT ownership. Uncertainties around external factors such as cyber-insurance,
legal remediation and cost of cyber-incidents also make small business decisions around cyber-security difficult.
Through our overview approach, opportunities to apply non-traditional solutions to cyber-security are also becoming apparent. Promising characteristics
including alliances, a new security paradigm and open source community for
helping small businesses to build up their defences were also identified.
With the right research and support, a more coherent understanding of small
business cyber-security needs and risks can lead to more resilient small businesses. It is through a combination of these insights that cyber-security
solutions can be made accessible to fit better with small businesses, rather
than expect small businesses to fit into current cyber-security solutions. Industry, government and society at large also benefit from the reduced investigative and human costs of cyber-incidents. Supporting small business
cyber-security has far reaching benefits, to the economy, the community and
national security.
34
9 Acknowledgement
This research is supported by an Australian Government Research Training
Program (RTP) Scholarship.
10 Authors Biographies
Tracy Tam is a doctoral candidate (Mathematical Science) within the
School of Science at RMIT University. She holds a Bachelor degree (with
Honours) in Telecommunications Engineering from Monash University. She
worked for a decade as an engineer within the IT industry. She also has experience in managing her own small business. Her research interests include
cyber-security within small business context, cyber-security human factors
and security risk management.
Prof. Asha Rao is Professor and Associate Dean (Mathematical Sciences)
within the School of Science at RMIT University, Australia. She is an Australian 2019-2020 Superstar of STEM. She has won over AUD 3.5M in grants
since 2007 from Government and Industry to research a variety of issues including insider threat and continuous authentication. As a trans-disciplinary
researcher, she works on a variety of problems, ranging from designing better codes for communication, exploring the mathematics behind quantum
cryptography, finding links between various combinatorial structures, to cybersecurity problems such as risk management for SME, detecting insider
threats, and money laundering.
Joanne Hall is a Senior Lecturer in mathematics and cybersecurity at
RMIT. With a background in abstract algebra, her research is on quantum
key distribution and post quantum cryptography. Dr Hall completed her
PhD at RMIT in 2011 on quantum key distribution. She has held research
and teaching positions at Charles University in Prague and the Queensland
University of Technology. As the internships coordinator for the Master of
Cybersecurity Degree, Dr Hall has a keen interest in the cybersecurity needs
of businesses.
References
[1] ABC News, “NT Chief Minister Delivers Emotional Address
to Territorians About Coronavirus Shutdown — ABC News
35
Video,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=QBV1gfcectU
[2] Symantec, “Internet Security Threat Report,” 2019. [Online].
Available: https://img03.en25.com/Web/Symantec/%7B984e78e2-
c9e5-43b8-a6ee-417a08608b60%7D ISTR 24 2019 April en.pdf
[3] Australian Government, “Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy -
Enabling innovation, growth and prosperity,” 2016. [Online]. Available: https://cybersecuritystrategy.homeaffairs.gov.au/AssetLibrary/
dist/assets/images/PMC-Cyber-Strategy.pdf
[4] Department of Parliamentary Services, “Small Business Sector
Contribution to the Australian Economy,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/library/prspub/
6272043/upload binary/6272043.pdf
[5] D. Armstrong, “I Lost My Identity to a Fraudster,
and It Took Six Years to Clean Up the Mess,”
Bloom. Businessweek, vol. 2019, Aug 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-08-12/i-lostmy-identity-to-a-fraudster-and-it-took-six-years-to-clean-up-the-mess
[6] BBC News, “Margaret Atwood says thieves targeted Handmaid’s
Tale sequel,” BBC News, Sep 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-49635236
[7] A. Bainbridge and L. Florance, “Victims to Vigilantes,” ABC News, Sep 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-09-20/puppy-scams-costaustralians-1.3m-but-victims-are-fighting-back/12611646?nw=0
[8] Hiscox, “Hiscox Cyber Readiness Report 2019,” p. 20, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://www.hiscox.co.uk/sites/uk/files/documents/2019-
04/Hiscox Cyber Readiness Report 2019.PDF
[9] Australian Cyber Security Centre and Australian Signals Directorate,
“Cyber Security and Australian Small Businesses,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.cyber.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-
07/ACSCSmallBusinessSurveyReport.pdf
36
[10] Council of The European Union, “GDPR Legislative Act,” 2016. [Online]. Available: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679&from=EN
[11] A. Azar, “Department of Health and Human Services, Annual Civil
Monetary Penalties Inflation Adjustment,” in Fed. Regist. / Friday,
January 17, 2020 / Rules Regul., 2020, vol. 85, no. 12, pp. 2869–2887.
[Online]. Available: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2020-
01-17/pdf/2020-00738.pdf
[12] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA),” 2018. [Online].
Available: https://www.cdc.gov/phlp/publications/topic/hipaa.html
[13] Office of Parliarmentary Counsel, “Privacy Act 1988,” 2019. [Online].
Available: https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2019C00241
[14] A. Kelkar and A. Rao, “Co-designing compliance to the Anti-Money
Laundering Act within the small and medium enterprise sector,” J.
Financ. Regul. Compliance, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 84–101, 2013.
[15] M. Newbury, “Designated non-financial businesses and professions:
The weak link in Australia’s AML/CTF regime,” J. Money Laund.
Control, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 247–261, 2017.
[16] C. Valli, I. Martinus, and M. Johnstone, “Small to Medium Enterprise
Cyber Security Awareness: an initial survey of Western Australian
Business,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Secur. Manag., C. Valli, Ed., 2014, p. 1.
[17] S. Dojkovski, S. Lichenstein, and M. Warren, “Enabling Information
Security Culture: Influences and Challenges for Australian SMEs,”
in Australas. Conf. Inf. Syst., vol. 61. Association for Information
Systems (AISeL), 2010. [Online]. Available: http://aisel.aisnet.org/
acis2010/61
[18] ——, “Fostering Information Security Culture in Small and Medium
Size Enterprises: An Interpretive Study in Australia,” in Eur.
Conf. Inf. Syst., vol. 120. Association for Information Systems
Electronic Library (AISeL), 2007, pp. 1560–1571. [Online]. Available:
http://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2007/120
37
[19] S. Dojkovski, S. Lichtenstein, and M. Warren, “Challenges
in fostering an information security culture in australian small
and medium sized enterprises,” 5th Eur. Conf. Inf. Warf.
Secur. 2006, ECIW 2006, pp. 31–40, 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://hdl.handle.net/10536/DRO/DU:30006079
[20] A. Alahmari and B. Duncan, “Cybersecurity Risk Management in
Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises: A Systematic Review of Recent
Evidence,” 2020 Int. Conf. Cyber Situational Awareness, Data Anal.
Assessment, Cyber SA 2020, 2020.
[21] M. Heidt, J. P. Gerlach, and P. Buxmann, “Investigating the Security
Divide between SME and Large Companies: How SME Characteristics
Influence Organizational IT Security Investments,” Inf. Syst. Front.,
vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 1285–1305, 2019.
[22] E. Osborn and A. Simpson, “On small-scale IT users’ system
architectures and cyber security: A UK case study,” Comput.
Secur., vol. 70, pp. 27–50, 2017. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2017.05.001
[23] Z. Ruhwanya and J. Ophoff, Information Security Culture Assessment
of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises in Tanzania. Springer
International Publishing, 2019, vol. 551. [Online]. Available: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-18400-1 63
[24] L. L. Bryan, “Effective Information Security Strategies for Small Business,” Int. J. Cyber Criminol., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 341–360, 2020.
[25] F. Almeida, I. Carvalho, and F. Cruz, “Structure and Challenges of a
Security Policy on Small and Medium Enterprises,” KSII Trans. Internet Inf. Syst., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 747–763, 2018.
[26] N. A. Salleh, H. Hussin, M. A. Suhaimi, and A. Md Ali, “A Systematic
Literature Review of Cloud Computing Adoption and Impacts Among
Small Medium Enterprises (SMEs),” Proc. - Int. Conf. Inf. Commun.
Technol. Muslim World 2018, ICT4M 2018, pp. 278–284, 2018.
[27] Cynch Security, Deakin University, RMIT University, and AustCyber,
“Big cyber security questions for small business The state of cyber
38
fitness in Australian small businesses,” 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/576a6006f5e23175ba4e41d8/
t/601b2bcc8724d11f1c78b95c/1612393427067/Cynch+-+Big+cyber+
security+questions+for+small+business+-+White+paper.pdf
[28] NSW Government, “Cyber Aware,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.smallbusiness.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2019-
07/Cyber-Aware-full-report.pdf
[29] A. Luque, R. Bhaskar, J. Noon, K. Rinz, and Victoria Udalova,
“Nonemployer Statistics by Demographics (NES-D): Using Administrative and Census Records Data in Business Statistics,”
2019. [Online]. Available: https://www2.census.gov/ces/wp/2019/
CES-WP-19-01.pdf
[30] US Census, “2015 SUSB Annual Datasets by Establishment
Industry - Data by Enterprise Employment Size,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/susb/
datasets/2015/us state 6digitnaics 2015.txt
[31] British Crown, “Business Population Estimates for the
UK and Regions 2019,” 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment data/file/852919/Business Population
Estimates for the UK and regions - 2019 Statistical Release.pdf
[32] G. H. Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences : Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions, and Organizations Across Nations, 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage Publications, 2001.
[33] Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
“Key Facts Survey of Adult Skills ( PIAAC ): Full Selection of
Indicator - UK, US, Australia and OECD Data Table,” 2018. [Online].
Available: https://gpseducation.oecd.org/IndicatorExplorer
[34] P. Moran, “Personality Characteristics and Growth-orientation of the
Small Business Owner-manager,” Int. Small Bus. J. Res. Entrepeursh.,
vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 17–38, 1998. [Online]. Available: http://
hjb.sagepub.com.proxy.lib.umich.edu/content/9/2/183.full.pdf+html
39
[35] J. Kickul and L. Gundry, “Prospecting for Strategic Advantage: The
Proactive Entrepreneurial Personality and Small Firm Innovation,” J.
Small Bus. Manag., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 85–97, 2002.
[36] IDC, “Worldwide Spending on Security Solutions Forecast to Reach
$103.1 Billion in 2019, According to New IDC Spending Guide,” 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=
prUS44150518
[37] J. Kaur and N. Mustafa, “Examining the Effects of Knowledge, Attitude and Behaviour on Information Security Awareness: A Case on
SME,” in Int. Conf. Res. Innov. Inf. Syst. ICRIIS, vol. 2013. IEEE,
2013, pp. 286–290.
[38] L. Cheng, Y. Li, W. Li, E. Holm, and Q. Zhai, “Understanding
the Violation of IS Security Policy in Organizations: An Integrated
Model Based on Social Control and Deterrence Theory,” Comput.
Secur., vol. 39, no. PART B, pp. 447–459, 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2013.09.009
[39] Y. Sawaya, M. Sharif, N. Christin, A. Kubota, A. Nakarai, and A. Yamada, “Self-Confidence Trumps Knowledge : A Cross-Cultural Study
of Security Behavior,” in Proc. 2017 CHI Conf. Hum. Factors Comput.
Syst., Denver, 2017, pp. 2202–2214.
[40] B. Von Solms and R. Von Solms, “The 10 Deadly Sins of Information
Security Management,” Comput. Secur., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 371–376,
2004.
[41] J. D’Arcy and A. Hovav, “Does One Size Fit All? Examining the
Differential Effects of Is Security Countermeasures,” J. Bus. Ethics,
vol. 89, no. SUPPL. 1, pp. 59–71, 2009.
[42] I. Bernik and K. Prislan, “Measuring information security performance
with 10 by 10 model for holistic state evaluation,” PLoS One, vol. 11,
no. 9, pp. 1–33, 2016.
[43] Deloitte, “The Future of Cyber Survey 2019,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/pages/advisory/
articles/future-of-cyber-survey.html
40
[44] 115th Congress Oversight & Government Reform Committee, “Congressional Report, The Equifax Data Breach, Majority Staff Report,”
2018. [Online]. Available: https://republicans-oversight.house.gov/
wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Equifax-Report.pdf
[45] D. Chau, “Ticketmaster admits customer details may
have been stolen in hack,” ABC News, 2018. [Online].
Available: https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-06-28/ticketmastercontacts-customers-personal-details-data-breach/9919124
[46] A. Bainbridge and L. Florance, “Tradies Frustrated by Banks as Business Email Scam Costs Them $51000,” ABC News, Nov 2020.
[47] ISACA, COBIT 2019 Framework: Introduction and methodology, 2019.
[48] Australian Bureau of Statistics, “8167.0 Selected Characteristics
of Australian Business,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/allprimarymainfeatures/
C575766838376FA0CA2573E1000E3F2F?opendocument
[49] ——, “8167.0 - Characteristics of Australian Business, 2018-19,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/industry/technology-andinnovation/characteristics-australian-business/latest-release
[50] Australian Productivity Commission and New Zealand Productivity
Commission, “Growing the Digital Economy in Australia and
New Zealand. Maximising Opportunities for SMEs,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.pc.gov.au/research/completed/growingdigital-economy/growing-digital-economy.pdf
[51] State Government of Victoria, “Stage 4 restrictions,” pp. 1–7, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.dhhs.vic.gov.au/stage-4-restrictionscovid-19
[52] T. Woschke, H. Haase, and J. Kratzer, “Resource Scarcity in SMEs:
Effects on Incremental and Radical Innovations,” Manag. Res. Rev.,
vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 195–217, 2017.
41
[53] H. Suryotrisongko and Y. Musashi, “Review of Cybersecurity Research Topics, Taxonomy and Challenges: Interdisciplinary Perspective,” Proc. 2019 IEEE 12th Conf. Serv. Comput. Appl. SOCA 2019,
pp. 162–167, 2019.
[54] US Small Business Administration, “Participants Sought For Survey
On Small And Mid-Size Business Cybersecurity Issues,” 2019. [Online].
Available: https://advocacy.sba.gov/2019/10/21/participants-soughtfor-survey-on-small-and-mid-size-business-cybersecurity-issues/
[55] Eurostat, “ICT Security in Enterprises,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/pdfscache/
9132.pdf
[56] T. Sommestad, J. Hallberg, K. Lundholm, and J. Bengtsson, “Variables
Influencing Information Security Policy Compliance: A Systematic Review of Quantitative Studies,” Inf. Manag. Comput. Secur., vol. 22,
no. 1, pp. 42–75, 2014.
[57] A. A. Abid, M. Rahim, and H. Scheepers, “Experienced Benefits
and Barriers of e-Business Technology Adoption by SME Suppliers,”
Commun. IBIMA, vol. 2011, no. October, pp. 1–11, 2011. [Online].
Available: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260426111
[58] Deloitte Australia, “SMBs In the Digital Race for the Customer,”
2016. [Online]. Available: http://www2.deloitte.com/au/en/pages/
economics/articles/SMBs-race-digital-customer.html
[59] A. Gupta and R. Hammond, “Information Systems Security Issues
and Decisions for Small Businesses: An Empirical Examination,” Inf.
Manag. Comput. Secur., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 297–310, 2005.
[60] US Government, “The Cost of Malicious Cyber Activity to
the U.S. Economy,” Tech. Rep. February, 2018. [Online].
Available: https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/
02/The-Cost-of-Malicious-Cyber-Activity-to-the-U.S.-Economy.pdf
[61] United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, “Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime,” 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.unodc.org/documents/organized-crime/UNODC
CCPCJ EG.4 2013/CYBERCRIME STUDY 210213.pdf
42
[62] C. D. Kam, J. R. Wilking, and E. J. Zechmeister, “Beyond the ”Narrow
Data Base”: Another Convenience Sample for Experimental Research,”
Polit. Behav., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 415–440, 2007.
[63] Y. Acar, C. Stransky, D. Wermke, M. L. Mazurek, and S. Fahl, “Security Developer Studies With GitHub Users: Exploring a Convenience Sample,” Proc. 13th Symp. Usable Priv. Secur. SOUPS 2017,
no. Soups, pp. 81–95, 2019.
[64] Ponemon Institute and IBM Security, “Cost of a Data Breach
Report,” Ponemon Institute, IBM, Tech. Rep., 2019. [Online].
Available: https://www.ibm.com/security/data-breach
[65] Vistage, Cisco, and National Center for The Middle Market,
“Cyberthreats and Solutions for Small and Midsize Businesses,” 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sap.com/uk/solution/sme-businesssoftware/analytics.html
[66] C. Watson, T. Zaw, I. Andriushchenko, G. M. Justiniano, and
M. Tesauro, OWASP Automated Threat Handbook Web Applications.
Bel Air, United States: OWASP, 2018. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.owasp.org/images/3/33/Automated-threat-handbook.pdf
[67] Australian Bureau of Statistics, “1321.0 - Small Business in Australia,
2001,” 2001. [Online]. Available: https://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/
abs@.nsf/mf/1321.0
[68] British Crown, “Small Business Survey 2014: SME
Employers,” London, 2015. [Online]. Available:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment data/file/414963/bis-15-151-small-businesssurvey-2014-sme-employers v1.pdf
[69] Eurostat, “Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs),” 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/structuralbusiness-statistics/structural-business-statistics/sme
[70] U.S. Small Business Administration, “Table of Small Business
Standards Matched to North American Industry Classification System
Codes,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/
files/files/Size Standards Table 2017.pdf
43
[71] M. Cruz, F. Boster, and J. Rodriguez, “The Impact of Group Size and
Proportion of Shared Information on the Exchange and Integration of
Information in Groups,” Communic. Res., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 291–313,
1997.
[72] R. F. Bales, F. L. Strodtbeck, T. M. Mills, and M. E. Roseborough,
“Channels of Communication in Small Groups,” Am. Sociol. Rev.,
vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 461–468, 1951.
[73] B. Steinheider and S. Al-Hawamdeh, “Team Coordination, Communication and Knowledge Sharing in Smes and Large Organisations,” J.
Inf. Knowl. Manag., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 223–232, 2004.
[74] S. I. Donaldson and E. J. Grant-Vallone, “Understanding Self-Report
Bias in Organizational Behavior Research,” J. Bus. Psychol., vol. 17,
no. 2, pp. 245–260, 2002.
[75] R. Fisher and J. Katz, “Social-Desirability Bias and the Validity of
Self-Reported Values,” Psychol. Mark., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 105–120,
2000.
[76] Redscan, “Most ICO Data Breach Reports Late and Incomplete
Prior to GDPR, Reveals Redscan FOI,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.redscan.com/press-release/most-ico-data-breachreports-late-and-incomplete-prior-to-gdpr-reveals-redscan-foi/
[77] C. Emami, R. G. Smith, and P. Jorna, “Online Fraud Victimisation
in Australia: Risks and Protective Factors,” 2019. [Online].
Available: https://www.aic.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-05/rr16
online fraud victimisation in australia-v3.pdf
[78] P. M. Boynton, “Administering, Analysing, and Reporting Your
Questionnaire,” BMJ(Clinical Res. Ed., vol. 328, no. 7452, pp.
1372–1375, 2004. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC420299/
[79] N. Kwak and B. Radler, “A Comparison Between Mail and Web Surveys: Response Pattern, Respondent Profile, and Data Quality,” J.
Off. Stat., vol. 18, no. 2, p. 257, 2002.
44
[80] Commonwealth of Australia and Australian Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman, “Small Business
Counts, Small Business in the Australian Economy,” 2019.
[Online]. Available: http://www.asbfeo.gov.au/sites/default/files/
Small Business Statistical Report-Final.pdf
[81] J. Coertze and R. Von Solms, “A Software Gateway to Affordable and
Effective Information Security Governance in SMMEs,” in 2013 Inf.
Secur. South Africa - Proc. ISSA 2013 Conf. IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–8.
[82] M. Panjwani, M. Jantti, and J. Sormunen, “IT Service Management
From a Perspective of Small and Medium Sized Companies,” in Proc.
- 2016 10th Int. Conf. Qual. Inf. Commun. Technol. QUATIC 2016.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 210–215.
[83] M. Bada and J. Nurse, “Developing Cybersecurity Education and
Awareness Programmes for Small- and Medium-Sized Enterprises
(SMEs),” Inf. Comput. Secur., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 393–410, 2019.
[84] V. Dimopoulos, S. Furnell, M. Jennex, and I. Kritharas, “Approaches to IT Security in Small and Medium Enterprises,” in
Proc. 2nd Aust. Inf. Secur. Manag. Conf. Secur. Futur. Perth,
West. Aust. Novemb. 26th, 2004, 2004, pp. 73–82. [Online].
Available: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/221148270
Approaches to IT Security in Small and Medium Enterprises
[85] D. Almubayedh, M. A. Khalis, G. Alazman, M. Alabdali, R. Al-Refai,
and N. Nagy, “Security Related Issues in Saudi Arabia Small Organizations: A Saudi Case Study,” in 21st Saudi Comput. Soc. Natl. Comput.
Conf. NCC 2018. Ar Riyad, Saudi Arabia: IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[86] E. Laleh, Y. Masoudi, F. Fathy, and S. Ghorbani, “Influencing Factors
of Information Security Management in Small- and Medium- Sized Enterprises and Organizations,” in Proc. - 2013 Int. Conf. Commun. Syst.
Netw. Technol. CSNT 2013. IEEE, 2013, pp. 445–449.
[87] E. Osborn and A. Simpson, “Risk and the Small-Scale Cyber Security
Decision Making Dialogue - A UK Case Study,” Comput. J., vol. 61,
no. 4, pp. 472–495, 2018.
45
[88] Australian Bureau of Statistics, “8165.0 - Counts of Australian
Businesses, including Entries and Exits, June 2015 to June 2019,”
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/
abs@.nsf/DetailsPage/8165.0June2015toJune2019?OpenDocument
[89] M. Smith, “Huge Rise in Hack Attacks as Cyber-Criminals
Target Small Businesses,” Guard., Feb 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/
feb/08/huge-rise-hack-attacks-cyber-criminals-target-small-businesses
[90] C. McDonald, “A Whopping 78% of Small Business Are Being Targeted
by Cyber Criminals. Here’s How to Stay Ahead,” 2019. [Online].
Available: https://www.smartcompany.com.au/finance/fraud/cybercrime-stay-ahead/
[91] Microsoft, “Planning the Development, Testing, Staging,
and Production Environments,” 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/biztalk/technical-guides/planningthe-development-testing-staging-and-production-environments
[92] H. Raul, “Setting up Systems for a Staged Upgrade,” 2020. [Online].
Available: https://docs.bmc.com/docs/brid91/en/setting-up-systemsfor-a-staged-upgrade-825210729.html
[93] B. Iyamuremye and H. Shima, “Network Security Testing Tools for
SMEs (Small and Medium Enterprises),” in Proc. 4th IEEE Int. Conf.
Appl. Syst. Innov. 2018, ICASI 2018. IEEE, 2018, pp. 414–417.
[94] Rapid7, “Metasploit Framework,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
//metasploit.help.rapid7.com/docs/msf-overview
[95] Deloitte, “The economic value of cloud services in Australia,”
2019. [Online]. Available: https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/
Deloitte/au/Documents/Economics/deloitte-au-economics-valuecloud-services-australia-230719.pdf
[96] Gartner Inc, “Gartner Forecasts Worldwide Public Cloud End-User
Spending to Grow 18% in 2021,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2020-11-17-
gartner-forecasts-worldwide-public-cloud-end-user-spending-to-grow18-percent-in-2021
46
[97] M. Chiappetta, “Uber Eats Demand Soars Due To
COVID-19 Crisis,” Forbes, Mar 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.forbes.com/sites/marcochiappetta/2020/03/25/
uber-eats-demand-soars-due-to-covid-19-crisis
[98] L. Dignan, “Uber vs. Lyft: How the Rivals Approach
Cloud, AI, and Machine Learning,” ZDNet, May 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.zdnet.com/article/uber-vs-lyft-howthe-rivals-approach-cloud-ai-machine-learning/
[99] K. O. Detken, M. Jahnke, H. Birkholz, and C. Dwertmann, “Design
and Implementation of Virtual Security Appliances (VSA) for SME,”
in Proc. 2013 IEEE 7th Int. Conf. Intell. Data Acquis. Adv. Comput.
Syst. IDAACS 2013, vol. 1, no. September. IEEE, 2013, pp. 30–35.
[100] Spyse, “Spyse Subscriptions,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//spyse.com/user/subscription
[101] Tenable, “Purchase Tenable Solutions,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.tenable.com/buy
[102] Intruder, “External Vulnerability Scanner,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.intruder.io/
[103] Amazon AWS, “AWS Customer Support Policy for Penetration
Customer Service Policy for Penetration Testing,” 2020. [Online].
Available: https://aws.amazon.com/security/penetration-testing/
[104] Microsoft, “Microsoft Cloud Penetration Testing Rules of Engagement,” pp. 1–3, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.microsoft.com/
en-us/msrc/pentest-rules-of-engagement?rtc=1
[105] Google, “Cloud Security FAQ,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//support.google.com/cloud/answer/6262505?hl=en
[106] T. August and T. I. Tunca, “Who Should Be Responsible for Software
Security? a Comparative Analysis of Liability Policies in Network Environments,” Manage. Sci., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 934–959, 2011.
[107] L. Selznick and C. LaMacchia, “Cybersecurity Liability: How Technically Savvy Can We Expect Small Business Owners to Be?” J. Bus.
Technol. Law, vol. 13, no. 2, p. 217, 2018.
47
[108] Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA), “The
Connected Business - ACMA research snapshot,” 2013. [Online].
Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=etjjds2PIN0
[109] M. A. Harris and K. P. Patten, “Mobile Device Security Considerations for Small- and Medium-Sized Enterprise Business Mobility,” Inf.
Manag. Comput. Secur., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 97–114, 2014.
[110] Google, “GSuite by Google Cloud Endpoint Management,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://gsuite.google.com/products/admin/endpoint/
[111] S. Perez, “Apple Is Making Corporate ‘BYOD’ Programs Less
Invasive to User Privacy,” TechCrunch, Jun 2019. [Online]. Available: https://techcrunch.com/2019/06/10/apple-is-making-corporatebyod-programs-less-invasive-to-user-privacy/
[112] Microsoft, “Technology decisions for BYOD with EMS — Microsoft
Docs,” pp. 1–5, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://docs.microsoft.com/
en-gb/intune/fundamentals/byod-technology-decisions
[113] Google, “Overview : Manage devices with Google endpoint management Tailor your basic mobile device management,” 2020. [Online].
Available: https://support.google.com/a/answer/1734200?hl=en-AU
[114] Glassdoor, “Average IT Administrator Salaries,” 2019. [Online].
Available: https://www.glassdoor.com.au/Salaries/it-administratorsalary-SRCH KO0,16.htm
[115] L. Taylor, “Happy 25 years of the internet, Australia,” SBS News,
Jun 2014. [Online]. Available: http://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/
2014/06/24/happy-25-years-internet-australia
[116] Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
“Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC): Full selection of indicators,”
Paris, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://gpseducation.oecd.org/
IndicatorExplorer
[117] E. Walker, J. Redmond, B. Webster, and M. Le Clus, “Small Business
Owners: Too Busy to Train?” J. Small Bus. Enterp. Dev., vol. 14,
no. 2, pp. 294–306, 2007.
48
[118] M. Scott and R. Bruce, “Five Stages of Growth in Small Business,”
Long Range Plann., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 45–52, 1987.
[119] J. Alqatawna, “The Challenge of Implementing Information Security
Standards in Small and Medium e-Business Enterprises,” J. Softw.
Eng. Appl., vol. 7, no. 10, p. 883, 2014.
[120] National Institute of Standards and Technology, “NIST Framework
for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity,” 2018. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.CSWP.04162018
[121] ISACA, “COBIT 2019 Publications & Resources,” 2019. [Online]. Available: http://www.isaca.org/COBIT/Pages/COBIT-2019-
Publications-Resources.aspx
[122] Standards Australia Limited, “AS ISO/IEC 27001 Australian Standard
Information Technology - Security Techniques - Information Security
Management Systems - Requirements,” 2015.
[123] Australian Signals Directorate and Australian Cyber Security
Centre, “Australian Government Information Security Manual,” Jun
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.cyber.gov.au/sites/default/
files/2020-06/AustralianGovernmentInformationSecurityManual%
28June2020%29.pdf
[124] Commonwealth of Australia, “Cyber Security: The Small
Business Best Practice Guide,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.asbfeo.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/
ASBFEO-cyber-security-research-report.pdf
[125] Australian Cyber Security Centre, “Australian Signal Directorate Essential Eight Maturity Model,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/view-all-content/publications/
essential-eight-maturity-model
[126] ——, “Small Business Cyber Security Guide,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/view-all-content/publications/
small-business-cyber-security-guide
49
[127] J. E. Maddux and R. W. Rogers, “Protection Motivation and SelfEfficacy: A Revised Theory of Fear Appeals and Attitude Change,” J.
Exp. Soc. Psychol., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 469–479, 1983.
[128] K. Renaud, “How Smaller Businesses Struggle With Security Advice,”
Comput. Fraud Secur., vol. 2016, no. 8, pp. 10–18, 2016. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1361-3723(16)30062-8
[129] ISACA, COBIT 2019 : Design Guide Designing an Information and
Technology Governance Solution, Information Systems Audit and Control Association, Ed. Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA, 2019.
[130] Insurance Business Australia, “Cyber Insurance Products,” pp. 1–4,
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.insurancebusinessmag.com/
au/commercial-insurance-coverage-area/cyber-12/
[131] Cyber Insurance Australia, “Cyber Insurance Australia
Quote Form,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://
www.cyberinsuranceaustralia.com.au/
[132] BizCover, “Fact sheet Cyber Liability Insurance,” 2019. [Online].
Available: https://www.bizcover.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/
12/BC1243 FactSheet CyberLiability Nov19 FINAL-5.pdf
[133] A. Davenport, “Is Cyber Insurance Really Worth It?” CRN Mag., Feb
2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.crn.com.au/feature/is-cyberinsurance-really-worth-it-451442/page0
[134] A. Satariano and N. Perlroth, “Big Companies Thought Insurance Covered a Cyberattack. They May Be Wrong. - The
New York Times,” New York Times, pp. 3–5, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/15/technology/
cyberinsurance-notpetya-attack.html
[135] Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
“Enhancing the Role of Insurance in Cyber Risk Management,” 2017.
[136] Lloyds of London, “Counting the Cost: Cyber Exposure Decoded,”
2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.lloyds.com/news-and-insight/
risk-insight/library/technology/countingthecost
50
[137] A. Greenberg, “The Untold Story of NotPetya, the Most Devastating
Cyberattack in History,” Wired, Aug 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.wired.com/story/notpetya-cyberattack-ukrainerussia-code-crashed-the-world/
[138] ABC News, “Petya Cyber Attack: Ransomware Virus Hits Computer
Servers Across Globe, Australian Office Affected,” ABC News, Jun
2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-06-28/
ransomware-virus-hits-computer-servers-across-the-globe/8657626
[139] R. Crozier, “DLA Piper Paid 15000 Hours of IT Overtime
after NotPetya Attack,” ITNews, Mar 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.itnews.com.au/news/dla-piper-paid-15000-hoursof-it-overtime-after-notpetya-attack-490495
[140] A. Taylor, “Australian Government attribution of the
’NotPetya’ cyber incident to Russia,” 2018. [Online].
Available: https://www.dfat.gov.au/sites/default/files/australiaattributes-cyber-incident-to-russia.pdf
[141] C. Cross, R. G. Smith, and K. Richards, “Challenges of Responding
to Online Fraud Victimisation in Australia,” 2014. [Online]. Available:
https://www.aic.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-05/tandi474.pdf
[142] T. Reitano, T. Oerting, and M. Hunter, “Innovations in international
cooperation to counter cybercrime: The Joint Cybercrime Action Taskforce,” Eur. Rev. Organ. Crime, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 142–154, 2015.
[143] J. Bamford, “The Most Wanted Man in The World,” Wired Mag., Jun
2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.wired.com/2014/08/edwardsnowden/
[144] P. Szoldra, “This Is Everything Edward Snowden Revealed in One
Year of Unprecedented Top-Secret Leaks,” Bus. Insid. India, Sep
2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.businessinsider.in/This-iseverything-Edward-Snowden-revealed-in-one-year-of-unprecedentedtop-secret-leaks/articleshow/54367926.cms
[145] N. Khadem, “Coronavirus wreaks havoc on wedding industry as Chinese factories remain closed and work51
ers quarantined,” ABC News, Feb 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-02-27/coronavirus-closeschinese-factories-affecting-wedding-industry/12002854
[146] Broadsheet, “Live List: Melbourne Restaurants Pivoting
to Takeaway Due to Coronavirus,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.broadsheet.com.au/melbourne/guides/live-listmelbourne-restaurants-pivoting-takeaway-due-coronavirus
[147] N. Gallagher, “One of KC’s Best Craft Cocktail Bars Adapts
With Bottled Drinks and Kits During Coronavirus Quarantine,”
Kansas City Mag., Mar 2020. [Online]. Available: https://
www.kansascitymag.com/cocktail-hour-during-coronavirus-outbreak/
[148] J. Longbottom, “Coronavirus forces businesses to adapt to survive
the COVID-19 pandemic,” ABC News, Mar 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-03-19/how-businessesadapting-to-survive-covid-19-coronavirus/12068696
[149] D. Gray, “Craft Brewer Pivots to Hand Sanitiser as Firms Rise to
Virus Challenge,” Age (Omaha)., Mar 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.theage.com.au/business/companies/craft-brewer-pivots-tohand-sanitiser-as-firms-rise-to-virus-challenge-20200327-p54ehh.html
[150] H. De Vries and M. Shields, “Towards a Theory of Entrepreneurial
Resilience : A Case Study Analysis of New Zealand SME Owner Operators,” Appl. Res. J., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 33–44, 2006.
[151] L. J. Branicki, B. Sullivan-Taylor, and S. R. Livschitz, “How Entrepreneurial Resilience Generates Resilient SMEs,” Int. J. Entrep.
Behav. Res., vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 1244–1263, 2018.
[152] Y. Eshet-Alkalai and E. Chajut, “You Can Teach Old Dogs New Tricks:
The Factors That Affect Changes over Time in Digital Literacy,” J.
Inf. Technol. Educ. Res., vol. 9, pp. 173–181, 2010.
[153] S. E. Freed, “Examination of Personality Characteristics Among
Cybersecurity and Information Technology Professionals,” Masters,
University of Tennessee at Chattanoog, 2014. [Online]. Available:
https://scholar.utc.edu/theses/127/
52
[154] M. Bashir, A. Lambert, J. M. C. Wee, and B. Guo, “An Examination
of the Vocational and Psychological Characteristics of Cybersecurity
Competition Participants,” USENIX Summit Gaming, Games, Gamification Secur. Educ., pp. 1–8, 2015.
[155] J. L. Hall and A. Rao, “Non-Technical Skills Needed by Cyber Security
Graduates,” in IEEE Educ. Conf. Porto, Portugal: IEEE Education
Society, 2020, pp. 14–18.
[156] H. Zhao and S. E. Seibert, “The Big Five Personality Dimensions and
Entrepreneurial Status: A Meta-Analytical Review,” J. Appl. Psychol.,
vol. 91, no. 2, pp. 259–271, 2006.
[157] Business Victoria, “Small Business Workshops and Events,” 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://www.business.vic.gov.au/events
[158] Australian Cyber Security Centre, “Small Business Cyber Security
Guide,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.cyber.gov.au/sites/
default/files/2019-10/SmallBusinessCyberSecurityGuide.pdf
[159] C. Vroom and R. Von Solms, “Towards Information Security Behavioural Compliance,” Comput. Secur., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 191–198,
2004.
[160] R. Von Solms and J. Van Niekerk, “From Information Security to
Cyber Security,” Comput. Secur., vol. 38, pp. 97–102, 2013. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2013.04.004
[161] IDCare, “IDCare,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.idcare.org
[162] Australian Cyber Security Centre, “ReportCyber, Are You a Victim
of Cybercrime?” [Online]. Available: https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/
report
[163] Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, “ScamWatch,”
2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.scamwatch.gov.au/
[164] Verizon, “2019 Data Breach Investigations Report,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://enterprise.verizon.com/resources/reports/
2019-data-breach-investigations-report.pdf
53
[165] F. Abolhassan, Cyber Security. Simply. Make it Happen. Leveraging
Digitization Through IT Security, 1st ed. Springer International Publishing : Imprint: Springer, 2017.
[166] AusCERT, “AusCERT Become a Member,” 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.auscert.org.au/become-a-member/
[167] Australian Cyber Security Centre, “Become a Partner,” 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.cyber.gov.au/partner-hub/becomea-partner#no-back
[168] T. Yanpiboon and L. Schjoedt, “The Effect of Strategic Alliance on
Small Business Performance: A Meta- Analysis,” in ICSB World Conf.
Proc., Washington, 2017.
[169] S. Rose, O. Borchert, S. Mitchell, and S. Connelly, “Zero Trust Architecture - NIST Special Publication 800-207,” 2020. [Online].
Available: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/
NIST.SP.800-207-draft2.pdf
[170] J. Kindervag, “No More Chewy Centers: The Zero Trust
Model Of Information Security Vision: The Security Architecture And Operations Playbook,” 2016. [Online]. Available: http://crystaltechnologies.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/
forrester-zero-trust-model-information-security.pdf
[171] Australian National University, “Incident Report on the Breach of
the Australian National University Administrative Systems,” 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://imagedepot.anu.edu.au/scapa/Website/
SCAPA190209 Public report web 2.pdf
[172] BeyondCorp, “Beyondcorp : A New Approach to Enterprise Security,”
2014. [Online]. Available: www.beyondcorp.com
[173] J. Curran, “Chaffetz Urges ’Zero-Trust Model’ For Network Security,”
Cybersecurity Policy Rep., Sep 2016.
[174] R. Ward and B. Beyer, “Beyondcorp : A New Approach to Enterprise
Security,” ;login Mag. USENIX SAGE, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 6–11, 2014.
[Online]. Available: https://storage.googleapis.com/pub-tools-publicpublication-data/pdf/43231.pdf
54
[175] SE Radio, “SE Radio: Episode 385: Evan Gilman and
Doug Barth on Zero-Trust Networks,” 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ES-6zAQo1WU
[176] J. Kindervag, “Build Security Into Your Network’s DNA: The Zero
Trust Network Architecture,” 2010. [Online]. Available: http://
www.virtualstarmedia.com/downloads/Forrester zero trust DNA.pdf
[177] V. Escobedo, B. Beyer, M. Saltonstall, and F. Zyzniewski,
“BeyondCorp 5: The User Experience,” ;login Mag. USENIX
SAGE, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 38–43, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://storage.googleapis.com/pub-tools-public-publicationdata/pdf/c8da594124dab1f91e6750995e2b7805403b19f1.pdf
[178] L. Cittadini, B. Spear, B. Beyer, and M. Saltonstall, “BeyondCorp
Part III: The Access Proxy,” ;login Mag. USENIX SAGE, pp. 28–33,
2016. [Online]. Available: https://storage.googleapis.com/pub-toolspublic-publication-data/pdf/45728.pdf
[179] Queensland Government, “Open source software guideline Guideline,”
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.qgcio.qld.gov.au/documents/
open-source-software-guideline
[180] Digital Transformation Agency, “Simple, clear and fast public
services.” [Online]. Available: https://www.dta.gov.au/help-andadvice/digital-service-standard/digital-service-standard-criteria
[181] Victorian Government, “Vic Open Source Policy.pdf.” [Online].
Available: https://www.vic.gov.au/make-your-project-open-sourcedigital-standards
[182] Australian Government Information Management Office, “A Guide
to Open Source Software for Australian Government Agencies,”
2011. [Online]. Available: https://www.ghdonline.org/uploads/
AGuidetoOpenSourceSoftware.pdf
[183] Cisco, “Snort Intrusion Detection System,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.snort.org/
[184] H. Welte and P. N. Ayuso, “The netfilter.org Project,” 2014. [Online].
Available: https://netfilter.org/
55
[185] G. Lyon, “NMap Tool,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://nmap.org/
[186] Free Software Foundation, “GNU General Public License,” 2007.
[Online]. Available: https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html
[187] Creative Commons, “Creative Commons,” pp. 1–7, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://creativecommons.org/
[188] CyberX, “Free CyberSecurity Tools : The Ultimate List (2018),” 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://cyberx.tech/free-cybersecurity-tools/
[189] K. Ven, J. Verelst, and H. Mannaert, “Should You Adopt Open Source
Software?” IEEE Softw., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 54–59, 2008.
[190] M. A. Alojail, “ITIL usage, and use of ITIL recommended practices and
the IT outsourcing relationship quality,” Ph.D. dissertation, RMIT,
2013.
[191] RedHat, “What’s the difference between Fedora and Red Hat Enterprise Linux?” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.redhat.com/en/
topics/linux/fedora-vs-red-hat-enterprise-linux
[192] C. Ebart, “Open Source Software in Industry,” IEEE Softw., vol. 25,
no. 3, pp. 52–53, 2008.
[193] J. Wesselius, “The Bazaar inside the Cathedral: Business Models for
Internal Markets,” IEEE Softw., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 60–66, 2008.
[194] PyCon AU, “Pyconlineau,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//2021.pycon.org.au/
[195] Linux Australia, “Linux Australia.” [Online]. Available: https:
//linux.org.au/
56