S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 11. CI techniques and CFE infrastructures, theoretical basis and enablers for CI-NGWNs applications.
• Self-Supervised Learning: The self-supervised learning is a new paradigm and can be considered as an intermediate algorithm between
unsupervised and supervised learning. The self-supervised methods
assume that the data is not of the best quality in terms of labels (unlike supervised learning); thus, it starts with the training of
pseudo-labels associated with data and then can carry on to employ supervised or unsupervised learning for improving the desired
task (Liu et al., 2021d).
• Evolutionary Algorithms: Evolutionary algorithms encompass optimization and meta-heuristic algorithms to solve various tasks. These algorithms are appropriate when there is no assumption about the
optimized values to begin with. As the evolutionary algorithms are
computationally complex, they can either be used with hard constraints to lower the computational complexity or with prior approximations that are near to the optimal values (Zeb et al., 2022a). There
are various popular methods that can be categorized as evolutionary
algorithms, such as particle swarm optimization, cuckoo search, artificial bee colony, ant colony optimization, gray-wolf optimization,
Harris-hawk optimization, sailfish optimization, firefly optimization,
harmony search, and others.
• Neural Fuzzy Systems: Neural Fuzzy systems use fuzzy theory to represent the probabilistic values between true and false states in conjunction with neural networks (Ji et al., 2021). Neural Fuzzy theory has
been extensively applied over the years in the field of home appliance
control, power system control, and control systems.
• Reinforcement Learning: Reinforcement learning, also known as
learning-by-experience, trains an agent by taking actions with perceived inputs and interprets the environment to maximize cumulative
rewards (Zeb et al., 2022a). The method heavily relies on the notion
of exploration versus exploitation of the prior and acquired knowledge to achieve the desired task. It has gained a lot of traction in
robotics, autonomous driving, and resource optimization.
• Federated Learning: Federated learning is relatively new technique, but
is proposed to address privacy and security concerns while improving
the task at hand Khan et al. (2021). First proposed by Google, the FL
does not send the data to the server, unlike other learning algorithms.
FL requires only the trained model, which is collected by the number
of users, aggregated on the server, and then sent to the user for model
update.
• Soft Computing Techniques: The last in this discussion are the soft computing techniques that are quite analogous to numerical computation.
Soft computing combines the characteristics of the aforementioned
learning algorithms, such as supervised/unsupervised learning, fuzzy
logic, evolutionary techniques, and probabilistic reasoning, to approximate the solution rather than provide an optimized one (Soltanali
et al., 2021; Sharma et al., 2021). These techniques are imprecise, yet
can be effectively tolerant of uncertainty. For real-world applications
that can cater to higher risk for robust solutions at a reasonable cost,
the soft computing techniques are ideal and natural fit.
5.1.1. CI for holistic industry 5.0 framework
Existing studies suggest that without using computational intelligence techniques, Industry 5.0 could not be realized in an effective
way (Fraga-Lamas et al., 2021; Maddikunta, 2021). These studies
consider using CI for holistic Industry 5.0 framework or its particular aspects. Besides, some studies have emphasized the use of CI
techniques for solving sustainability and resiliency issues in Industry
5.0 (Fraga-Lamas et al., 2021; Ozdemir and Hekim, 2018; Du et al.,
2021a; Thakur and Sehgal, 2021) while considered the CI to achieve or
realize specific characteristics of Industry 5.0 such as human–machine
collaboration (Demir et al., 2019; Longo et al., 2020; Nahavandi, 2019),
pandemic situations (COVID-19) (Javaid et al., 2020), education (Rachmawati et al., 2021), medical and health (Haleem and Javaid, 2019),
robotics (Han et al., 2017), Blockchain Rupa et al. (2021), Digital
Society (Doyle-Kent and Kopacek, 2019; Martynov et al., 2019), Society
5.0 (Elim and Zhai, 2020), Energy (Carayannis et al., 2021; ElFar et al.,
2021; Ullah et al., 2022), UAVs (Jain et al., 2021), Mass Customization (ElFar et al., 2021), and Emotional Intelligence (Chin, 2021). A
summary of the applications targeted by the summarized studies using
CI in Industry 5.0 is shown in Fig. 12. Below, we review some of
the works carried out towards exploring the CI in targeted application
domains of Industry 5.0.
Industrial Automation and Robotics Han et al. (2017) emphasized
human–robot collaboration for increased productivity in industries.
The authors study the design of robots that can exhibit autonomous
intelligence and integration of human supervision. The authors proposed developing an intelligent swarm robotic system that can be
used as an intelligent automation system and for functions controlling
humanoid organs. To achieve the enabling tasks, the study extensively used CI techniques to control the robotic system with human
commands or autonomously. In Nahavandi (2019), authors emphasized the human–machine collaboration for Industry 5.0. The study
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 12. Distribution of the targeted application domains considered by the summarized
studies using CI techniques.
considered sensor data interoperability, digital twins, virtual training,
intelligent autonomous systems, and machine cognition to be the driving forces for human–machine collaboration. The study suggested that
CI techniques are analogous to threads that connect the aforementioned
driving forces. Similarly, Maddikunta (2021) suggested that CI is one
of the key enabling technologies for the realization of Industry 5.0
to bring sustainability and automation in applications such as smart
additive manufacturing, predictive maintenance, hypercustomization,
and cyber–physical cognitive systems. Furthermore, they also suggested
that the CI plays a key role in realizing cobots, which is a key characteristic of Industry 5.0. Similarly, Javaid and Haleem (Javaid and
Haleem, 2020) emphasized the use of CI for realizing Industry 5.0,
specifically in the manufacturing industry. The study listed seventeen
critical components needed to adopt Industry 5.0 in manufacturing.
Amongst them, cobots, emergent artificial intelligence, multiagent systems and technologies, complex adaptive systems, and virtual reality
heavily rely on the CI. Similarly, numerous enabling components of
holography, 4D printing, 5D printing, smart manufacturing, Internet of
Everything, and Big data are complimentary domains that can exploit
CI for various applications.
Healthcare. The authors in Haleem and Javaid (2019), Javaid et al.
(2020) proposed the use of Industry 5.0 for healthcare in the context
of the current pandemic (COVID-19), as well as in general. These studies explore various paradigms, issues, and challenges associated with
the realization of Industry 5.0 in the healthcare industry to facilitate
physicians, practitioners, and patients. Among all proposed enabling
technologies, both studies focus on the use of CI to make the smarter,
accurate, sustainable, and resilient healthcare system.
Digital Society. The studies Doyle-Kent and Kopacek (2019), Martynov
et al. (2019), and Elim and Zhai (2020) considered the aspect of
digitization and digital society in the industry 5.0 ecosystem. The
former two studies evaluated the technologies that are essential for the
digitization of Industry 5.0 components, while the work in Elim and
Zhai (2020) represented the description of Industry 5.0 as a complex
mathematical problem. The study suggested that giving it a formal
description would not only help the enterprises to transition from the
fourth to the fifth industrial revolution but also help in measuring the
cost Nevertheless, these studies highly emphasize on the use of CI as
an underlying technology to achieve the digitization process.
5.2. Cloud/edge-native computing network infrastructure
The availability of HCI computing infrastructure and communication resources arise at the core and edge of NIBs (c.f. Section 3),
i.e., cloud–fog–edge (CFE) computing network infrastructure can provide the necessary communication and computing environment for
enabling CI techniques for different Industry 5.0 applications. Additionally, it introduces a transformative approach to managing industrial
processes and services, leveraging the inherent strengths of both cloud
and edge computing for optimized performance. More details on CFE
computing are as follows.
5.2.1. CFE computing and three-level CFE-based IoT architecture
Recently in an Annual Automation Fair, Rockwell Automation
(world’s largest company for industrial automation and digital transformation) has also listed CFE architectures as one of the driving forces
for Industry 5.0.2 CFE computing infrastructure plays a critical role in
enabling the CFE architecture. In this regard, numerous critical enablers
for CFE computing are shown in Fig. 11. Most of the technical details
on enhanced computing features and softwarized functions at the
architecture-level have already been covered and discussed holistically
in previously Section 3 &4. For the sake of generality, we can assume
a three-level cloud–fog–edge-based IoT architecture for Industry 5.0.
The three-layered architecture consists of edge devices, edge/fog/mist
servers, and cloud servers.
• The first layer comprises edge devices or IoT sensors, including highend vehicles, smartphones, smartwatches, smart pendants, wearable
devices, and sensor nodes.
• The second layer consists of fog gateway, base stations, cloudlets,
road-side units, routers, edge servers, and proxy servers to form edge–
fog computing layer. This layer provides the essential computation,
communication, and storage capabilities for the nodes in the first
layer.
• The last is the cloud computing layer that consists of cloud server(s)
and datacenter(s), respectively.
In general, the main task of the IoT system is to collect data from
sensors and send the response to the IoT actuators. Integrating the
cloud in an IoT system acts as a liaison for managing the implicit
services and interacting with remote users and third-party services.
Since the cloud-based IoT systems are centralized, they suffer from
long response latency and bottlenecks (Du et al., 2021a). To overcome
the latency and bottlenecks issues, techniques such as mist, fog, and
edge computing were explored in Fraga-Lamas et al. (2021) for the IoT
ecosystem to offload some communication tasks to improve the latency
response of node requests. To improve response time, fog computing
gateways and cloudlets are added between IoT devices and the cloud.
Mist computing devices can perform complex tasks locally as well as
in collaboration with other IoT nodes, therefore, reducing the communication overhead associated with the cloud (Markakis et al., 2017).
Cloudlets use high-end PCs to perform computing-intensive services
and real-time rendering in the local network (Fraga-Lamas et al., 2021).
The fog computing gateways can provide QoS-aware, low-latency, and
physically distributed services (Markakis et al., 2017).
The usage of CFE computing devices in communication architectures helps to achieve greener and more sustainable solutions. To
achieve green communication and sustainability within the Industry 5.0
ecosystem, IoT, CFE computing in cloud-/edge-native network architecture, and AI are the key enabling technologies (Fraga-Lamas et al.,
2021). The amalgamation of IoT and CFE computing for sustainable
communication is referred to as Green IoT (G-IoT) system, which aims
to minimize the energy consumption of the communication system. As
Industry 5.0 is still in its infancy, some studies have been published
to cover a few or a single aspect of CFE architectures in the context
of Industry 5.0. For example, Fraga-Lamas et al. (2021) discussed the
sustainability issue in the context of a smart circular economy and
Industry 5.0. The paper focuses mainly on the reduction of carbon
footprint issues concerning recycling, operating, and manufacturing
2 http://www.koreaherald.com/common/newsprint.php?ud=
20211202000559
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 13. Taxonomy and applications of the reviewed studies that uses the combination of both computational intelligence and cloud–fog–edge network computing resources
concerning three components of Industry 5.0 vision.
processes. The study considers CFE as one of the enabling technologies
to achieve sustainability in the Industry 5.0 ecosystem. Furthermore,
the study considers edge nodes integrated with mist computing for
analyzing energy consumption and its effect on carbon footprint.
Edge Computing as Supportive Technology. Edge computing serves
as a crucial supportive technology for Industry 5.0 by enhancing response time and latency reduction. For example, Maddikunta (2021)
reviewed the enabling technologies for Industry 5.0 and considered
edge computing as one of the supportive technologies. The integration
of edge computing was discussed in the context of latency reduction rather than a sustainable solution. According to their review,
Industry 5.0 needs to be faster in response time to achieve industrial
needs, therefore, edge computing techniques are considered a necessary
building block. Similarly, Ozdemir and Hekim (2018) were one of
the earliest ones to discuss the implications and diversity of Industry
5.0. Although the study discusses mostly the technology policy and
adaptation, it also emphasizes on the use of edge devices to maintain
a symmetry in industrial automation, which is one of the reasons for
transition to Industry 5.0.
Industrial IoT at the Edge. The integration of IIoT and edge computing has proven beneficial for various industrial processes and applications in smart cyber–physical systems. In this regard, Thakur
and Sehgal (2021) proposed IIoT and edge-computing-based architecture that caters to several industrial processes and applications for
heterogeneous smart cyber–physical systems. The processes include
hydraulic, pneumatic, and electrical, while the application comprises
dynamic voltage and frequency scaling, and voltage frequency islands.
The authors emphasized that their edge-computing-based heterogeneous architectures are in compliance with Industry 5.0 standards as
it requires minimal human intervention. Similarly, Du et al. (2021a)
proposed using the industrial edge computing framework for fault
diagnosis in the context of Industry 5.0. The study showed that the
edge computing-based framework reduces the computation and communication bottleneck. Also, it reduces the latency and helps to shift
the industrial process paradigm from centralized to distributed.
5.3. Nexus of CI and CFE computing for industry 5.0 vision
In this subsection, we discuss the synergistic relationship between
CI techniques and CFE computing platform as they collectively contribute to the realization of Industry 5.0 vision. By harnessing the
adaptability and problem-solving capabilities of CI techniques in conjunction with the distributed, scalable, and low-latency characteristics
of CFE provided by the softwarized multi-tenant CI-NGWNs framework
(c.f. Fig. 6), it enable the actualization of the three core objectives of
Industry 5.0: (1) human-centric, (2) sustainability, and (3) resiliency. As
illustrated in Fig. 13, which presents a taxonomy and applications of the
reviewed studies that utilize the combination of CI and CFE resources
concerning the three components of Industry 5.0 vision, we aim to
do an in-depth review of related work and provide valuable insights
into how CI and CFE can work in tandem to drive advancements in
industrial applications and wireless network architectures, thus shaping
the future of the Industry 5.0 era. More details on each aspect are as
follows.
5.3.1. Human-centric aspects
As one of the driving forces for Industry 5.0 is mass customization
and personalization, it attracts human eccentricity into the mix that
prioritizes human interest and needs in the production process. Industry
5.0 is also considered to be a society-centric approach, suggesting that
the technology would adapt to the diversity and needs of workers. For
example, prioritizing the mental and physical well-being of workers
can be performed to preserve the fundamental rights of workers while
focusing on the digital privacy of acquired data. One of the ways of
well-being, relevancy, and human–machine collaboration can be achieved
is by using the combination of CFE computing and CI. The edge devices
can help in acquiring the data from human workers in a ubiquitous
way, while the CI can analyze the data and activate relevant services.
Furthermore, Edge AI (a combination of CI and CFE computing) can
also help to improve human–machine collaboration by understanding
action perception in a pervasive manner. Some studies have highlighted
S. Zeb et al.
the human-centricity issues based on other factors (e.g., reliable maintenance, control systems) in their studies (Right, Fig. 13) while others
focused on a particular scenario and proposed a way to realize it in
current industrial environment as discussed below.
• Emerging Technologies: Bhat and Alqahtani (2021) linked the
vision and key performance indicators of 6G with Industry 5.0 to
achieve hyper personalization, which heavily relies on both edge
computing and CI. According to the study, the use of Internet-ofEverything (IoE), extended reality, 4D imaging, brain–computer
interface (BCI), haptic communication, holography, and telepresence would heavily contribute to personalized systems and
automation. The importance of this study can be taken into account by recent developments in the aforementioned technologies
from Facebook (Meta).3
Some studies (Wang et al., 2021a; Shahzadi et al., 2021; Nayak
and Pargiri, 2020) have hypothesized that EdgeAI which drives 6G
communication systems would contribute significantly to Industry 5.0
in terms of personalization, human-centric services, and real-time
management systems. For instance, Wang et al. (2021a), proposed
an AI-powered 6G layered architecture that uses EdgeAI and
ensures the delivery of intelligent services to Industry 5.0. The
architecture is based on explainable AI (XAI) for understanding
the logic behind activation of differentiated services, and how
they are related to the end-users, which will be helpful for legal
auditors and service providers to customize their products and
equipment, accordingly. Shahzadi et al. (2021) proposed the use
of 6G services in manufacturers based on Industry 5.0 leverage
EdgeAI analytics, and 6G communication systems to increase
collaboration and cognitive communication between humans and
machines to provide personalized user experience and improved
service quality. Similarly, Nayak and Pargiri (2020) discussed
the transition of Industry 4.0 (Digitalization) to Industry 5.0
(Personalization) with Edge AI and 6G communication systems.
The study highlights several issues concerning data heterogeneity,
security, privacy, and mobility in the context of Industry 5.0. The
study highlighted that the convergence of Industry 5.0 and 6G
communication systems would result in an improved Industry 5.0
(Intelligentization) that could be drive a paradigm shift in the
technological industry.
• Enabling Technologies: Maddikunta (2021) highlighted the term
hyper customization essential to Industry 5.0. The study also suggests that CI and data from edge devices, such as, specific content,
service, or product details, are crucial to move towards the hyper
customization process. Furthermore, the study also highlights the
specific preferences of the user that can be incorporated in the
manufacturing process by utilizing user preference data from
edge devices and decision/analysis using CI. It reveals that the
workers are a crucial aspect for achieving personalization, as
the manufacturing process must transition to an agile supply
chain and a process that requires human intervention to customize the product accordingly. Similarly, the study Fraga-Lamas
et al. (2021) undertakes an industrial scenario where humans
and machines work in collaboration. It focuses on the safety of
human workers in a industrial environment by leveraging Edge AI
characteristics. For instance, continuous visual monitoring could
be performed to detect close proximity of robots with humans. If
the proximity condition is violated, an alarm could be generated
and the machine could be shut down in a remote manner for
protecting the human worker.
• Ethical and Value Oriented Industries: Nahavandi (2019) highlighted several aspects and issues concerning human-centricity in
Industry 5.0. For instance, the study highlights that new jobs and
3 https://www.wired.com/story/facebook-haptic-gloves-vr/
positions such as chief robotic office (CRO) could be created in
every industry as human–machine collaboration will have a high
significance in Industry 5.0 ecosystem. Furthermore, the study
also highlights the importance of virtual training to update the
skills of the workforce in a simulated environment or remotely
without affecting the real-time manufacturing process. The study
suggests that the role of Edge AI in developing such kind of
systems would be highly crucial. The study emphasized on machine cognition and sensing technologies to build a cobots-based
systems for improving the quality and accuracy of assistive tasks
in industrial environment.
5.3.2. Resiliency aspects
The importance of resilience was highlighted during the COVID-19
pandemic that challenged the economic resilience concerning industry perspective. In its reports, the European Commission (Maija et al., 2021;
Andrea et al., 2022) highly emphasized the resilience, social, economic,
and production stabilization in Industry 5.0. For example, the industrial
process recovery and manufacturing recovery issue has been touched
upon in an abstract manner in Maddikunta (2021), Fraga-Lamas et al.
(2021) while highlighting the use of CI and edge computing as its
key enablers. In this regard, Fig. 13 consolidates the studies covering
the resiliency in Industry 5.0. To shed light on resiliency aspects,
in Sindhwani et al. (2022), the authors considered the technology
enablers of Industry 5.0 and conducted an extensive evaluation and
ranking of the enablers via the Pythagorean fuzzy Delphi method. From
an energy perspective, the study ElFar et al. (2021) briefly discusses the
algae-based bio-fuel energy conversion and its management perspective
within the resilience vision of Industry 5.0 (sustainable cities and
communities) while considering the UN4SDG goals.
Security and Privacy concerns. Numerous studies in literature had
addressed the security and privacy concerns to enhance resilience
in Industry 5.0. For example, in Khowaja et al. (2021b), the study
highlighted the problem of data and model security when it comes
to NGWNs. The study highlighted several security concerns that are
dealt with when performing data acquisition and data analysis on edge
devices in an industrial environment. The study proposed a Private AIbased framework to address data and model security. Additionally, it
also proposes a data security mechanism for industrial environments
to secure the data flow. While the aforementioned study of Khowaja
et al. (2021b) proposed data and model security but the performance
evaluation is done only on the data modality, whereas the study
in Khowaja et al. (2022) dealt with the model security aspect. Although
the study focuses mainly on IoMT data, the authors suggest that the
model security framework can be applied to the Industry 5.0 environment, as model security is one of the emerging issues and can affect
industries heavily when humans and edge devices are hyperconnected.
The study proposed a proximal gradient based learning network that
could help to cope with model inversion attacks. In another study, the
authors proposed a collect-reduce-aggregate-collect-aggregate-update
(CRACAU) method that uses edge computing and Byzantine machine
learning algorithm to meet industrial automation requirements (Du
et al., 2021a). The study highlighted that fault tolerance is one of the
issues; however, due to the employment of heterogeneous devices, the
security aspect becomes crucial and can affect the overall production.
In this regard, they proposed the CRACAU framework to improve
automation processes and enhance resiliency and privacy through a
Byzantine-tolerant algorithm. Similarly, Rupa et al. (2021) emphasized
on the use of blockchain networks for data protection in medical
services. The study employed remix Ethereum blockchain to protect and
manage medical certificates on edge computing devices.
4 https://www.undp.org/sustainable-development-goals
S. Zeb et al.
5.3.3. Sustainability aspects
Existing studies have focused highly on using Edge AI, i.e., a fusion of
CI and CFE computing to achieve the required level of sustainability. This
integration enables real-time data processing, decision-making, and resource optimization, ultimately contributing to the sustainable and efficient operation of industrial systems. For instance, the study Carayannis
et al. (2021) emphasizes the use of CI for the automation process as
well as to explore the possible combination for the fusion of energy
sources. On the other hand, the study ElFar et al. (2021) utilized CI
techniques in conjunction with the prototype of the electro-optical
systems bioreactor to reduce carbon emissions for manufacturers in
Industry 5.0. Below is a consolidation of some studies focusing mainly
on sustainability using Edge AI in Industry 5.0. We have divided these
studies into a few categories, such as enabling technologies, emerging technologies, robotics, manufacturing, and generalized studies (as
illustrated in Fig. 13).
• Enabling Technologies: Fraga-Lamas et al. (2021) proposed the use of
Edge AI and green IoT systems to address issues of carbon footprint.
The study proposed hypothetical architecture based on Edge AI and
green IoT and performs evaluation in terms of energy efficiency to
show that such a fusion can be helpful in reducing carbon emissions.
The evaluated scenario is considered in the context of Industry 5.0
and it was suggested that the use of CI and edge computing can be
helpful in mitigating sustainability issues. Maddikunta (2021) also
emphasized sustainability in Industry 5.0 and highlighted the use of
CFE computing and the CI technique to reduce the carbon footprints
of manufacturing industries.
• Emerging Technologies: Although some studies have not directly proposed sustainability in Industry 5.0 using Edge AI, they have indirectly addressed the use cases of techniques that use both CI and edge
computing. For instance, Nayak and Pargiri (2020) proposed a hypothetical architecture for 6G communication that is based primarily
on computational intelligence and edge computing techniques. 6G is
essentially known for a larger footprint and sustainable communication, therefore, some of the use cases highlight its correspondence
with Industry 5.0, assuming that 6G could carry on its sustainable
traits to the manufacturing domain as well. Similarly, Shahzadi et al.
(2021) proposed a collaborative cognitive communication system
that uses CI and CFE computing as its core to enable intelligent
services. Furthermore, the main aspect of the system was to leverage
contextual information to activate a particular service. The study
shows that one of the use cases of their proposed system is sustainable
energy for Industry 5.0.
• Robotics: In Demir et al. (2019), Demir et al. specified that the
main purpose of Industry 5.0 is to achieve sustainability and pursue
the bioeconomy through the means of renewable resources, bionics,
robotics, and CI. The study suggests that the CI is the key to enabling
the co-work between humans and robots as well to as develop a
sustainable working ecosystem for Industry 5.0.
• Manufacturing: The authors in Draghici and Ivascu (2022) explored
different aspects of Industry 5.0 for manufacturing systems that include green manufacturing, smart manufacturing, intelligent monitoring, process automation, warehouse ergonomics, product development, and economic impact. Most of the sections in Draghici and
Ivascu (2022) focused on the feasibility and impact of Industry 5.0-
based manufacturing systems on the sustainability. Meanwhile, some
sections also emphasized on using CI and edge computing to move
towards green computation and circular economy that could help in
reducing the carbon emissions
Farsi et al. (2021) evaluated Industry 5.0 indicators for their feasibility in reliable centered maintenance. They suggested that a high
correlation between maintenance and operation phases could achieve
sustainability for high-value equipment from the industry 5.0 perspective. The study uses fuzzy logic and edge equipment to measure the impact of reliable, centered maintenance on sustainability.
Furthermore, the authors also suggest recommendations to improve
sustainability in terms of the identified indicators in the study.
6. Potential enabling services for industry 5.0
This section delves into a comprehensive exploration of potential
enabling services that can be integrated into the multi-tenant softwarized service framework (as discussed in Section 3) to address the
challenges of Industry 5.0 vision.
TSN-enabled Hybrid NIBs Architecture. By leveraging advanced
technologies and integrating multiple service functions, the multitenant softwarized framework (c.f. Section 3) over CFE-enabled architecture aims to provide versatile and unified solutions to meet the
growing demands of Industry 5.0. These enabling services encompass
various areas such as communication, computation, automation, and data
management, working together to achieve an intelligent, interconnected,
and efficient industrial ecosystem that characterizes Industry 5.0. Hence,
the seamless fusion of TSN-enabled hybrid NIBs and multi-tenant
softwarized frameworks has the capacity to offer scalable, agile, and
adaptable customized services, catering to a wide range of industrial
requirements. For instance, Fig. 14 illustrates the TSN-enabled hybrid
NIB infrastructure, which merges the CI-NGWNs infrastructure with the
backhaul hyperconverged industrial network. This integration ensures
the delivery of reliable and secure communication and computation
services to inter/intra-networked machine cells situated on the actual
manufacturing and production floor, specifically within matrix production environments (Sun et al., 2021; ACIA, 2021; Prados-Garzon
et al., 2021). In addition to these advantages, there are several other
notable features that contribute to the overall system performance and
efficiency, which include:
1. Seamless Cloud Integration: It can provide seamless integration between both public cloud (e.g., B5G/6G, third-party vendors) and private cloud (on-premise) in hybrid NIBs. More enterprises are moving
towards the options of both public and private clouds according to
the business ecosystem (Mahmood et al., 2021).
2. Holistic Softwarized Communications: The integration of TSN standards, a promising enabler and convergence technology standardized by 3GPP for FoFs, allow hybrid NIBs to provide deterministic
and/or isochronous softwarized communications for industrial automation and control applications, meeting critical requirements
such as time synchronization, bounded latency, ultra-reliability, and
dedicated resource allocations (ACIA, 2021).
3. Adaptability and Scalability: TSN-enabled hybrid NIBs with multitenant softwarized frameworks can adapt to the evolving requirements of Industry 5.0, offering a scalable architecture that accommodates the growing demands for automation, communication, and
computation in the industrial sector (Ashjaei et al., 2021).
4. Enhanced Security: The integration of TSN-enabled hybrid NIBs with
multi-tenant softwarized frameworks can facilitate advanced security measures, ensuring the protection of critical industrial data
and communication channels against cyber threats and vulnerabilities (Prados-Garzon et al., 2021).
Moreover, there is potential for other essential softwarized services
to be organized and implemented to facilitate critical applications
intelligently. For example, services like CaaS, IaaS, and AI-as-a-Service
can be deployed within the control plane of CI-NGWNs (as depicted
in Fig. 14). These services enable intelligent network management and
control of the entire TSN-enabled NIBs architecture without human intervention, leading to increased efficiency, reduced response times, and
improved decision-making. Hence, the automated management of the
TSN-enabled NIBs allows for real-time adaptation to changing network
conditions, optimizing resource allocation, and ensuring continuous
high-quality communication and computation services for Industry 5.0
applications (Mahmood et al., 2021). In addition to these services, this
section further explores various potential enabling services specifically
tailored for Industry 5.0. The following subsections discuss these services in greater detail, including (1) Navigation/Tracking-as-a-Service
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 14. Softwarized communication of physical twins and deployed digital twins over a zero-touch TSN-enabled hybrid NIBs architecture of CI-NGWNs.
(NTaaS), Section 6.1, (2) Everything-as-a-Service (XaaS), Section 6.2,
(3) Network Function-as-a-Service (NFaaS), Section 6.3, (4) AI-as-aService (AIaaS), Section 6.4, and (5) Connected Digital Twin Services
and Metaverse, Section 6.5. Each subsection highlights the unique
benefits and applications of these services in the context of Industry
5.0 and the multi-tenant softwarized service framework.
6.1. Navigation/Tracking-as-a-Service (NTaaS)
Navigation/Tracking-as-a-Service (NTaaS), in conjunction with
cloud-based infrastructure, provides on-demand localization services to
various industries such as retail, manufacturing, supply chain, transportation, healthcare, and logistics (Research, June 2021; Farahsari
et al., 2022). These services encompass navigational tracking in machine cells, real-time location information maintenance, and factory
asset management for industrial cobots, AGVs, isochronous factory
operations, environmental sensing, and numerous other industrial applications (c.f. Fig. 14, Physical Manufacturing Floor). Furthermore,
the increasing adoption of ICT-based digital infrastructure throughout
the factory ecosystem has led to a surge in the utilization of NTaaS
to enhance productivity, revenue growth, and financial efficiency,
ultimately fulfilling the sustainability objectives of Industry 5.0 vision.
The critical components of NTaaS systems include Kouhini et al.
(2021), Koonen et al. (2021), Conceição et al. (2021), (1) appropriate
localization techniques such as Time-of-Arrival (ToA), Received-SignalStrength-Intensity (RSSI), etc., (2) localization system integration involving optical and wireless systems, and (3) optimization and performance enhancement methods, which consist of tracking algorithms,
Kalman filters, neural networks, and more. These elements work in
tandem to deliver efficient and reliable navigation and tracking services
tailored to the specific needs of Industry 5.0 applications.
Fig. 15. Illustration and classification of various localization systems and enabling
technologies based on the scale (scenarios and applications) and range resolution
(accuracy).
6.1.1. Enabling localization technologies
Various enabling technologies, such as optical/light sensor technology and wireless technologies, are employed for localization and
ranging purposes (Liu et al., 2007).
S. Zeb et al.
• Optical Sensor Technology: LIDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) is an
optical sensor technology that measures and senses the environment
and distance range based on laser reflections (Jiang et al., 2021c).
LIDAR is commonly used in AGV applications (e.g., manufacturing
warehouses, and cell-based matrix productions) due to its compactness, accuracy, and greater reliability compared to wireless-based
localization technologies. However, LIDAR has a high cost, and its
ranging performance can be significantly affected by atmospheric
conditions such as rain, snow, and fog, which limits its use in outdoor
scenarios (Liu et al., 2021a).
• Wireless Localization Technologies: A variety of wireless localization
technologies are available for different scenarios and applications
(c.f. Fig. 15). GPS-based localization is unsuitable for indoor scenarios since GPS signals are severely attenuated due to the rich multipath
scatterer profile of the indoor factory environment (Zeb et al., 2020a).
Alternative indoor positioning solutions based on WiFi, RFID, ZigBee,
LoRaWAN, and Bluetooth have been developed over time and provide
accurate positioning services in indoor factory scenarios (Mahmood
et al., 2022b; Anjum et al., 2020).
1. Ultra-Wideband (UWB) Localization: UWB-based localization, particularly with large bandwidths of 500 MHz and 1 GHz in the
3.1–10.6 GHz band, offers more accurate localization and ranging
performance compared to other wireless technologies (Zeb et al.,
2020a).
2. mmWave/THz-based Localization: Recent developments in the use
of mmWave and THz bands with massive MIMO and beamforming
technologies for high data rate communications in B5G and 6G
have increased the importance of mmWave/THz-based localization to provide integrated communication and ranging (ICAR)
services (Zeb et al., 2022b).
The selection of an appropriate localization technology for user-defined
operations and FoFs applications generally hinges on the required performance metrics, such as accuracy, precision, complexity, scalability,
robustness, and cost. The advancement of optical sensor technologies like LIDAR and wireless localization technologies such as UWB
and mmWave/THz-based solutions offer a wide range of options for
addressing different localization requirements. As Industry 5.0 continues to evolve, integrating and optimizing these enabling localization
technologies can play a critical role in ensuring efficient and reliable
navigation and tracking services for various industrial applications.
6.1.2. Localization and ranging techniques/algorithms
Traditional wireless localization and ranging techniques rely on
the measurements of received signal properties (Obeidat et al., 2021).
These techniques can be categorized as follows:
• RSSI-based localization schemes that utilize received signal strength
information.
• AoA/AoD-based localization schemes that employ received signal angular information, i.e., angle-of-arrival (AoA) and angle-of-departure
(AoD).
• ToA-based localization schemes that use received signal time-of-flight
(ToF) information.
ToA/TDoA-based localization algorithms generally performed better
than the RSSI- and AoA/AoD-based algorithms in indoor factory scenarios since their performance is more affected due to thick-wall penetration losses and human blockages, machines and factory assets,
and angular scatterers structures (Zeb et al., 2022b). Moreover, both
the time and angle-based methods can be complemented by other
measurements, such as carrier-phase (CP) measurements, to achieve
cm-level positioning accuracy (Nikonowicz et al., 2022). However,
multipath structure indeed induces erroneous errors in positioning
accuracy due to the absence of direct-path (DP) in line-of-sight (LOS)
conditions. Hybrid algorithms—combining conventional localization
Fig. 16. Various servitization frameworks that can be adopted in TSN-enabled hybrid
NIBs architecture.
techniques, e.g., RSSI-ToA, performs better than the standalone algorithms (Conceição et al., 2021). Nevertheless, it increases the ranging
and localization algorithm complexity.
For URLLC and mMTC services in mission-critical industrial applications, timing synchronization among the industrial assets (wireless and
wired) at the physical layer is very important (Mahmood et al., 2019).
At the 5G RAN level, 5G gNBs wirelessly disseminate the absolute reference time and physical propagation delay information for adjusting
the timing clocks at the UE level (Zeb et al., 2020b). This increases the
criticality of accurate positioning of industrial assets in a rich multipath
indoor environment. Kalman filters and AI-enhanced localization algorithms are also developed over time to perform joint positioning and
time synchronization and better UE navigational tracking in a realistic
environment (Koivisto et al., 2018). For M2M and D2D communication
scenarios, a cooperative localization approach is adopted in the worst
conditions (e.g., geographic positioning fails) where multiple wirelessly
connected industrial sensors and assets communicate and collaborate to
improve the accuracy of position estimates (Chukhno et al., 2021).
6.2. Everything-as-a-Service (XaaS)
The paradigm of softwarized XaaS (also called anything-as-a-service)
combines traditional on-premises, software-as-a-service (SaaS), platform-as-a-service (PaaS), and infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS) models
based on the required hierarchy of control and management over
computational and communication resources. As illustrated in Fig. 16,
local enterprises and businesses have total control over their resources
in the traditional on-premise model. However, maintaining the local
network infrastructure with the scale and expansion of the enterprise
over time becomes infeasible due to extra resource consumption and
new emerging technologies that can bring enhanced features and value
to the system. Hence, depending upon the enterprise requirements
of control over computational and communication resources in the
network, the cloud/edge services and resources of XaaS paradigm can
S. Zeb et al.
be provisioned by CI-NGWNs of Fig. 16, i.e., IaaS, PaaS and SaaS. The
XaaS paradigms has led to the massive shift in leveraging subscriptionbased business models closely integrated with the ‘‘servitization’’ in
emerging enterprises, i.e., nexus of softwarized products with the ondemand service models in a single package (Andrikopoulos and Lago,
2021; Gill and Buyya, 2018; Cao et al., 2021). Hence depending upon
the type of XaaS servitization model and subscription, the CI-enabled
NGWN can provide a wide range of service advantages, e.g.,
1. Communication and computation services to the numerous humancentric robotic industrial processes
2. Financial savings, and improved productivity for small enterprises
3. High efficiency in terms of hybrid cloud–edge management, i.e., service request automation, cost management and resource optimization, secure identity and compliance during the product lifecycle,
governance in package and deliverance procedure
4. System backup and cybersecurity without exorbitant costs
5. Agile, scalable, and growth-oriented enterprise with integrated
evolving technologies and softwares.
Similarly, the emerging trend in the softwarization of networks
is paving the way for new hybrid XaaS paradigms (Liu et al., 2019;
Cinque et al., 2020), such as integration of disaster recovery and unified communication-as-a-service, zero-touch network monitoring services, container-as-a-service, health-care-as-a-service, etc., This can be
beneficial for the new vision provided for core elements in Industry 5.0.
6.3. Network Function-as-a-Service (NFaaS)
The integration of NFV-SDN technologies and enabling networking
techniques, such as network programmability, virtualization/containerization, and the emerging AI-native SBA paradigm within the TSNenabled hybrid NIB architecture facilitates the use of zero-touch network functionalities. These functionalities include service-aware communications, network management and control, link-aware softwarized
routings, and visual services (Benzaid and Taleb, 2020b; Bunyakitanon
et al., 2020). To achieve these network service functionalities, the
control plane of NGWN utilizes the on-demand XaaS services and
collects the network state information and network flow information
from the underlying core of hybrid NIBs (as illustrated in Fig. 14,
Top). Then, the control plane trains the AI models/algorithms in run
time to intelligently manage the softwarized network (i.e.,multi-tenant
TSN-enabled hybrid NIB architecture) using network control signals.
Additionally, the combined enabling functions of the CI and infrastructure layers (c.f. Fig. 6) form the building blocks for providing
Network Function-as-a-Service (NFaaS) solutions to support the servicebased provisioning architecture in Industry 5.0 scenarios. NFaaS can be
further categorized as follows:
• NFV Infrastructure-as-a-Service (NFVIaaS) offers virtualized network
infrastructure resources, enabling flexible and scalable network services.
• Virtual Network Function-as-a-Service (VNFaaS) provides virtualized
network functions that can be deployed on-demand, improving network agility and adaptability.
• Virtual Network-as-a-Service (VNaaS) delivers complete virtual networks that can be customized to meet specific requirements, enabling
rapid deployment and streamlined management.
These NFaaS examples emphasize the potential of a flexible and intelligent network management approach within the context of CI-NGWNs
and Industry 5.0, catering to the evolving demands of modern industrial
scenarios.
Slice-as-a-Service (SlaaS). In addition to providing essential network
functionality, NFaaS also serves as the foundation for network slicing in the hybrid NIB architecture. This capability allows network
vendors/operators to customize their infrastructure and allocate portions of network resources as slices for various tenants (Bonati et al.,
2020; Sun et al., 2020). These tenants might include hybrid eMBBURLLC-mMTC traffic, e-health services, private enterprise networks,
and connected vehicles, each with distinct requirements and service
levels. As a result, network slicing ushers in new business models, fostering long-term agreements between network operators and a diverse
range of tenants (Mahmood et al., 2021). By providing sustainable
Slice-as-a-Service (SlaaS) solutions, operators can satisfy the diverse,
on-demand requirements and network traffic characteristics inherent
to CI-NGWNs and Industry 5.0 scenarios. Moreover, SlaaS enables
network operators to dynamically allocate resources, optimize network
efficiency, and better manage the diverse needs of different applications, industries, and users in a flexible, cost-effective manner (Jiang
et al., 2021b). This adaptability is crucial for the successful realization
of Industry 5.0, as it ensures the necessary agility and scalability to
accommodate future technological advancements and emerging use
cases.
6.4. AI-as-a-Service (AIaaS)
Earlier, numerous enterprises were not considering adopting AI due
to several factors (Zeb et al., 2021; Casati et al., 2019), (1) the high cost
of massive hardware/machines (infrastructure), (2) a limited supply of
technical programmers and experts to operate the available infrastructure, and (3) a lack of sufficient data. However, the exponential growth
in hybrid cloud services and the integration of AI within TSN-enabled
hybrid NIB infrastructure of Fig. 14 have facilitated the widespread
adoption of AI in Industry 5.0, as they enable access to vast data
collection, storage, and computation services. AI-as-a-Service (AIaaS)
provides remote AI tools, empowering emerging enterprises to implement and scale AI techniques in industrial contexts (Li et al., 2021).
Furthermore, AIaaS delivers various on-demand AI-native functions
(ACF) to various industrial processes (c.f. Section 3), offering numerous
advantages, such as:
• Cost flexibility and reduced investment risk through limiting investment
risks and cost flexibility in CI-NGWNs deployments for Industry 5.0
• Less dependency on data analytics and ML expertise through decreasing
dependency on expertise in data analytics and ML, allowing enterprises to focus on their core business in Industry 5.0 environments
• Enhanced decision-making and adaptability using provided insights
through the information extracted from critical data, resulting in improved transparency and maneuverability for future strategic actions
in digital enterprises to increase productivity in Industry 5.0
To enable a real-time AIaaS architecture within the context of CINGWNs and Industry 5.0, there are generally three essential components, as illustrated in Fig. 17 and explained below:
6.4.1. AI infrastructure
AI infrastructure forms the backbone structure to implement and
train multiple AI-native models and functions (c.f. Section 3.1.2). Data
storage and computations form the critical pillar of AI infrastructure.
Data. AI data from multiple heterogeneous data sources has the utmost importance in the training of AI models/frameworks at the AFL
layer of Fig. 6 since the functional performance of orchestrated AInative services relies on the quality of trained AI models. These data
are fed as input to the AI models, which can come from numerous
types of databases, i.e., (1) relational databases management systems
(RDBMS) that offer data storage functions possessing security, accuracy, integrity, and consistency (Luo et al., 2018), (2) stored raw data
in data lakes (Zhang and Ives, 2020), and (3) unstructured large binary
objects and stored annotation in NoSQL databases (Sicari et al., 2022).
Similarly, real-time data processing and streaming approaches, such as
Apache Spark and Kafka, include a scalable ML library that works in
parallel with databases to store raw data acquired (Zeb et al., 2021).
Computations. Advanced AI techniques, such as Deep RL, and Swarm
AI, needs high computational power to train on data and converge
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 17. I-as-a-Service (AIaaS) components.
towards optimal solutions (Zeb et al., 2022a). As a part of an extension
to the XaaS paradigm (c.f. Fig. 16), numerous cloud, telecom, and
private vendors in AIaaS setup, based on a pay-as-you-go IaaS model,
can offer a combination of GPU-CPU-based VMs and containers to
provide high-power computing power in softwarized networking tasks,
such as zero-touch self-automated AI tasks, perform serial/parallel
processing in batch and streaming analytic, serverless computations.
Together AI computations form a compute-as-a-service (CaaS) in hybrid
NIBs (c.f. Fig. 14), which can easily be availed on-demand and scaled
by enterprises since maintaining and owning a dedicated infrastructure
(on-premises) can be cost expensive for a young factory ecosystem.
Under the Industry 5.0 vision, AIaaS allows the space for investing
capital on other goals of human sustainability (Fraga-Lamas et al.,
2021), e.g., health, human–robot collaboration, and digital skills among
workers.
6.4.2. AI tools
AI tools help the enterprise developers team to develop and access the various on-demand AI services and other associated services
(i.e., IaaS, CaaS, NFVaaS), which are entirely in sync with data and
compute platforms.
Wizards & IDE. The wizards (software) together with the integrated
development environment (IDEs) and browser-based notebooks enable
real-time back/front-end development in a multi-tenant softwarized
environment and provide ease by reducing complexity in training AI
frameworks for an enterprise management team (Salvaris et al., 2018).
Such AI tools facilitate smooth DevOps processes in smart industrial
applications.
Data Engineering Tools. The quality of AI data determines the performance of any trained AI model (Gröger, 2021). Hence, the cleansing and pre-processing of collected raw data are essential for which
data preparation tools have the utmost importance as advanced data
tools help extract-transform-load (ETL) jobs, sophisticated data automation, increase the data value, perform feature engineering, and
fuse specific critical data, i.e., data fusion (Fountaine et al., 2019).
The extracted data are then fed into the ML pipelines for model
training, provided by third-party orchestrated and deployed applications, e.g., Kubeflow. Kubeflow supports wizards, IDEs, and deployable and scalable ML/DL workflows over the softwarized microservice
architecture, easily integrated with the CaaS model (Zeb et al., 2021).
AI Libraries. In the data science environment, the configuration and
setting up of ML and DL libraries, such as TensorFlow, Apache MXNet,
Torch, Keras, and Scikit-learn becoming quite complicated, especially
with the emerging updates and patches over time (Chen and Liu,
2021). Numerous ready-to-go VMs and container templates are set
and configured with necessary ML/DL libraries with GPU-supported AI
computations, which can be provided to train and implement complex
neural networks.
6.4.3. AI service APIs and types
Numerous cloud vendors provide different types of standalone customer service APIs that can be readily deployed since they do not
require dedicated custom-designed AI models as benefits are extracted
from the underlying AI infrastructure. Some of the emerging AI service
types are given below.
Chatbots & Digital Assistance. Chatbots and digital/virtual assistance
in integration with collaborative robots (cobots) can perform tasks
automatically and intelligently in collaboration with human workers (Strazdas et al., 2020). They generally use natural language processing (NLP) and perceptual image processing algorithms on voice, text,
and image data to learn from human beings and imitate the language
and human behavior pattern to provide answers and assistance (Androutsopoulou et al., 2019). Enterprises can leverage and integrate
AI-based bots and assistance services over the whole factory ecosystem to fulfill the vision of Industry 5.0 by bridging the gap between
humans and robots towards the digital revolution (Adam et al., 2021).
Moreover, developers can use these types of AI services in orchestrated
industrial xApps to assist in monitoring and control applications.
Cognitive Computing APIs. Cognitive computing is a technology that
imitates human thought processes, personality, and sentiments, which
help in real-time analysis of the environment and making the bestpossible appropriate decision (Gudivada et al., 2019). The concept of
chatbots and digital assistants is part of cognitive computing products.
Various services use cognitive computing APIs as representational state
transfer (REST) endpoints—a way for services to communicate with
each other (Sud, 2020). Without developing the application code from
scratch, the REST endpoints are accessed by enterprise developers
and integrated into the custom industrial application/services they are
building (Yin et al., 2021). Some examples of cognitive computing APIs
are (1) NLP, (2) speech recognition, (3) image recognition, (4) pattern recognition, (4) knowledge extraction, (5) searching, (5) emotion
detection.
Fully Managed AI Frameworks as a Services. Various ML and AI
frameworks (e.g., Deep DL, neural networks, etc.) can be provided ondemand to enterprise developers that automatically learn and build
on the incoming data and evolve with time (John et al., 2020). For
example, at the CI-enabled NGWNs control plane, various AI models
are provided as disjoint services that take the underlying network’s
state information to learn, build, and select an appropriate control
policy to provide zero-touch network functions. Similarly, enterprise
developers can utilize various intelligent functions using various AI
model templates and drag-and-drop tools to assist with customized and
fully automated AI-based applications.
Custom Computing. With the rise of different industrial applications
and scenarios having diverse communication and computation requirements, various cloud vendors are moving towards providing custom
APIs that serve the purpose of specialized custom services (Al-Aghbari
and Elrabaa, 2019). This strategy results in reducing the overhead of
selecting the suitable algorithm and networked computation resources
that suit the on-demand QoS and QoE performance.
Cost-effective Sustainable and Green Computing Design. Costeffective green computing or environment-friendly computing design
are considered essential for a sustainable future (Tuli et al., 2022). The
environment-friendly design introduces novel solutions to protect the
environment and achieve the goal of net-zero carbon emission. The
aims of green computing are (Stergiou et al., 2018), (1) introduction of
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 18. Illustration of autonomous digital twin with deep learning (DTaaS
Implementation).
management and policies to reduce the energy consumption and carbon
footprint of the enabling ICT technologies to perform computations
while reducing the costs, (2) promote energy-efficient and eco-friendly
networking products (hardware and software), (3) reduce the power
consumption of machines, and (4) use minimum computation and
communication resources in all types of M2M communications. Using
AI models in DevOps for the factory softwarized environment can
provide green-computing-enabled cost-effective services to meet various SDG targets in Industry 5.0 applications using green computing
methodologies (Vinuesa et al., 2020).
Affective Computing. According to the author, Rosalind Picard, of ‘‘Affective computing’’ (Picard, 2000), the computers must be provided the
capability to have recognition, understanding, and tenancy of emotions and
expression, in case we want computers to possess high intelligence and
interact naturally with us. The recent advancements in AI algorithms
(cognitive computing, conversational AI, emotional intelligence) and
robotics (i.e., cobots for zero-defect manufacturing) and convergence
of multidisciplinary fields (e.g., engineering, psychology, education,
cognitive science, sociology) have brought forth the new demanding
vertical applications in human–computer interactions and affective
computing (Wang et al., 2022b). These new vertical applications are
human health, computer-assisted AR-VR-XR technologies, entertainment, factories-of-the-future, etc. Similarly, the integration of affective
mediation technologies and the assistive tools using AR-VR-XR into the
FoFs ecosystem can significantly help assist disabled workers during
their daily experience.
6.5. Connected digital twin services and metaverse
The world has eventually reached a point where almost every
technology is deeply embedded in our lives, leading to the blurriness
among lines between business (factory production, big enterprise) and
personal (factory workforce, employees) (Zeb et al., 2022a).
6.5.1. Digital twin-as-a-Service (DTaaS)
In this regard, the emerging industrial digital twins bridge the
physical and virtual space of factory assets and form a digital replica
of the factory through IIoT and CPS-enabled cobots in nexus with CINGWNs as a hyperconnectivity medium that can optimize and interact
with the physical environment autonomously (Schluse et al., 2018;
Mortlock et al., 2022; Minerva et al., 2020). Similarly, the symbiotic
role of industrial DTs along with cognitive AI-based sensing paradigms,
AR-VR-XR, and blockchain, accelerates towards realizing true digital
transformation that can perform a wide range of on-demand functions
and provide services, e.g., DT services for automated health, predictive
maintenance, virtual insights. Especially, the factory workforce such
as disabled persons with blind or visually impaired disabilities needs
to have the proper care in terms of stress management and trauma
management, which forms an essential condition for the all-inclusive
digital and sustainable future under Industry 5.0 vision.
Moreover, DT technology can be utilized as standalone services,
forming a DT-as-a-service (DTaaS) to provide numerous digital services (Aheleroff et al., 2021), such as visualization and insights, status
monitoring, process optimization, automated control, fault prediction,
remote control maintenance. Many leading software giants provide the
cloud-based APIs for standalone softwarized DT services to spinning out
large-scale digital twin for associated and connected physical assets,
e.g., Microsoft Azure (Azure Digital Twins, (Microsoft, 2022)), Amazon
AWS (AWS IoT TwinMaker, (AWS, 2022)) and Google Cloud (Supply
Chain Twin and Pulse, (Cloud, 2022)), Generally, the created digital
twins are hosted on their respective clouds. However, depending on
the enterprise and customer requirements, private enterprise cloud can
be configured with softwarized DT APIs to ensure the privacy and
security perspective by keeping the DT data confined to local enterprise
premises. Many leading industries are opting for incorporating DT solutions in their factory environment to enable machine failure analysis,
defective product monitoring, virtual simulation and others, e.g., CATIA (Dassault Systèmes) for assembly process monitoring, American
electric power (AEP) using PSS-ODMS from Siemens to transmission
network modeling and analysis, and many others (c.f. Zeb et al. (2022a,
Table. 3)).
Likewise, DT capabilities can enable true mass customization and
personalization in matrix productions to achieve sustainable goals of
zero-defect manufacturing. Note that depending upon the type of DT
application and required capabilities, enablers for DT implementation
inside unified framework focus on various data types, AI models,
service types and enabling technologies (Jiang et al., 2021a). For
example, the two phases, i.e., DT training and implementation, of
autonomous DT creation together with the deep learning method has
been illustrated in Fig. 18 which can be used for the DT application
for inference, control and prediction mechanism. Hence, the utilization
of AIaaS (AI analytics functions, data processing, and others) and
XaaS (computation infrastructure services, softwarized communication
through dedicated networked links) resources provided by CI-NGWNs
NIBs can build the unified DTaaS model atop of physical systems data
and cyber-metaverse data (both historical and real-time).
6.5.2. Metaverse
Recently, the term ‘‘metaverse’’—digital ‘‘big bang’’ of digital-native
cyberspace, has been introduced to promote and streamline the digitizing of each physical reality (Park and Kim, 2022), e.g., devices,
people, processes, buildings, vehicles. The essence of metaverse lies
in the vision of shared digital-native realms of cyberspace, connected
by the gigantic, immersive, unified, persistent, and sustainable Internet at its core, forming the mesh web of virtual worlds or digital
twins which enables true digital transformation (Wang et al., 2022a;
Ning et al., 2021). The true implementations of metaverse may seem
futuristic at the moment, especially concerning its integration in the
intelligent factory ecosystem. However, various emerging and enabling
technologies are poised to catalyze metaverse formation. Hence, the
numerous enabling technologies and the essential roles that they play
in the development of the metaverse are depicted and classified in
left-hand side of Fig. 19.
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 19. Linking the physical world (i.e., factories, devices, workers) to its counterpart digital twins, and shifting to the metaverse: (Left) the metaverse enabling technologies
(i.e., blockchain, CV, distributed networks, pervasive computing, and ubiquitous interfaces); and (Right) the metaverse ecosystem features (i.e., avatars, content creation, data
interoperability, security/privacy, trust, and others).
3R’s of Digital Twins and Metaverse. The interplay of working
roles, relationships, and requirements (3R’s) between the digital twin
and digital-native virtual world determines the actual realization and
implementation of the metaverse vision (Lee et al., 2021). Fig. 19
shows the three stages for metaverse development, i.e., (1) digital
twin implementation of physical space, (2) creation of mesh-networked
digital-native virtual worlds, and (3) dual nexus of both digital twins
and the digital-native virtual world towards the metaverse creation.
As a starting point, the digital twin digitizes and creates the virtual
image of physical environments, providing the capability to project
any physical world changes upon its virtual counterpart. For different environments and physical spaces/processes that encompass surroundings, digital twin technology creates many unique and distinct
digital-native virtual worlds, which initially suffer from, (1) limited
inter-connectivity among themselves and with physical worlds, and
(2) information silos, i.e., communication between unrelated virtual
images is difficult/impossible. Humans, intelligent agents, or devices
can interact and work on different virtual creations as different digital
avatars within the build-up of digital-native images. The emerging
trends towards the adoption of various enabling technologies and increased sharing/connection of many virtual worlds within a massive
digital landscape have led to the convergence of the digitized real
world and created meshed virtual world (Cheng et al., 2022b). With
this convergence, the final stage of the interconnected reality of the
physical and virtual world arises where the hyperconnectivity barrier
has been reduced, and simultaneous co-existence of both physical–
virtual entities entails much like surreality. It leads to the perpetually
connected and 3D cyber-reality as the metaverse. Therefore, with this
in mind, the essential components of the metaverse ecosystem, as well
as the significance of those components, have been outlined in the
right-hand side of Fig. 19.
7. Open standards, frameworks, project demos, groups
To the best of our knowledge, most of the working related to
Industry 5.0 guidelines, standards, and frameworks have been carried
out by European Union (EU).
7.1. EU publications
So far, the EU has published over 4 articles explicitly to advance
the operations and realization of Industry 5.0. The first was the result
from a workshop with Europe’s Technology leaders where a discussion
with funding agencies and technology, and research organizations was
carried out (Muller, 2020). Most of the focus was shifted towards the
identification of enabling technologies that could realized the concept
of Industry 5.0 along with the challenges. The publication considered
individualized human–machine-interaction, bio-inspired technologies
and smart materials, digital twins, emerging communication techniques
for data transmission, data storage and analysis, AI, and technologies that can achieve autonomy, renewability, and energy efficiency.
Furthermore, the challenges such as scalability, economic dimension,
interdisciplinarity, governmental and political dimension, and social
dimensions were also undertaken, accordingly.
The second publication in the series complemented Industry 4.0
paradigm and provided a pathway for its transition to fifth industrial iteration and first industrial evolution. Apparently, the focus was to make
a transition from shareholder to stakeholder value for making industries
resilient, human-centric, and sustainable (Maija et al., 2021). The
publication discussed in detail the benefits for industries and workers to
adapt Industry 5.0 guidelines. For instance, the guidelines for skilling,
re-skilling, up-skilling, inclusive and safe work environment, and role
of industry worker were defined. Similarly, to motivate industries,
some benefits including increased resilience, resource efficiency for
competitiveness and sustainability, and retaining as well as attracting
talents were elaborated.
The most recent one considers the perspective of industries as well
as recent challenges including the pandemic, biodiversity collapse, and
climate change. The guidelines in this recent report mainly focus on the
transformation rather than transition (Andrea et al., 2022). The report
consists of three segments, i.e., vision, governance, and action. The
vision for Industry 5.0 was discussed to achieve Europe’s 2030 goals
by focusing on responsible ecosystem and value chain, regenerative
circular economy design, adaptive and self-sustaining industries, decentralization to achieve sustainability and resilience, respecting planetary
boundaries by limiting digitalization, and regulatory frameworks. The
governance focuses on horizontal and vertical coherence with international standards and government levels, corporate governance 5.0, and
S. Zeb et al.
Table 6
Ongoing projects that are closely related to Industry 5.0.
Project title Project sub-title Project length Project website
BEYOND 4.0 Technological Inequality — Understanding the relation between
recent technological innovations and social inequalities
Jan 2019–Dec 2022 https://beyond4-0.eu/
EMPOWER European platforM to PromOte Wellbeing and hEalth in the
woRkplace
Jan 2020–Dec 2023 https://empower-project.eu/
HR-Recycler Hybrid Human–Robot RECYcling plant for electriCal and eLEctRonic
equipment
Dec 2018–Nov 2022 https://www.hr-recycler.eu/
H-WORK Multilevel Interventions to Promote Mental Health in SMEs and
Public Workplaces
Jan 2020–Jun 2023 https://h-work.eu/
KYKLOS 4.0 An Advanced Circular and Agile Manufacturing Ecosystem based on
rapid reconfigurable manufacturing process and individualized
consumer preferences
Jan 2020–Dec 2023 https://kyklos40project.eu/
MindBot Mental Health promotion of cobot workers in Industry 4.0 Jan 2020–Dec 2022 http://www.mindbot.eu/
ROSSINI Robot enhanced Sensing, Intelligence and actuation to improve job
quality in manufacturing
Oct 2018–Mar 2022 https://www.rossini-project.com/
SPIRE-SAIS Skills Alliance for Industrial Symbiosis (SAIS) — A cross-sectoral
Blueprint for a Sustainable Process Industry (SPIRE)
Jan 2020–Dec 2023 https://www.spire2030.eu/sais
role of government for Industry 5.0 transformation. Lastly, an action
plan was proposed for what needs to be achieved and who will strive
to achieve it. The main course of action plan was to define the role of
industries, economic orientation and approaches to improve industry
performance, new design for supply chains, value chains, and business
models, digital transformation while respecting planetary boundaries,
policy making, and approaches and capabilities to innovation and
research. Together these EU publications define most of the standards
and provide guidelines for the transition and transformation of Industry
5.0.
7.2. EU infographs on industry 5.0
Next, the EU published an infographic that can be characterized
by going beyond profit based services and goods production. The infographic emphasized more on societal contribution from the perspective
of industries and suggests to place the health and well-being of the
worker first (for Research and Innovation, 2021). The key elements of
the infographic was to highlight the digitilization concerning Industry
4.0, its transition towards Industry 5.0, highlighting its importance
in terms of reduced cost (resource efficiency), empowered workers
(remaining in control), competitive industry (attracting talent), adaptation (training for evolving skills), competitive edge (new markets),
and safety and well-being of the workers. It also highlights three
core funding strategies through which Industry 5.0 can be uplifted,
i.e. Beyond 4.0, HuMan Manufacturing, and KYKLOS 4.0. Beyond 4.0
mainly concerns the technological impact on welfare, business models,
and jobs. HuMan Manufacturing focuses on the automation, factory
workers, and their collaboration for increased safety, satisfaction, performance, quality, harmony, and productivity, respectively. KYKLOS
4.0 concerns about the circular manufacturing by focusing on AI-based
methods, augmented reality, life-cycle assessment, product life-cycle
management, and cyber–physical systems.
7.3. Projects and demos
Below, we highlight some of the completed and ongoing projects
that either explicitly worked/working on Industry 5.0 or closely related
to Industry 5.0 guidelines.
7.3.1. Incobotics
One of the recent projects that was completed concerning Industry 5.0 was ‘‘Incobotics’’ (2019–2021) that was funded by Erasmus+
programme. The funding united four EU partners, i.e. Spain, Greece,
Italy, and France for the development of didactic materials that could
be used to design collaborative robots (CoBots). The main objective
of this project were to raise awareness concerning the evolution of
Industry, enhance pool of skilled workers, and increase collaboration
between educational centers and Industry. The modules designed by
Incobotics are currently undergoing tests from the pilot groups in Italy,
France, and Spain. Once the final products are reviewed and tested,
they will be made freely available for downloading from their project
website (incobots, June 2021).
7.3.2. Industry 5.0: Inclusive design methodologies for digital manufacturing
A project ‘‘Industry 5.0: Inclusive design methodologies for digital manufacturing’’ (Sep 2021–Feb 2025) is aligned with the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council’s (EPSRC) project ‘‘Made Smarter
Innovation: Center for People Led-Digitalization’’ is a collaboration between Nottingham, Bath, and Loughborough universities to overcome
the digital skills gap, lack of senior management, employee resistance,
and support for human capability in Industry 5.0. The project aims
to achieve a sustainable digital technology adoption while keeping an
emphasis on the well-being of a worker at the center of production
process.5
7.3.3. AI REGIO
In Europe, digital innovation hubs (DIHs) are being created to
support small medium enterprises (SMEs) for their smooth transition
to Industry 5.0. The project ‘‘AI REGIO’’ was funded by EU to address
business, technology, and policy barriers in making AI-focused DIHs
a reality. In this regard, the project ‘‘Regions and DIH alliance for
AI-driven digital transformation of European Manufacturing SMEs’’ was
funded (October 2020–September 2023) by Horizon 2020 (H2020)
with the co-ordination of Politecnico Di Milano, Italy. This project
aims to address three major concerns that kind of create hurdles in
implementing digital pathways between AI-driven DIHs and Manufacturing SMEs, i.e. European Union vs Regional Gap (policy driven
concern), Innovation collaboration platform vs Digital Manufacturing
Gap (Technology driven concern), and Industry 4.0 vs Industry 5.0 gap
(Business driven concern).6
The gap between EU and regional SMEs is about the scale at which
AI innovations are applied and integrated. Furthermore, this gap also
addresses the issue of accessibility to global marketplaces. A policy
needs to be devised to provide equal opportunities to the SMEs in
order to scale up the innovation as well as competition. Currently,
5 https://www.lboro.ac.uk/study/postgraduate/research-degrees/phdopportunities/industry-5-inclusive-design/ 6 https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/952003
S. Zeb et al.
the DIHs and digital manufacturing platforms (DMPs) fuel the digital
European industry and digital single market concerning SMEs. So far,
the related innovation, communities, and initiatives are working in an
independent way; therefore, platform-related challenges and technology adoption measures need to be incorporated not only to increase
the Socio-Business impact but also to bridge the gap between DIH
and DMP. The business driven gap mainly concerns ICT innovation
for manufacturing SMEs (I4MS) phase III platforms that pilot Industry
4.0 implementations through IoT, Motion and Analytics Data. It has
been suggested in this project that I4MS does not properly addresses
the synergy between AI revolution (autonomous systems) and Industry
5.0 (human-centricity) that creates the gap between Industry 4.0 and
Industry 5.0. This projects aims to solve the aforementioned three
concerns, accordingly.
7.3.4. Collaborative consortium on industry 5.0
A kind of collaborative consortium has recently been developed
among the EU universities to collectively work on Industry 5.0, specifically with the focus on combining human craftsmanship and creativity
with productivity, speed, and consistency of Robots.7 The consortium
includes Henry Royce Institute, The Thomas Ashton Institute, The
Tyndall Centre, The Manchester Institute of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, The Global Development Institute, The Manchester
Urban Institute, and The Productivity Institute. The main idea of this
consortium is to integrate human strength and AI for enabling mass personalization, improving products and productivity, deep understanding
of customers, value-added creativity, and problem solving. Some of the
other projects that are indirectly related to Industry 5.0 are mentioned
in Table 6.
8. Lessons learned, research challenges and future directions
In this section, we delve into the practical application of the Industry 5.0 vision and the emerging CI-NGWNs. In this regard, Section 8.1
covers the lessons learned, providing various important observations
and recommendations. Meanwhile, Section 8.2 discusses the future
research directions, highlighting open challenges and problems that
require further exploration
8.1. Lessons learned, observations, and key insights
In this subsection, we thoroughly examine the lessons we have
learned and the key insights we have gained from our survey. This
analysis will take us through each subsection, providing a clear and
detailed account of our findings.
8.1.1. New constructs of industry 5.0 and CI-NGWNs
The key practical lessons and recommendations derived from the
systematic review of Sections 1 and 2 can be summarized as follows:
1. Defining Industry 5.0 Vision: A key lesson learned from the ongoing discourse around Industry 5.0 is that a concrete and universallyadopted definition has yet to be established, as the concept continues
to evolve (c.f. 1.1). Notable trends suggest that the vision for Industry
5.0 will focus on human–robot collaboration in the workplace. This
perspective is also supported by EU commission documents that emphasize human-centric, sustainable, and resilient goals for Industry 5.0. The
review reveals that integrating critical technological enablers and digital systems to create people-centric and people-empowered ecosystems
is vital for achieving mass personalization and mass customizationbased scalable manufacturing and production. These insights highlight
the importance of fostering a more comprehensive understanding of
Industry 5.0 and its potential impact on various ecosystems, such as
7 https://www.digitalfutures.manchester.ac.uk/themes/societalchallenges/industry-5-0/
digital society, government, political scenarios, as well as economic and
environmental perspectives.
2. CI-NGWNs: The integration of computational intelligence as an
enabling technology with NGWNs (6G), forming CI-NGWNs, has garnered considerable interest from academia and researchers (c.f. Section 1). Our systematic review reveals several valuable insights related
to how CI-NGWNs can support the realization of the Industry 5.0 vision,
including:
• Leveraging inherent capabilities of computational intelligence technologies (e.g., swarm AI, evolutionary AI, DRL algorithms, fuzzy
systems) to provide diverse, intelligent functions throughout the core
network.
• Utilizing softwarized service provisioning and orchestration to enable
flexible and efficient resource management.
• Implementing AI-native service architecture to ensure diverse QoS
and QoE requirements are met across various industry applications.
• Adopting zero-touch network management and operations to enhance
network efficiency and reduce operational costs.
• Promoting private, intelligent, and open RAN architecture to enable
seamless connectivity and interoperability.
These lessons learned emphasize the potential of CI-NGWNs in facilitating the widespread implementation of the Industry 5.0 vision and offer
guidance for future developments in this area.
3. Key Insights from Industry 5.0 Technological Enablers: Industry
5.0 vision seeks to bridge the physical and cyber world, allowing
seamless integration between human intelligence and cobots working
together (c.f. Fig. 4). In this regard, our review in Section 2.1 identified
six key technological enablers and systems that play critical roles in
facilitating this integration and meeting the necessary requirements.
Key insights in each category are as follows,
• Human–machine interaction technologies and tools, such as CCPSS systems, AMR, augmented reality for visualization insights, and cognitive services, enable effective communication and cooperation in
manufacturing and production processes.
• Virtual simulation and digital twins technologies, e.g., IIoT-based CPS
systems, industrial process optimization, holograms, and digital 3D
modeling, enable the creation of virtual simulations and digital twins
for improved decision-making and process optimization.
• AI-native smart systems, such as secure, safe, energy-efficient, and
person-centric AI solutions, contribute to the overall intelligence and
adaptability of Industry 5.0 ecosystems.
• Data infrastructure, sharing, and analytics, e.g., edge computing and
micro clouds, communication interfaces, scalability and autonomy
over multi-level IT infrastructure, facilitate efficient data processing
and decision-making.
• Bio-inspired technologies, such as embedded bio-sensor networks and
body area networks enable the integration of biological systems
within Industry 5.0 environments.
• Energy-efficiency paradigms, i.e., integration of renewable energy sources and energy-autonomous systems based on energy harvesting
mechanisms, promote sustainable and eco-friendly operations.
These key insights offer a valuable perspective on the essential technological enablers that can contribute to the successful realization of
each element of Industry 5.0 vision and emphasize the need for a
diverse range of technologies to support human-centric and intelligent
industrial ecosystems.
4. Network-in-Box Architecture: The implementation of NIB architecture in CI-NGWNs facilitates an interoperable paradigm of intelligent
network softwarization, which is essential for meeting the critical
technical requirements of Industry 5.0 vision. From our review in
Section 2.2, we have gained the following insights:
S. Zeb et al.
• Design objectives for CI-NGWNs: The NIB architecture supports AInative SBA embedded throughout the entire network, providing reconfigurable integrated solutions and network resources tailored for
Industry 5.0.
• Functional features and softwarized service support: NIBs in CI-NGWNs
offer numerous functional features using SDN/NFV-enabled networked HCIs, enhancing the overall performance and flexibility of the
system.
• CI-native features distribution: The enhanced functions and features
(as illustrated in Fig. 5) are spread across the functional layers
of CI-NGWNs, including the intelligent application layer, intelligent
network control layer, analytic layer, and sensing layer.
• Catering to the Industry 5.0 technological enablers: We have learned that
the NIB architecture, combined with CI technology in NGWNs, can
efficiently address the critical requirements of the six technological
enablers discussed previously.
These lessons learned emphasize the importance of NIB architecture
in achieving the Industry 5.0 vision, highlighting its role in providing
adaptable, efficient, and intelligent network solutions.
8.1.2. Open and intelligent 6G network architectures
The following key lessons and recommendations are derived from
the systematic review of Section 4.
1. Self-organizing networks (SON) and O-RAN Integration: From
our analysis in Section 4, we have learned that combining selforganizing networks (SON) and O-RAN architectures can yield significant benefits for network management and performance. Key insights
include:
• Shared infrastructure: By utilizing the same infrastructure nodes and
monitoring databases, SON and O-RAN can streamline operations,
reduce redundancy, and promote efficient resource allocation.
• Cross-operations: The integration enables seamless collaboration and
coordination between SON and O-RAN, which can lead to improved
network performance and adaptability in response to changing conditions and requirements.
• Synergistic data analytics: The combination of Management Data Analytic Service (MDAS) with Non-RT RIC enhances network analytics
and decision-making capabilities, allowing for more intelligent and
proactive network management.
• Enhanced orchestration: The O-RAN orchestrator offers valuable services to support SON operations, including resource management,
coordination, and optimization, which can lead to better overall
network performance and user experience.
• Interoperability and standardization: The integration of SON and ORAN promotes the adoption of standardized interfaces and protocols,
fostering an open and flexible ecosystem that encourages innovation
and collaboration among vendors and stakeholders.
Furthermore, it is essential to support and promote the integration
of SON and O-RAN within the industry, as O-RAN communities are
already working on implementing such integration to unlock the full
potential of these synergies and maximize the long-term benefits.
2. MEC, Network Slicing, and O-RAN Integration: The integration
of MEC, Network Slicing (NS), and O-RAN offers valuable insights and
benefits for improving the performance of CI-NGWNs in the context of
Industry 5.0. Key lessons learned from this integration include:
• Enhanced Synergy: Combining MEC hosts with near-RT RIC hosts
in the O-RAN architecture allows for better integration of thirdparty vendors, enabling improved synergy and collaboration among
different network entities.
• Integrated Data Management: By incorporating MEC databases with ORAN databases, critical information such as UE locations, deployed
cell performance, and radio network information service (RNIS) can
be effectively managed and utilized to optimize network performance.
• Flexible Orchestration: Utilizing a mobile edge application orchestrator
(MEAO) allows for the orchestration of diverse xApps, including
SON functions and softwarized enterprise services. This flexibility
enables the efficient management of resources and services across the
integrated network.
• Slice-Specific XApps: With NS support, xApps can be included in NR
slice templates, which can be easily orchestrated by O-RAN and/or
MEC orchestrators on separate and secure partitions of O-RAN and/or
MEC databases. This ensures that network resources are allocated and
managed effectively based on the specific requirements of each slice.
• Improved Network Performance: The integration of MEC, NS, and ORAN leads to enhanced network performance in CI-NGWNs by leveraging the combined strengths of these technologies, ultimately supporting the diverse and demanding requirements of Industry 5.0
applications.
By learning from these insights, the development and implementation of CI-NGWNs can be better informed and optimized to meet the
evolving needs of Industry 5.0.
8.1.3. Computational intelligence for industry 5.0
In this subsection, we outline the key practical lessons and recommendations after in detail review of Section 5.
1. Diverse use of Computational Intelligence: With such diversified characteristics of computational intelligence techniques, issues
concerning resiliency, sustainability, and personalization ought to be
handled in Industry 5.0. For instance, variants of some supervised learning and federated learning can be widely used for developing resilient
systems in Industry 5.0. Similarly, methods that are less computationally complex, such as self-supervised learning or soft computing
techniques, can be used to achieve sustainability, while many intelligence techniques can be employed for achieving mass personalization
as well.
2. CI for Industrial Security: The critical success of Industry 5.0
depends on the usage of CFE network infrastructure models and computational intelligence. However, these CFE models are quite vulnerable
to security and privacy attacks. Studies presented in Section 5 are
now moving toward the implementation or adoption of computational
intelligence techniques that not only provide smart services but also
preserve the privacy and security of users’ data specifically in the
Industry 5.0 setting. In this regard, the use of Federated learning and
soft computing techniques has proven to be quite effective so far. As
human workforce and industries have a high stake in Industry 5.0, it is
important to deal with such security and privacy threats in an efficient
and effective manner.
3. CI for Emerging Applications: Since the advent of Industry 5.0,
the use cases of CI usage have been mostly limited to manufacturing,
supply chain, and human–robot collaboration. In recent years and
with the popularity of the fifth industrial revolution and its vision,
more applications are emerging, and the use cases are increasing. For
instance, researchers have proposed using computational intelligence
paradigms in industrial automation, zero-defect matrix productions,
data privacy and security, Society 5.0, and alternative energy sources.
Similarly, researchers have also started exploring the use cases of
Industry 5.0 in healthcare, emotional intelligence, and education. It is
assumed that the increase in digital assets and technologies will pave
the way for more applications that can be associated with Industry 5.0
to improve value creation and circular economy. The report from the
European Commission on Industry 5.0 proposes new business models
for companies for re-hashing and redesigning from a digital transition
point of view, i.e., increased digital hyperconnectivity between workers
and intelligent cobots, mental well-being. The report also suggests
that workers should be involved in each of the transition phases,
accordingly. A digital education action plan has also been initiated by
the commission to further expedite the training systems and accessible
education that is fit for human–machine collaboration. However, such
S. Zeb et al.
realization of human-eccentricity requires substantial reforms concerning health-protection systems, taxation systems, welfare, and social
policies. In this regard, companies and industries are responsible to
help the workers to remain protected and relevant during the transition
phase.
8.1.4. Softwarized service provisioning and potential applications
In this subsection, we outline the lessons learned, research challenges, and research directions after a detailed review of Sections 3 and
6.
From the systematic review, we derive the following key lessons and
recommendations:
1. Multi-tenant Softwarized Service Provisioning: The survey study
presented in Section 3 has revealed the importance of softwarized components, i.e., embedded throughout the hardware- and cyber- world,
in realizing the essential features of Industry 5.0, such as zero-defect
manufacturing and mass-customization in matrix productions. Based on
this understanding, we have gained the following insights:
• Softwarized CI-NGWNs-based framework: A multi-tenant softwarized
service provisioning framework, as illustrated in Fig. 6, provides
essential and on-demand softwarized services orchestration across
various functional layers to support Industry 5.0 applications.
• Functional layers: The framework comprises multiple layers, including
the service layer, computational intelligence layer, and infrastructure
layer, working together to enable a wide range of critical softwarized
services. The role of each functional layer are, (1) the service layer
providing multi-tenancy support and service mesh-enabled composite service blocks to orchestrate customized services for deployed
multi-tenant industrial apps, (2) the computational intelligence layer
providing critical functions of AFL and DTFL, and (3) infrastructure
layer providing functions of HCI resources, industrial access networks, autonomy and control over computing infrastructure and DTI
functions.
• Role of softwarized components: Functions like ACF and DT play an
integral role in enabling fully self-automated control in production
manufacturing and assembly, contributing to the goals of Industry
5.0.
• Best practices and principles: The CI-enabled softwarized industrial
framework incorporates best practices and principles of SOA, microservices, and serverless architecture (c.f. Fig. 7 and Table 4) to
support diverse services such as XaaS, AIaaS, DTaaS, and NFaaS
(discussed in Section 6).
These lessons learned highlight the significance of multi-tenant softwarized service provisioning in achieving the Industry 5.0 vision and
demonstrate the value of leveraging softwarized components and CINGWNs to create adaptable, efficient, and intelligent industrial ecosystems.
2. Softwarized Communication and Industrial DevOps: The detailed
survey analysis in Section 6 has shown the potential of multi-tenant service provision architecture in orchestrating and deploying softwarized
XaaS paradigms over NIBs architecture in CI-NGWNs. We have gained
the following insights:
• Hybrid NIBs architecture: Fig. 14 illustrates a hybrid NIBs architecture
that provides enhanced services for critical applications. Key aspects
include,
1. Intelligent control planes using CaaS, IaaS, AIaaS, SlaaS, and NFVaaS for zero-touch networks.
2. Customized DTaaS to enable and connect machine/cell physical
twins and virtual twins over various placement choices, such as
cloud, edge, and private databases.
3. Hybrid cloud architectures to connect public and private clouds.
4. Time-sensitive networking to meet stringent time synchronization
requirements for cobots operations in cells.
5. NTaaS to provide critical localization and ranging services at
manufacturing floors.
• Bi-directional softwarized communication: The hybrid NIBs architecture enables real-time, reliable, and control communication between
physical twins and DT throughout the entire CI-NGWNs.
• Enhanced DevOps strategies and Softwarized architecture choices: The
integration of XaaS principles creates an infrastructure for implementing advanced DevOps strategies that meet enterprise requirements.
In this regard, Table 4 demonstrates that various softwarized architectures offer unique functional elements and significance in adopting suitable architectures for necessary DevOps, enabling strategies
in cloud-native environments, and incurring specific drawbacks or
limitations depending on the chosen frameworks.
The insights gained from these lessons emphasize the importance of
softwarized communication and industrial DevOps in realizing the
Industry 5.0 vision, showcasing how multi-tenant service provision
architecture and hybrid NIBs architecture can support a wide range of
critical applications and facilitate effective DevOps strategies.
4. Industrial Assets Positioning and Localization Services: Our exploration in Section 6.1 has underscored the importance of localization
and ranging techniques with centimeter-level accuracy, particularly
for mission-critical and location-aware Industry 5.0 applications like
AMRs, AGVs, and product and human tracking. From this section, we
have learned the following:
• Localization techniques: Various localization techniques have been reported in the literature, such as ToA, RSSI, AOA/AoD, cooperative localization, and hybrid algorithms (e.g., RSSI-ToA-based frameworks).
These techniques help meet the diverse requirements of Industry 5.0
applications.
• Various enabling technologies: Numerous light-based and wirelessbased technologies are available for localization purposes, including
LIDAR, GPS, WiFi, RFID, ZigBee, LoRaWAN, UWB, and mmWave/
THz. Each technology offers different performance metric-based solutions, such as cost, scalability, accuracy-precision, and implementation complexity.
• Performance-based classification: Fig. 15 illustrates the classification of
various enabling technologies and techniques based on their rangeresolution performance in different scenarios. It demonstrates that
mmWave-THz-based localization is ideal for providing ICAR services
over CI-NGWNs infrastructure.
The understanding derived from these lessons underlines the significance of understanding and selecting appropriate localization services
and technologies for Industry 5.0 applications. Achieving accurate
and reliable localization is vital for enabling efficient human–machine
interactions and supporting mission-critical processes in the evolving
industrial landscape.
4. Industrial DT and Metaverse: Our survey analysis in Section 6.5.1
has shed light on the significance of DTaaS as a building block for
various Industry 5.0 applications, such as predictive maintenance and
zero-defect manufacturing. We have learned the following:
• Bridging virtual and physical spaces: DTaaS connects the virtual image of industrial assets with their physical counterparts, effectively
enhancing hyperconnectivity and integrating human intelligence through augmented reality technologies.
• CI-NGWNs architecture for DT implementation: The CI-NGWNs architecture can utilize DT implementation at the core network, enabling dynamic reconfiguration of communication and computation resources.
The autonomous DT creation for any required application can be
realized through DTaaS infrastructure, as illustrated in Fig. 18.
• The emergence of metaverse: The mesh-connection and super-convergence of DT virtual images in cyberspace can pave the way for the
metaverse, a futuristic technology that digitizes every physical reality,
including humans, industrial assets, devices, vehicles, and buildings,
forming a web of interconnected virtual worlds.
S. Zeb et al.
• Metaverse enabling technology and features: In Section 6.5.2, we have
identified three process steps from initial DT implementation to the final metaverse realization. Fig. 19 illustrates the necessary metaverseenabling technology and the resultant features of the metaverse
ecosystem.
The knowledge acquired through these lessons highlights the importance of industrial DT and the metaverse in achieving the Industry 5.0
vision. The evolution and transition towards metaverse-based digitized
industrial concepts will facilitate the successful fusion of physical and
virtual spaces and help realize the true potential of human–machine
interaction.
8.2. Research challenges and potential future directions
In this subsection, based on the lessons learned and key insights
discussed in the previous subsection, we now extend our discussion
to focus on the key research challenges that arise from the nexus of
both new constructs of Industry 5.0 and softwarized CI-NGWNs for a
truly interconnected and intelligent industrial future. This intersection
presents a unique set of complexities and opportunities that demand
further exploration, resulting into potential paths for future research
and development in this rapidly evolving field.
8.2.1. Task/Goal-based Network-in-Box Architecture
The concept of ‘‘Task/Goal-based Network-in-Box Architecture’’ represents a paradigm shift in the design and implementation of network
systems (Leivadeas and Falkner, 2023). This innovative approach prioritizes tasks or goals, tailoring the network architecture to meet specific
requirements. Based on the critical systematic review and potential uses
of NIB architecture in CI-NGWNs for supporting Industry 5.0 vision,
we identified and categorized the relevant goal-based potential critical
challenges into four groups as,
1. Hyper-intelligent network challenges: These challenges focus on incorporating CI into the core network and improving network intelligence for Industry 5.0 (Duan et al., 2020; Zeb et al., 2023). For
example, some of the hyper-intelligent network challenges tailored
to Industry 5.0 needs include,
• development of standardized and high-quality network datasets
with distinguished features (Alkhateeb et al., 2023), e.g., channel
modeling, RAN technologies, device densities, suitable for new
Industry 5.0 applications,
• increased visibility of the underlying network operations since
almost all proposed AI solutions are implemented in a black-box
manner, which may hinder trust and adoption in meeting the goals
of the resilient Industry 5.0 (Chatterjee and NS, 2023),
• addressing hybrid public–private network challenges in providing
centralized and distributed AI-based solutions at the network edge
to meet the diverse needs of Industry 5.0 use cases (Faisal et al.,
2023).
2. Coordinated and harmonized network challenges: These challenges
can be found in the co-existence of hyper-intelligent core network
with other standalone and backward compatible heterogeneous networks (Roy et al., 2021), e.g., 5G/B5G, terrestrial and non-terrestrial
networks, visible light communication. The coordinated and harmonized networks challenges and future directions for Industry 5.0
include,
• holistic approach towards designing frameworks that initiate the
convergence between cyber, physical, biological, and social space
through wirelessly connected biosensors and CCPSS systems using
nano-networks, cell-free MIMO, autonomous D2D, above 100 GHz
THz and optical spectrum, tailored to Industry 5.0 requirements
(Saadati and Barenji, 2022),
• global-level optimization schemes in coordinated networks to utilize available communication and computation resources at different networks efficiently and collaboratively, catering to the
dynamic needs of Industry 5.0 (Shi et al., 2023),
• establishing trustworthy cooperation and protocols between the
coordinated networks for seamless allocation and operation of
AI-native functions in Industry 5.0 scenarios (Shi et al., 2023).
3. Sustainable network challenges arises in achieving the goals of green
computing-enabled energy-efficient networks (Asad Ullah et al.,
2023; Tataria et al., 2021; Jameel et al., 2020b). Potential challenges
in sustainable network goals for Industry 5.0 include (1) energyaware routing and resource management algorithms for ultra-dense
wireless sensors networks in industrial environments, (2) globallevel network sustainability through integrating renewable energy
systems and varying levels of processing power in a computing
infrastructure to support Industry 5.0 applications, and (3) adaptive
data modulation schemes to accommodate the diverse requirements
of Industry 5.0 use cases.
4. Cyber security challenges in the wake of AI inclusion for Industry 5.0
requires the design of novel AI-based security architecture to provide
basic security and privacy requirements in future networks (Chergui
et al., 2021), e.g., confidentiality, location privacy, integrity, identity privacy, availability, and authenticity, data privacy, and other
meta-data privacy, while considering the specific security concerns
and requirements of Industry 5.0 applications.
Addressing these research challenges and investigating future research
directions in accordance with diverse FoFs requirements can ensure
the successful integration of NIB architecture within CI-NGWNs, leading to the development of the dynamic, hyper-connected, and seamless merger of heterogeneous industrial ecosystems that epitomize the
principles of Industry 5.0 vision.
8.2.2. Optimal CI-NGWNs and functional KPIs
The potential of CI-NGWNs to enable Industry 5.0 vision depends
on overcoming several challenges that stem from the need to deliver
an optimal mobile experience, ensure extreme network coverage, and
provide mission-critical low-latency communications (Ji et al., 2021).
Key areas of focus for future research in the context of Industry 5.0
include:
1. Network Coverage and Infrastructure: Investigating the deployment of
UAV-Satellite-based terrestrial networks to enhance network coverage and provide communication and computation services in areas
with limited infrastructure (Ranjha et al., 2021).
2. Accurate Positioning and Synchronization: Developing methods for
precise ranging and positioning over the NGWNs infrastructure at
mmWave bands to achieve nanosecond-level accuracy in ultra-dense
wireless networks for timing synchronization procedures (Zeb et al.,
2022b).
3. Integration of Computing and Storage Services: Enabling seamless integration between cloud/edge networks and wireless access networks
through the use of critical enabling technologies such as mmWaveTHz bands, mMIMO technologies, advanced antenna arrays, NOMA,
and RIS metasurfaces (Ji et al., 2021; Rubab et al., 2022; Basharat
et al., 2021).
4. Human-Centric Performance Metrics: Introducing new performance
metrics like Quality-of-Physical-Experience (QoPE) that combine the
required QoS and QoE with human-centric perception and intelligence in new vertical applications, such as AR-VR-XR in augmented
reality technologies and holographic communication (Hu et al.,
2020).
By tackling these research challenges and exploring future research
directions, the effective integration of CI-NGWNs in Industry 5.0 can be
achieved, ultimately fostering the development of adaptive, intelligent,
and human-centric industrial ecosystems.
S. Zeb et al.
8.2.3. Network intelligence-enhanced open 6G optimization
This subsection reflects upon the imminent challenges in 6G architecture design and optimization, inclusive of network intelligence (NI).
The integration of SON and O-RAN offers numerous benefits, but there
are still several research challenges and future directions to explore in
the context of Industry 5.0 (Bonati et al., 2021a). Some of these include:
1. E2E NI-native Architecture with Customized AI: The NextG architecture will require hosting/integrating NI instances explicitly at NF
levels and their coordination across the entire network (i.e., macrodomains). Meanwhile, AI models should facilitate network automation and management, and thereby adapt (w.r.t. latency guarantees
training and computational complexity) for NI-specific design aspects. Besides, the other two main challenges are Banchs et al.
(2021): AI feedback loop between the control and data planes not
allowing the NI to monitor the system in a continuous manner, and
the lack of interaction among NI instances at different levels in the
current architectural trends.
2. Network Functionality and Optimization: One key challenge is determining the optimal functionalities and parameters for each network
function within the integrated SON and O-RAN architecture (Polese
et al., 2022). This requires developing novel techniques to dynamically optimize and manage network functions, ensuring their
alignment with the requirements of Industry 5.0 applications.
3. Distribution of Network Intelligence: As Industry 5.0 demands more
intelligent and adaptive networks, it is essential to investigate the
best strategies for distributing network intelligence in an integrated
SON and O-RAN environment (Banchs et al., 2021). This includes exploring new approaches to edge computing and AI-driven decisionmaking, ensuring timely and efficient network adaptation in response to changing industrial demands.
4. Data-Driven Control Loop Solutions: The integration of SON and ORAN relies heavily on data-driven control loop solutions. Future
research should focus on optimizing these solutions to ensure high
performance, low latency, and efficient resource utilization (Abedin et al., 2021). This could involve investigating advanced machine learning and AI techniques to improve the responsiveness and
accuracy of control loop mechanisms.
5. RAN Data Access Overhead: Another challenge lies in minimizing the
RAN data access overhead for network intelligence (NI) in an integrated SON and O-RAN architecture. Future research should explore
methods for reducing data access overhead while maintaining the required level of network intelligence, potentially leveraging advanced
data compression, caching, and pre-processing techniques (O-RAN
Alliance, 2023).
8.2.4. Unified multi-tenant softwarized service management
Unified service management in multi-tenant cloud/edge-native NIBs
environments is essential for Industry 5.0, as it demands novel mechanisms and performance guarantees (e.g., agility and flexibility) for
designing, instantiating, deploying, running, and optimizing composite
services within softwarized HCI (Bonati et al., 2020; Duan et al., 2020).
In this context, the research directions tailored for Industry 5.0 are:
1. Holistic management of heterogeneous functions: Integrating network,
compute, and storage resources from different tech-domains into
a single infrastructure layer, and managing them holistically to
accommodate the diverse service requirements of Industry 5.0 applications (Mollahasani et al., 2021).
2. Function/Service design and system scalability for Industry 5.0: Addressing the challenges of increased communication overheads among
finer-grained service components in microservices architecture and
ensuring system scalability to meet the evolving needs of industrial
ecosystems (Faisal et al., 2023).
3. Modeling unified abstraction for resources and services: Designing and
standardizing a set of models for unified abstractions of resources
and services across domains to overcome heterogeneity challenges
in the convergence of Industry 5.0 enabling technologies embedded
throughout NIBs of CI-NGWNs (Duan et al., 2020).
4. Leveraging new technologies for customized service management: Utilizing advanced tools and platforms such as KubeEdge, Kubernetes,
and OpenShift for automating software management, scaling, and
deployment in the context of Industry 5.0 (Zeb et al., 2021). These
open-source container-based orchestration systems can facilitate the
creation and management of flexible, responsive, and efficient industrial ecosystems.
8.2.5. On-demand industrial DevOps and deployments
The complexity in NIBs architecture of CI-NGWNs is expected to
grow unprecedentedly due to the wide range of softwarized heterogeneous service requirements of diverse Industry 5.0 applications, such as
cloud/edge functions often demanding lower latency, higher throughput, and greater reliability than the VNFs (Chowdhury et al., 2019; Bunyakitanon et al., 2020). Therefore, addressing the following research
challenges tailored to Industry 5.0 becomes critical:
1. Heterogeneity, scalability, flexibility, and performance: Developing comprehensive solutions to tackle these aspects in softwarized NIBs
architecture of CI-NGWNs for Industry 5.0, considering the resource
limitations, inefficient deployed service application execution, communication protocols for data sharing, control signaling, and resource allocations between heterogeneous coordinated networks,
as well as service mobility and connectivity (Benzaid and Taleb,
2020b).
2. Context-aware and adaptive solutions: Developing context-aware and
adaptive solutions that can dynamically adjust to changing industrial requirements and conditions, such as fluctuations in demand,
network congestion, or equipment failures (Minerva et al., 2020).
This will enhance the resilience and flexibility of softwarized communication and industrial DevOps in Industry 5.0 environments.
3. DevOps strategies for third-party service types: Adapting the DevOps
strategies for enterprise softwarized solutions to accommodate different third-party service types. For instance, in third-party AIaaS solutions, the enterprise management and service development teams
lack access to the underlying AI process(only the inputs and outputs
of the system), which changes the design guidelines of enabling
software-oriented service architecture principles, affecting privacy
and increasing security risks (Al-Doghman et al., 2022).
8.2.6. Dynamic industrial environments and localization
In the rapidly evolving landscape of industry, understanding the
dynamic nature of industrial environments and their impact on localization (assets tracking) is crucial. This subsection delves into the complexities of these environments, exploring how changes in technology,
market demands, and regulatory frameworks influence localization
strategies, and what type of research challenges and future trends in
indoor positioning systems can significantly contribute to the NTaaS
paradigm:
1. Exploring AI-based localization for dynamic environments: In Industry 5.0, localization systems must adapt to rapidly changing and
dynamic environments. Traditional localization algorithms might
struggle to provide accurate positioning in such scenarios. AI-based
localization techniques, such as deep learning and reinforcement
learning, can potentially offer better adaptability and accuracy
(3GPP TR 23.700-91, 2020). However, these techniques face challenges such as the need for continuous learning and adaptation,
model interpretability, and real-time processing. Addressing these
challenges requires the development of efficient AI-based localization models that can learn and adapt to dynamic environments,
provide real-time decision-making, and offer better interpretability
for effective monitoring and control.
S. Zeb et al.
2. Overcoming harsh multipath conditions: Indoor positioning and ranging coverage in mmWave and THz bands suffer from harsh multipath
conditions due to severe NLOS blockages, such as human and machine blockages, and scattering conditions, such as metallic surfaces
and energy absorption. Additionally, ToA-based ranging and positioning accuracy degrades in indoor factory (InF) environments (Zeb
et al., 2020b). To address these challenges, RIS metasurfaces combined with mMIMO technology operating at mmWave-THz bands
can be employed to enhance ICAR services (Zeb et al., 2022b).
This approach can aid localization algorithms through intelligent
reconfiguration of InF environments, extend ranging coverage by
avoiding NLOS areas, and reconfigure mMIMO channel gain matrix to increase sparsity for the provision of high-capacity wireless
connectivity.
3. Exploiting Smart Beamforming: Integrating smart beamforming at
mmWave bands can significantly improve the performance of RSSIbased localization algorithms (Sun et al., 2022). The development
of innovative asset tracking solutions in Matrix Productions leveraging this enabling technology will contribute to better positioning
accuracy in dynamic industrial environments within FoFs use cases.
4. Developing Hybrid localization algorithms: New hybrid localization
algorithms are needed for ultra-dense wireless sensors that offer low
complexity, high precision, and high accuracy. Fusion-based localization algorithms that infer estimated locations using the fusion of
location information obtained from multiple wireless technologies
(WiFi, Bluetooth, LoRaWAN) employing different wireless localization techniques (time, angle, and power) can be explored (Farahsari
et al., 2022; AlZubi et al., 2021). One promising direction is multisensor fusion-based algorithms for AGVs and AMR applications,
which combine wireless technologies with other technologies such
as optical (LIDAR), inertial, or ultrasonic (Xu et al., 2021b).
8.2.7. Networks of industrial digital twin and metaverse
As Industry 5.0 emphasizes the synergy between humans and machines, industrial DT and metaverse technologies are crucial for enabling seamless interaction and collaboration (Ji et al., 2021). Addressing the following research challenges is vital for their successful
integration:
1. Real-time communication and resource allocation: Developing solutions
to enable real-time communication and dynamic resource allocation
in industrial DT and metaverse applications, focusing on network
latency, bandwidth, throughput, and jitter. It can ensure a smooth
user experience and reliable operation in Industry 5.0 settings (Lee
et al., 2021).
2. Adaptive solutions for mobile industrial assets: Designing adaptive
solutions for managing complexities arising from mobile industrial
assets, such as AMRs and AGVs, in remote operations through
industrial DT. This involves maintaining seamless communication
and control over CI-NGWNs even with changing network conditions
and topologies (Wang et al., 2022c).
3. Holistic security and privacy frameworks: Establishing holistic security
and privacy frameworks to protect sensitive information and data in
multi-vendor environments, considering the involvement of multiple
vendors, third parties, and service providers in CI-NGWNs offering
MEC services. It can address the risks of adversaries accessing,
stealing, or tampering with edge DTs (Cheng et al., 2022b).
4. AI-driven security and privacy solutions: Developing AI-driven security
and privacy solutions for industrial DT and metaverse-based applications with a focus on automating security and privacy preferences
and protecting virtual copies of physical assets from adversarial
attacks (Zeb et al., 2022a).
8.2.8. Evolving industry 5.0 vision and new dimensions
As we delve into the realm of Industry 5.0, it is clear that there
are numerous research challenges and potential future directions to
explore. This section will discuss the complexities and uncertainties
that researchers face in this dynamic field.
1. Unraveling the Challenges and Future Directions of Industry
5.0. While the development of the Industry 5.0 vision has recently
gained momentum, attracting attention from both researchers and
industries, several challenges remain to be addressed. These include
the realization of comprehensive human–robot collaboration and the
recognition of other significant human-society influences on Industry
5.0 vision that are difficult to quantify and measure (Research and
Innovation, Jan 2022). Key areas of focus for future research could
include,
1. Social challenges, e.g., digitally skilled labor shortages, unemployment, corporate social responsibilities, customer value, and sociocentricity in technical training to learn complex ecosystem of technologies
2. Government and political challenges, e.g., compliances with countryspecific laws, adaptation with the speed of technological changes,
protectionism, and digital system-oriented innovation policies
3. Economic challenges, e.g., new business models, circular economy,
productivity challenges, significant investments, and public–private
partnerships
4. Interdisciplinary approach towards nexus of various research disciplines to address interrelations and cause–effects relations in system complexities, e.g., engineering and technology, mathematics,
computer sciences, life and humanities, environmental and social
sciences.
By addressing these challenges and fostering future research directions,
the development of Industry 5.0 vision can progress towards a more
comprehensive, adaptable, and impactful model for industries and
societies alike.
2. Challenges and Opportunities in Industry 5.0 Technological
Enablers. The core idea of Industry 5.0 technological enablers for is
to introduce and integrate the lost human-centric dimension (i.e., human values and needs) of the previous revolution (incobots, June
2021). In this regard, numerous complex systems and technologies are
categorized and discussed in this paper. However, technologies and
systems assisting the human–machine collaboration to generate products and services, e.g., human–machine interfaces, integrating humanintelligence using person-centric AI, AMRs, and cognitive CPSS systems,
are still in the early development stage with critical research challenges
still to be addressed (Fraga-Lamas et al., 2021). Similarly, the requirements and challenges differ with the Industry 5.0 scenario. For example, to ensure trust in the cloud/edge-based matrix production system,
the critical private data exchange between humans (designer, collaborators) and machines at the factory physical floor for monitoring and
control needs to be secured and not visible to any third-party system
for potential cyber-attacks. Therefore, a blockchain and digital ledger
transaction (DLT) in conjunction with federated learning-enabled computing can provide a robust framework for Industry 5.0 (Rupa et al.,
2021), enabling faster cognitive edge data processing for stringent time
applications and secrecy-preserving data transaction.
Simultaneously, the ethical and societal issues with implementing
AI needs to be addressed for seamless human–cobots collaboration
since it negatively impacts due to the notion of job displacements and
humans replacements with AI-based cobots systems, while Industry 5.0
is poised to create more employment opportunities (Muller, 2020).
Moreover, data privacy in cobots needs to be preserved while doing the
cognitive analysis in predictive maintenance applications with human
collaboration. One of the essential requirements is regulatory compliance
in the co-production environment, where several issues relevant to
technical policies and proper regulations may arise (Xu et al., 2021a),
e.g., (1) distinguishing between cognitive cobots and several other
S. Zeb et al.
machines, i.e., drones, AMRs and (2) the inculcation use of critical AI
in nexus with other complex digital systems, and (3) better predictions
and control over more sophisticated mass-personalization goals.
3. Exploring CI with Technological Frontiers. The use of computational intelligence has been exploited for a variety of industrial
and manufacturing use cases, but only a limited amount of attention
has been diverted toward education, healthcare, and next-generation
network domains. Each of the aforementioned domain has its own
corresponding challenges, for instance, personalization and resilience
is the key to academic industry, acquisition of sensor data and its
privacy are essential for health care data, and affordability is one of
the keystones for Industry 5.0’s integration with next generation networks (Khowaja et al., 2021b,a). Therefore, there is a need to must push
the envelope to explore or extend the research in the aforementioned
areas.
4. Mental Well-being and Affective Computing with CI: Industry
5.0 is said to be an association with human workers while making
the production process automated and user-friendly. However, existing
studies have shown that working with machines causes emotional
imbalance and stress (Khowaja et al., 2020; Setiawan et al., 2020).
Considering that the fifth industrial revolution has a dedicated workplan with machines, the monitoring of mental well-being and stress
levels is an issue. Computational intelligence techniques can play a
vital role in monitoring and diagnosing stress or depressing state in a
timely manner for avoiding health issues. Currently, to the best of our
knowledge, this issue has not been explored in the context of Industry
5.0.
5. Seamless Integration of CI with Digital Spaces: With the current
rise in digital technologies such as virtual medicine, digital twins,
and Metaverse, the concept of Industry 5.0 can be leveraged to make
manufacturing and industrial spaces more sustainable, resilient, and
human-centric.8 However, in order to provide seamless integration,
computational intelligence is of vital importance. For instance, digital
avatars can be designed and simulated via digital twins to see how
productive and sustainable the designed industry would be with certain
characteristics. This will allow investors to not only foresee and plan
budget issues but also to identify the potential opportunities that could
be exploited to generate more revenue.9
9. Conclusion
In this state-of-the-art survey paper, we have undertaken a comprehensive exploration of the Industry 5.0 vision and its associated goals
and requirements for emerging applications. Our primary focus has
been on the integration of Computational Intelligence (CI) with softwarized NGWNs utilizing the Network-in-Box (NIB) architecture as a
critical technological enabler. This integration addresses the fundamental communication, computation, and enabling service requirements of
Industry 5.0.
Throughout the paper, we have defined the Industry 5.0 vision,
emphasizing its core principles of human-centricity, sustainability, and
resilience. We have meticulously examined the technological enablers
and specific requirements necessary for the full realization of Industry
5.0. Furthermore, we have delineated the design objectives and the vision of softwarized CI-native NGWNs, with the NIB architecture serving
as a pivotal element in satisfying the critical demands of Industry 5.0.
We have identified and discussed the pivotal features and technologies
inherent to CI-native NGWNs, including multi-tenant softwarized service provisioning for self-organizing industrial automation networks,
open RAN architecture, computational intelligence algorithms and their
8 https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/industry-metaverse-next-big-thingribeiro-cybersecurity-msc-mba?trk=articles-directory 9 https://medium.com/@theo/digital-twins-iot-and-the-metaverseb4efbfc01112
integrations, and hybrid TSN-enabled NIB architecture that enables
numerous potential enabling on-demand services types, e.g., NTaaS,
AIaaS, DTaaS and NFaaS. Additionally, we have explored the range
of technologies and services within the NIB architecture that CI-native
NGWNs can leverage to manifest the Industry 5.0 vision.
To conclude, we have summarized our research findings, offering
valuable lessons learned and insights, recommendations, and future
research directions for Industry 5.0. Both Industry 5.0 and softwarized
CI-NGWNs are relatively new constructs and cover a broad spectrum
of new concepts and features. For example, the Industry 5.0 vision
is not just the next logical technological evolution to previous Industry 4.0. Besides the technological dimension, the expected output
features/goals in Industry 5.0 include the ecology, economic, policy,
and sociological dimensions, with each dimension encompassing a
wide range of roles and requirements. A key challenge lies in fostering increased human–machine interactions to provide human-centric
solutions within Industry 5.0. This necessitates scalable and flexible
CI technology within the softwarized NIB architecture of NGWNs to
facilitate hybrid and unified service deployments. We anticipate that CInative NGWNs will address the identified research challenges encompassing O-RAN orchestration and deployments, user and machine experiences, hyper-intelligent network deployment, network coordination,
sustainability, and cybersecurity.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Knowledge Foundation Sweden
(KKS) under Research Profile NIIT.
References
3GPP TR 23.700-91, 2020. Study on enablers for network automation for the 5G System
(5GS); Phase 2 (Release 17).
5G Americas (White Paper), 2022. 5G edge automation and intelligence. Available:
https://www.5gamericas.org/5g-edge-automation-and- intelligence/. (Accessed 18
April 2022).
Abdel-Basset, M., Abdle-Fatah, L., Sangaiah, A.K., 2019. An improved Lévy based whale
optimization algorithm for bandwidth-efficient virtual machine placement in cloud
computing environment. Cluster Comput. 22 (4), 8319–8334.
Abedin, S.F., Mahmood, A., Tran, N.H., Han, Z., Gidlund, M., 2021. Elastic O-RAN
slicing for industrial monitoring and control: A distributed matching game and
deep reinforcement learning approach.
Abid, S.A., et al., 2021. Biosensors as a future diagnostic approach for COVID-19. Life
Sci. 273, 119117.
Aceto, G., Persico, V., Pescapé, A., 2019. A survey on information and communication
technologies for industry 4.0: State-of-the-art, taxonomies, perspectives, and challenges. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 21 (4), 3467–3501. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
COMST.2019.2938259.
ACIA, G., 2021. Integration of 5G with Time-Sensitive Networking for Industrial
Communications. URL . (Accessed 28 March 2022).
Adam, M., Wessel, M., Benlian, A., 2021. AI-based chatbots in customer service and
their effects on user compliance. Electron. Markets 31 (2), 427–445.
Aheleroff, S., Xu, X., Zhong, R.Y., Lu, Y., 2021. Digital twin as a service (DTaas) in
industry 4.0: An architecture reference model. Adv. Eng. Inform. 47, 101225.
Ahmad, R.W., et al., 2015. A survey on virtual machine migration and server
consolidation frameworks for cloud data centers. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 52, 11–25.
Ahmed, I., Jeon, G., Piccialli, F., 2022. From artificial intelligence to explainable
artificial intelligence in industry 4.0: A survey on what, how, and where. IEEE
Trans. Ind. Inform. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2022.3146552.
Al-Aghbari, A.A., Elrabaa, M.E., 2019. Cloud-based FPGA custom computing machines
for streaming applications. IEEE Access 7, 38009–38019.
S. Zeb et al.
Al-Doghman, F., et al., 2022. AI-enabled secure microservices in edge computing:
Opportunities and challenges. IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TSC.2022.3155447.
Alam, I., Sharif, K., et al., 2020. A survey of network virtualization techniques for
internet of things using SDN and NFV. ACM Comput. Surv. 53 (2), 1–40.
Alkhateeb, A., et al., 2023. DeepSense 6G: A large-scale real-world multi-modal sensing
and communication dataset. IEEE Commun. Mag. 61 (9), 122–128. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/MCOM.006.2200730.
Alwis, C.D., et al., 2021. Survey on 6G frontiers: Trends, applications, requirements,
technologies and future research. IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc. 2, 836–886. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/OJCOMS.2021.3071496.
AlZubi, A.A., Alarifi, A., et al., 2021. Multi-sensor information fusion for internet of
things assisted automated guided vehicles in smart city. Sustainable Cities Soc. 64,
102539.
Andrea, R., Sylvia, S.S., et al., 2022. A transformative vision for europe : governing
systemic transformations towards a sustainable industry. Publ. Office Eur. Union
1–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.2777/17322.
Andrikopoulos, V., Lago, P., 2021. Software sustainability in the age of everything as
a service. In: Next-Gen Digital Services. a Retrospective and Roadmap for Service
Computing of the Future. Springer, pp. 35–47.
Androutsopoulou, A., et al., 2019. Transforming the communication between citizens
and government through AI-guided chatbots. Gov. Inf. Q. 36 (2), 358–367.
Anjum, M., et al., 2020. RSSI fingerprinting-based localization using machine learning
in LoRa networks. IEEE Internet Things Mag. 3 (4), 53–59. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/IOTM.0001.2000019.
Asad Ullah, S., et al., 2023. Opportunistic CR-NOMA transmissions for zero-energy
devices: A DRL-driven optimization strategy. IEEE Wirel. Commun. Lett. 12 (5),
893–897. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LWC.2023.3247962.
Ashjaei, M., Bello, L.L., et al., 2021. Time-sensitive networking in automotive embedded
systems: State of the art and research opportunities. J. Syst. Archit. 117, 102137.
Atmojo, U.D., et al., 2020. A service-oriented programming approach for dynamic
distributed manufacturing systems. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 16 (1), 151–160.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2019.2919153.
AWS, A., 2022. AWS IoT twinmaker: Optimize operations by easily creating digital
twins of real-world systems. URL www.aws.amazon.com/iot-twinmaker/. (Accessed
5 October 2022).
Bachiega, N.G., Souza, P.S., Bruschi, S.M., De Souza, S.D.R., 2018. Container-based
performance evaluation: A survey and challenges. In: 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Cloud Engineering. (IC2E), IEEE, pp. 398–403.
Banchs, A., Fiore, M., Garcia-Saavedra, A., Gramaglia, M., 2021. Network intelligence
in 6G: Challenges and opportunities. In: Proceedings of the 16th ACM Workshop
on Mobility in the Evolving Internet Architecture. Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, ISBN: 9781450387064, pp. 7–12. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1145/3477091.3482761.
Barakabitze, A.A., Ahmad, A., Mijumbi, R., Hines, A., 2020. 5G network slicing using
SDN and NFV: A survey of taxonomy, architectures and future challenges. Comput.
Netw. 167, 106984.
Basharat, S., Hassan, S.A., Pervaiz, H., Mahmood, A., Ding, Z., Gidlund, M., 2021.
Reconfigurable intelligent surfaces: Potentials, applications, and challenges for 6G
wireless networks. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 28 (6), 184–191. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/MWC.011.2100016.
Benzaid, C., Taleb, T., 2020a. AI-driven zero touch network and service management in
5G and beyond: Challenges and research directions. IEEE Netw. 34 (2), 186–194.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.001.1900252.
Benzaid, C., Taleb, T., 2020b. AI-driven zero touch network and service management in
5G and beyond: Challenges and research directions. IEEE Netw. 34 (2), 186–194.
Bhat, J.R., Alqahtani, S.A., 2021. 6G ecosystem: Current status and future perspective.
IEEE Access 9, 43134–43167. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3054833.
Bonati, L., D’Oro, S., Bertizzolo, L., Demirors, E., Guan, Z., Basagni, S., Melodia, T.,
2020. CellOS: Zero-touch softwarized open cellular networks. Comput. Netw. 180,
107380.
Bonati, L., D’Oro, S., Polese, M., Basagni, S., Melodia, T., 2021a. Intelligence and
learning in O-RAN for data-driven NextG cellular networks. IEEE Commun. Mag.
59 (10), 21–27. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.101.2001120.
Bonati, L., et al., 2021b. Intelligence and learning in O-RAN for data-driven nextg
cellular journal=IEEE Commun. Mag., networks. 59 (10), 21–27. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/MCOM.101.2001120.
Borghesi, A., Burrello, A., Bartolini, A., 2021. ExaMon-x: A predictive maintenance
framework for automatic monitoring in industrial IoT systems. IEEE Internet Things
J. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.3125885.
Bunyakitanon, M., et al., 2020. End-to-end performance-based autonomous VNF placement with adopted reinforcement learning. IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw. 6
(2), 534–547.
Calvo, R.A., D’Mello, S., 2010. Affect detection: An interdisciplinary review of models,
methods, and their applications. IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 1 (1), 18–37. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/T-AFFC.2010.1.
Cao, K., Wei, T., et al., 2021. Exploring reliable edge-cloud computing for service
latency optimization in sustainable cyber-physical systems. Softw. - Pract. Exp. 51
(11), 2225–2237.
Cao, Y., et al., 2020. Multi-tenant provisioning for quantum key distribution networks
with heuristics and reinforcement learning: A comparative study. IEEE Trans. Netw.
Serv. Manag. 17 (2), 946–957. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2020.2964003.
Carayannis, E.G., Draper, J., Bhaneja, B., 2021. Towards fusion energy in the industry
5.0 and society 5.0 context: Call for a global commission for urgent action on fusion
energy. J. Knowl. Econ. 12 (4), 1891–1904. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13132-
020-00695-5.
Casati, F., et al., 2019. Operating enterprise AI as a service. In: International Conference
on Service-Oriented Computing. Springer, pp. 331–344.
Chatterjee, S., NS, S., 2023. Impact of AI regulation and governance on online personal
data sharing: from sociolegal, technology and policy perspective. J. Sci. Technol.
Policy Manag. 14 (1), 157–180.
Chaudhary, R., et al., 2018. Optimized big data management across multi-cloud data
centers: Software-defined-network-based analysis. IEEE Commun. Mag. 56 (2),
118–126. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2018.1700211.
Chen, C.-H., Liu, C.-T., 2021. A 3.5-tier container-based edge computing architecture.
Comput. Electr. Eng. 93, 107227.
Chen, K.-C., et al., 2020. Wireless networked multirobot systems in smart factories.
Proc. IEEE 109 (4), 468–494.
Cheng, L., Guo, R., et al., 2022a. Evaluation methods and measures for causal
learning algorithms. IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAI.
2022.3150264.
Cheng, R., Wu, N., Chen, S., Han, B., 2022b. Will metaverse be nextg internet? Vision,
hype, and reality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12894.
Chergui, H., et al., 2021. Zero-touch AI-driven distributed management for energyefficient 6G massive network slicing. IEEE Netw. 35 (6), 43–49. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/MNET.111.2100322.
Chin, S.T.S., 2021. Influence of emotional intelligence on the workforce for industry 5.0.
J. Hum. Resour. Manag.s Res. 2021, 1–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.5171/2021.882278.
Choi, J.-y., Cho, M., Kim, J.-S., 2021. Employing vertical elasticity for efficient big data
processing in container-based cloud environments. Appl. Sci. 11 (13), 6200.
Chowdhury, S.R., et al., 2019. Re-architecting NFV ecosystem with microservices: State
of the art and research challenges. IEEE Netw. 33 (3), 168–176. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/MNET.2019.1800082.
Chukhno, N., et al., 2021. D2D-based cooperative positioning paradigm for future
wireless systems: A survey. IEEE Sens. J..
Cicconetti, C., et al., 2020. Toward distributed computing environments with serverless
solutions in edge systems. IEEE Commun. Mag. 58 (3), 40–46. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/MCOM.001.1900498.
Cinque, E., et al., 2020. V2X communication technologies and service requirements for
connected and autonomous driving. In: International Conference of Electrical and
Electronic Technologies for Automotive. (AEIT AUTOMOTIVE), IEEE, pp. 1–6.
Cloud, G., 2022. Supply Chain twin and pulse: Build a digital representation of
your supply chain with end-to-end visibility, alert-driven event management,
analytics, and collaboration across teams. URL www.cloud.google.com/solutions/
supply-chain-twin#section-2. (Accessed 5 October 2022).
Conceição, F., et al., 2021. Empowering industry 4.0 and autonomous drone scouting
use cases through 5G-DIVE solution. In: Joint European Conference on Networks
and Communications & 6G Summit. (EuCNC/6G Summit), IEEE, pp. 265–270.
Cornet, B., et al., 2022. An overview of Wireless Body Area networks for mobile
health applications. IEEE Netw. 36 (1), 76–82. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.
103.2000761.
Dash, S.P., et al., 2022. A cybertwin-based 6G cooperative IoE communication network:
Secrecy outage analysis. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.
2021.3140125.
Demir, K.A., Döven, G., Sezen, B., 2019. Industry 5.0 and human-robot co-working.
Procedia Comput. Sci. 158, 688–695. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2019.09.
104.
Di Francesco, P., et al., 2019. Architecting with microservices: A systematic mapping
study. J. Syst. Softw. 150, 77–97.
Ding, C., Zhou, A., et al., 2020. A cloud-edge collaboration framework for cognitive service. IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TCC.2020.
2997008.
Doyle-Kent, M., Kopacek, P., 2019. Industry 5.0: Is the manufacturing industry on the
cusp of a new revolution? In: International Conference on Production Research. pp.
432–441. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-31343-2_38.
Draghici, A., Ivascu, L., 2022. Sustainability and Innovation in Manufacturing
Enterprises. Springer Singapore.
Du, A., Shen, Y., Zhang, Q., Tseng, L., Aloqaily, M., 2021a. CRACAU: Byzantine machine
learning meets industrial edge computing in industry 5.0. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform.
Early Access, 1–11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3097072.
Du, A., Shen, Y., et al., 2021b. CRACAU: Byzantine machine learning meets industrial
edge computing in industry 5.0. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TII.2021.3097072.
Duan, L., Da Xu, L., 2021. Data analytics in industry 4.0: A survey. Inf. Syst. Front.
1–17.
Duan, Q., Wang, S., Ansari, N., 2020. Convergence of networking and cloud/edge
computing: Status, challenges, and opportunities. IEEE Netw. 34 (6), 148–155.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.011.2000089.
S. Zeb et al.
Duan, Q., et al., 2012. A survey on service-oriented network virtualization toward
convergence of networking and cloud computing. IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag.
9 (4), 373–392. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2012.113012.120310.
van Eck, N.J., et al., 2006. Visualizing the computational intelligence field [application
notes]. IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag. 1 (4), 6–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCI.2006.
329702.
Eclipse fog05, 2022. The end-to-end compute, storage and networking virtualisation
solution. Available: https://fog05.io/. (Accessed 18 April 2022).
Eismann, S., et al., 2021. The state of serverless applications: Collection, characterization, and community consensus. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TSE.2021.3113940.
ElFar, O.A., Chang, C.-K., Leong, H.Y., Peter, A.P., Chew, K.W., Show, P.L., 2021.
Prospects of industry 5.0 in algae: Customization of production and new advance
technology for clean bioenergy generation. Energy Convers. Manage.: X 10, 100048.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecmx.2020.100048.
Elim, H., Zhai, G., 2020. Control system of multitasking interactions between society
5.0 and industry 5.0: A conceptual introduction & its applications. J. Phys.: Conf.
Ser. 1463 (1), 012035. http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1463/1/012035.
Elkhatib, Y., et al., 2017. On using micro-clouds to deliver the fog. IEEE Internet
Comput. 21 (2), 8–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MIC.2017.35.
Faisal, T., et al., 2023. How to design autonomous service level agreements for 6G. IEEE
Commun. Mag. 61 (3), 80–85. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.001.2200131.
Farahsari, P.S., et al., 2022. A survey on indoor positioning systems for IoT-based
applications. IEEE Internet Things J. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2022.
3149048.
Farsi, M., Mishra, R.K., Erkoyuncu, J.A., 2021. Industry 5.0 for sustainable reliability centered maintenance. In: 10th International Conference on Through-Life
Engineering Service. pp. 1–6, SSRN 3944533.
for Research, D.-G., Innovation, E.C., 2021. Industry 5.0: Human-centric, sustainable
and resilient. Eur. Union Publ. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.2777/073781.
Fountaine, T., McCarthy, B., Saleh, T., 2019. Building the AI-powered organization.
Harv. Bus. Rev. 97 (4), 62–73.
Fraga-Lamas, P., Lopes, S.I., Fernandez-Carames, T.M., 2021. Green IoT and edge AI
as key technological enablers for a sustainable transition towards a smart circular
economy: An industry 5.0 use case. Sensors 21 (17), 1–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.
3390/s21175745.
Ganjavi, N., Fazlollahtabar, H., 2021. Integrated sustainable production value measurement model based on lean and six sigma in industry 4.0 context. IEEE Trans. Eng.
Manage. 1–14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2021.3078169.
Garcia-Saavedra, A., Costa-Pérez, X., 2021. O-RAN: Disrupting the virtualized RAN
ecosystem. IEEE Commun. Standards Mag. 5 (4), 96–103. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/MCOMSTD.101.2000014.
Ghosh, A., et al., 2022. SEGA: Secured edge gateway microservices architecture for
iIoT-based machine monitoring. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 18 (3), 1949–1956.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3102158.
Gill, S.S., Buyya, R., 2018. A taxonomy and future directions for sustainable cloud
computing: 360 degree view. ACM Comput. Surv. 51 (5), 1–33.
Gröger, C., 2021. There is no AI without data. Commun. ACM 64 (11), 98–108.
Gudivada, V.N., et al., 2019. Cognitive computing systems: Their potential and the
future. Computer 52 (5), 13–18. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MC.2019.2904940.
Haleem, A., Javaid, M., 2019. Industry 5.0 and its applications in orthopaedics. J. Clin.
Orthop. Trauma 10 (4), 807–808. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcot.2018.12.010.
Han, J., Wu, S., Zhang, X., 2017. Artificial intelligence and industry 5.0. Artif. Intell.
Robotics Res. 6 (4), 135–140. http://dx.doi.org/10.12677/AIRR.2017.64015.
Hashima, S., et al., 2022. On softwarization of intelligence in 6G networks for ultrafast optimal policy selection: Challenges and opportunities. IEEE Netw. 1–9. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.103.2100587.
Hazra, A., et al., 2021. Collaborative AI-enabled intelligent partial service provisioning
in green industrial fog networks. IEEE Internet Things J. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/JIOT.2021.3110910.
He, H., et al., 2021. The challenges and opportunities of human-centred AI for
trustworthy robots and autonomous systems. IEEE Trans. Cogn. Dev. Syst. 1.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TCDS.2021.3132282.
Hong, P., Xue, K., Li, D., et al., 2018. Resource aware routing for service function
chains in SDN and NFV-enabled network. IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput..
Hu, F., Deng, Y., Saad, W., Bennis, M., Aghvami, A.H., 2020. Cellular-connected wireless
virtual reality: Requirements, challenges, and solutions. IEEE Commun. Mag. 58 (5),
105–111.
Huang, Y., Liu, S., et al., 2021. True-data testbed for 5G/B5G intelligent network. Intell.
Converged Netw. 2 (2), 133–149. http://dx.doi.org/10.23919/ICN.2021.0002.
Ibarra-Junquera, V., et al., 2021. Component-based microservices for flexible and
scalable automation of industrial bioprocesses. IEEE Access 9, 58192–58207. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3072040.
(IDC), I.D.C., Sep 2021. Investment in artificial intelligence solutions will accelerate as
businesses seek insights, efficiency, and innovation. URL www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?
containerId=prUS48191221. (Accessed 22 March 2022).
incobots, June 2021. INCOBOTS: Ready for Industry 5.0. URL . (Accessed 30 March
2022).
Jain, D.K., Li, Y., Er, M.J., Xin, Q., Gupta, D., Shankar, K., 2021. Enabling unmanned
aerial vehicle Borne secure communication with classification framework for
industry 5.0. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. Early Access, 1–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TII.2021.3125732.
Jameel, F., et al., 2020a. NOMA-enabled backscatter communications: Toward batteryfree IoT networks. IEEE Internet Things Mag. 3 (4), 95–101. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/IOTM.0001.2000055.
Jameel, F., et al., 2020b. NOMA-enabled backscatter communications: Toward batteryfree IoT networks. IEEE Internet Things Mag. 3 (4), 95–101. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/IOTM.0001.2000055.
Janai, J., Güney, F., Behl, A., Geiger, A., et al., 2020. Computer vision for autonomous
vehicles: Problems, datasets and state of the art. Found Trends® Comput Graph Vis
12 (1–3), 1–308.
Javaid, M., Haleem, A., 2020. Critical components of industry 5.0 towards a successful
adoption in the field of manufacturing. J. Ind. Integr. Manag. 5 (3), 327–348.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S2424862220500141.
Javaid, M., Haleem, A., Singh, R.P., Haq, M.I.U., Raina, A., Suman, R., 2020. Industry
5.0: Potential applications in COVID-19. J. Ind. Integr. Manag. 5 (4), 507–530.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S2424862220500220.
Ji, B., et al., 2021. A survey of computational intelligence for 6G: Key technologies,
applications and trends. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 17 (10), 7145–7154. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3052531.
Jiang, J.-R., 2018. An improved cyber-physical systems architecture for industry 4.0
smart factories. Adv. Mech. Eng. 10 (6), 1687814018784192.
Jiang, Z., Guo, Y., Wang, Z., 2021a. Digital twin to improve the virtual-real integration
of industrial IoT. J. Ind. Inf. Integr. 22, 100196.
Jiang, W., Han, B., et al., 2021b. The road towards 6G: A comprehensive survey.
IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc. 2, 334–366. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/OJCOMS.2021.
3057679.
Jiang, W., et al., 2021c. A seamless train positioning system using a lidar-aided hybrid
integration methodology. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 70 (7), 6371–6384.
Jin, Q., et al., 2019. Guest editorial: Special issue on human-centric cyber social
computing. IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst. 6 (5), 1038–1041. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/TCSS.2019.2941333.
John, M.M., Holmström Olsson, H., Bosch, J., 2020. Architecting AI deployment: A
systematic review of state-of-the-art and state-of-practice literature. In: International
Conference on Software Business. Springer, pp. 14–29.
Kao, L.-C., Liao, W., 2021. 5G intelligent A+: A pioneer multi-access edge computing
solution for 5G private networks. IEEE Commun. Stand. Mag. 5 (1), 78–84. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOMSTD.001.2000036.
Kappes, G., Hatzieleftheriou, A., Anastasiadis, S.V., 2019. Multitenant access control
for cloud-aware distributed filesystems. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.
16 (6), 1070–1085. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2017.2715839.
Khan, L.U., Saad, W., Han, Z., Hossain, E., Hong, C.S., 2021. Federated learning for
internet of things: Recent advances, taxonomy, and open challenges. IEEE Commun.
Surv. Tutor..
Khowaja, S.A., Dev, K., Khuwaja, P., Bellavista, P., 2021a. Toward energy efficient
distributed federated learning for 6g networks. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 28 (6), 34–40.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MWC.012.2100153.
Khowaja, S.A., Dev, K., Qureshi, N.M.F., Khuwaja, P., Foschini, L., 2021b. Towards
industrial private AI: A two-tier framework for data and model security. pp. 1–9,
arXiv, https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.12806.
Khowaja, S.A., Lee, I.H., Dev, K., Jarwar, M.A., Qureshi, N.M.F., 2022. Get your foes
fooled: Proximal gradient split learning for defense against model inversion attacks
on IoMT data. pp. 1–9, arXiv, https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.04569.
Khowaja, S.A., Prabono, A.G., Setiawan, F., Yahya, B.N., Lee, S.-L., 2020. Toward soft
real-time stress detection using wrist-worn devices for human workspaces. Soft
Comput. 25 (4), 2793–2820. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00500-020-05338-0.
Kim, H., Ben-Othman, J., 2020. Toward integrated virtual emotion system with AI
applicability for secure CPS-enabled smart cities: AI-based research challenges and
security issues. IEEE Netw. 34 (3), 30–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.011.
1900299.
Koivisto, M., Talvitie, J., Costa, M., Leppänen, K., Valkama, M., 2018. Joint cmwavebased multiuser positioning and network synchronization in dense 5G networks. In:
2018 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference. (WCNC), IEEE,
pp. 1–6.
Koonen, T., et al., 2021. Beam-steered optical wireless communication for industry 4.0.
IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 27 (6), 1–10.
Kouhini, S.M., et al., 2021. Lifi positioning for industry 4.0. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum
Electron. 27 (6), 1–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSTQE.2021.3095364.
Kyusakov, R., et al., 2013. Integration of wireless sensor and actuator nodes with IT
infrastructure using service-oriented architecture. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 9 (1),
43–51. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2012.2198655.
Lee, L.-H., et al., 2021. All one needs to know about metaverse: A complete survey on
technological singularity, virtual ecosystem, and research agenda. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.05352.
S. Zeb et al.
Leivadeas, A., Falkner, M., 2021. VNF placement problem: A multi-tenant intentbased networking approach. In: 24th Conference on Innovation in Clouds, Internet
and Networks and Workshops. (ICIN), pp. 143–150. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ICIN51074.2021.9385553.
Leivadeas, A., Falkner, M., 2023. A survey on intent-based networking. IEEE Commun.
Surv. Tutor. 25 (1), 625–655. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2022.3215919.
Leng, J., Wang, D., Shen, W., Li, X., Liu, Q., Chen, X., 2021. Digital twins-based
smart manufacturing system design in industry 4.0: A review. J. Manuf. Syst. 60,
119–137.
Letaief, K.B., et al., 2022. Edge artificial intelligence for 6G: Vision, enabling technologies, and applications. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 40 (1), 5–36. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/JSAC.2021.3126076.
Li, S., Deng, W., 2020. Deep facial expression recognition: A survey. IEEE Trans. Affect.
Comput. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2020.2981446.
Li, N., Shepperd, M., Guo, Y., 2020. A systematic review of unsupervised learning
techniques for software defect prediction. Inf. Softw. Technol. 122, 106287.
Li, M., et al., 2021. A systematic review of AI technology-based service encounters:
Implications for hospitality and tourism operations. Int. J. Hosp. Manag. 95,
102930.
Liang, Y., et al., 2018. Deep learning based inference of private information using
embedded sensors in smart devices. IEEE Netw. 32 (4), 8–14. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/MNET.2018.1700349.
Liu, Y., Piao, Y., Zhang, L., 2021a. Research on the positioning of AGV based on lidar.
J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 1920 (1), 012087.
Liu, S., Wang, Z., et al., 2021b. Human-centric relation segmentation: Dataset and
solution. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TPAMI.2021.3075846.
Liu, X., Xu, C., Yu, H., Zeng, P., 2021c. Deep reinforcement learning-based multichannel access for industrial wireless networks with dynamic multi-user priority.
IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3139349.
Liu, M., Yang, J., Gui, G., 2019. DSF-NOMA: UAV-assisted emergency communication
technology in a heterogeneous internet of things. IEEE Internet Things J. 6 (3),
5508–5519.
Liu, X., Zhang, F., et al., 2021d. Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive.
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng..
Liu, H., et al., 2007. Survey of wireless indoor positioning techniques and systems.
IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Part C (Appl. Rev.) 37 (6), 1067–1080. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSMCC.2007.905750.
Liu, X., et al., 2021e. Integrated cooperative spectrum sensing and access control for
cognitive industrial internet of things. IEEE Internet Things J. 1. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/JIOT.2021.3137408.
Lo, S.K., et al., 2022. Towards trustworthy AI: Blockchain-based architecture design for
accountability and fairness of federated learning systems. IEEE Internet Things J.
1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2022.3144450.
Longo, F., Padovano, A., Umbrello, S., 2020. Value-oriented and ethical technology engineering in industry 5.0: A human-centric perspective for the design of the factory
of the future. Appl. Sci. 10 (12), 4182. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/app10124182.
Lu, W., et al., 2020. AI-assisted knowledge-defined network orchestration for energyefficient data center networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 58 (1), 86–92. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/MCOM.001.1800157.
Luo, S., et al., 2018. Scalable linear algebra on a relational database system. IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 31 (7), 1224–1238.
Lv, Z., Guo, J., Lv, H., 2022. Safety poka yoke in zero-defect manufacturing based
on digital twins. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.
3139897.
Lv, Z., Song, H., Basanta-Val, P., Steed, A., Jo, M., 2017. Next-generation big data
analytics: State of the art, challenges, and future research topics. IEEE Trans. Ind.
Inform. 13 (4), 1891–1899. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2017.2650204.
Ma, J., Liu, J., et al., 2021. Multitask learning for visual question answering. IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 1–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3105284.
Ma, S., et al., 2020. Hierarchical optimization for green product line design. IEEE Trans.
Eng. Manage. 1–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2020.2978012.
Maddikunta, P.K.R.o., 2021. Industry 5.0: A survey on enabling technologies and
potential applications. J. Ind. Inf. Integr. 1–19. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.
2021.100257, in press.
Maddikunta, P.K.R., et al., 2021. Industry 5.0: A survey on enabling technologies and
potential applications. J. Ind. Inf. Integr. 100257.
Mahmood, A., Abedin, S.F., Sauter, T., Gidlund, M., Landernas, K., 2022a. Factory 5G:
A review of industry-centric features and deployment options. IEEE Ind. Electron.
Mag. 2–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MIE.2022.3149209.
Mahmood, A., Ashraf, M.I., et al., 2019. Time synchronization in 5G wireless edge:
Requirements and solutions for critical-MTC. IEEE Commun. Mag. 57 (12), 45–51.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.001.1900379.
Mahmood, A., Beltramelli, L., et al., 2022b. Industrial IoT in 5G-and-beyond networks:
Vision, architecture, and design trends. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 18 (6), 4122–4137.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3115697.
Mahmood, N.H., et al., 2021. Machine type communications: Key drivers and enablers
towards the 6G era. EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Networking 2021 (1), 1–25.
Maija, B., Lars, D.N., Athanasios, P., 2021. Towards a sustainable, human-centric and
resilient European industry. Publ. Office Eur. Union 1–48. http://dx.doi.org/10.
2777/308407.
Markakis, E., et al., 2017. EXEGESIS: Extreme edge resource harvesting for a virtualized
fog environment. IEEE Commun. Mag. 55 (7), 173–179. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
MCOM.2017.1600730.
Marques, B., Silva, S.S., et al., 2021. A conceptual model and taxonomy for collaborative
augmented reality. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TVCG.2021.3101545.
Martynov, V.V., Shavaleeva, D.N., Zaytseva, A.A., 2019. Information technology as the
basis for transformation into a digital society and industry 5.0. In: International
Conference ‘‘Quality Management, Transport and Information Security, Information
Technologies’’. pp. 539–543. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ITQMIS.2019.8928305.
Megargel, A., Shankararaman, V., Walker, D.K., 2020. Migrating from monoliths to
cloud-based microservices: A banking industry example. In: Software Engineering
in the Era of Cloud Computing. Springer, pp. 85–108.
Mendoza-Pitti, L., et al., 2021. Towards a service-oriented architecture for the energy
efficiency of buildings: A systematic review. IEEE Access 9, 26119–26137. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3057543.
Microsoft, 2022. Azure digital twins: Use IoT spatial intelligence to create models
of physical environments. URL www.azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/digitaltwins/#overview. (Accessed 5 October 2022).
Minerva, R., Lee, G.M., Crespi, N., 2020. Digital twin in the IoT context: A survey
on technical features, scenarios, and architectural models. Proc. IEEE 108 (10),
1785–1824. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2020.2998530.
Mohamed, A., Najafabadi, M.K., Wah, Y.B., Zaman, E.A.K., Maskat, R., 2020. The state
of the art and taxonomy of big data analytics: view from new big data framework.
Artif. Intell. Rev. 53 (2), 989–1037.
Mollahasani, S., Erol-Kantarci, M., Wilson, R., 2021. Dynamic CU-DU selection for
resource allocation in O-RAN using actor-critic learning. In: IEEE GLOBECOM. pp.
1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/GLOBECOM46510.2021.9685837.
Mortlock, T., et al., 2022. Graph learning for cognitive digital twins in manufacturing
systems. IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top. Comput. 10 (1), 34–45. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TETC.2021.3132251.
Muller, J., 2020. Enabling technologies for industry 5.0: Results of a workshop with
europe’s technology leaders. Eur. Union Publ. 1–19. http://dx.doi.org/10.2777/
082634.
Nahavandi, S., 2019. Industry 5.0 - A human centric solution. Sustainability 11 (16),
4371. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/su11164371.
Nations, U., July 2017. Work of the Statistical Commission pertaining to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. URL . (Accessed 16 March 2022).
Nayak, S., Pargiri, R., 2020. 6G communication: Envisioning the key issues and
challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04024.
Niknam, S., Roy, A., Dhillon, H.S., Singh, S., Banerji, R., Reed, J.H., Saxena, N.,
Yoon, S., 2020. Intelligent O-RAN for beyond 5G and 6G wireless networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.08374.
Nikonowicz, J., Mahmood, A., Ashraf, M.I., Björnson, E., Gidlund, M., 2022. Indoor positioning trends in 5G-advanced: Challenges and solution towards centimeter-level
accuracy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.01183.
Ning, H., et al., 2021. A survey on metaverse: The state-of-the-art, technologies,
applications, and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09673.
Niyato, D., Kim, D.I., Maso, M., Han, Z., 2017. Wireless powered communication
networks: Research directions and technological approaches. IEEE Wirel. Commun.
24 (6), 88–97. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MWC.2017.1600116.
O-RAN Alliance, 2023. Operator defined open and intelligent radio access networks.
Available: https://www.o-ran.org/. (Accessed 01 November 2023).
Obeidat, H., et al., 2021. A review of indoor localization techniques and wireless
technologies. Wirel. Pers. Commun. 119 (1), 289–327.
Ozdemir, V., Hekim, N., 2018. Birth of industry 5.0: Making sense of big data with
artificial intelligence, "the internet of things" and next-generation technology policy.
OMICS: J. Interact. Biol. 22 (1), 65–76. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/omi.2017.0194.
Park, S.-M., Kim, Y.-G., 2022. A metaverse: Taxonomy, components, applications, and
open challenges. IEEE Access.
Pelle, I., et al., 2021. Operating latency sensitive applications on public serverless edge
cloud platforms. IEEE Internet Things J. 8 (10), 7954–7972. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/JIOT.2020.3042428.
Peng, G., Wang, H., Dong, J., Zhang, H., 2018. Knowledge-based resource allocation
for collaborative simulation development in a multi-tenant cloud computing environment. IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput. 11 (2), 306–317. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TSC.2016.2518161.
Picard, R.W., 2000. Affective Computing. MIT Press.
Polese, M., Bonati, L., D’Oro, S., Basagni, S., Melodia, T., 2022. Understanding ORAN: Architecture, interfaces, algorithms, security, and research challenges. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2202.01032.
Ponnimbaduge Perera, T.D., et al., 2018. Simultaneous wireless information and power
transfer (SWIPT): Recent advances and future challenges. IEEE Commun. Surv.
Tutor. 20 (1), 264–302. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2017.2783901.
S. Zeb et al.
Potr£, S., et al., 2021. Sustainable renewable energy supply networks optimization–the
gradual transition to a renewable energy system within the European union by
2050. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 146, 111186.
Powell, D., et al., 2022. Advancing zero defect manufacturing: A state-of-the-art
perspective and future research directions. Comput. Ind. 136, 103596.
Prados-Garzon, J., et al., 2021. Asynchronous time-sensitive networking for industrial
networks. In: Joint European Conference on Networks and Communications & 6G
Summit (EuCNC/6G Summit). IEEE, pp. 130–135.
Proia, S., et al., 2021. Control techniques for safe, ergonomic, and efficient human-robot
collaboration in the digital industry: A survey. IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng. 1–22.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2021.3131011.
Rachmawati, I., Multisari, W., Triyono, T., Simon, I.M., Costa, A.d., 2021. Prevalence
of academic resilience of social science students in facing the industry 5.0 era. Int.
J. Eval. Res. Educ. 10 (2), 676–683. http://dx.doi.org/10.11591/ijere.v10i2.21175.
Ramanathan, S., et al., 2021. Live migration of virtual machine and container
based mobile core network components: A comprehensive study. IEEE Access 9,
105082–105100. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3099370.
Ranjha, A., et al., 2021. Facilitating URLLC in UAV-assisted relay systems with multiplemobile robots for 6G networks: A prospective of agriculture 4.0. IEEE Trans. Ind.
Inform. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3131608.
Ray, P.P., Kumar, N., Guizani, M., 2021. A vision on 6G-enabled NIB: Requirements,
technologies, deployments, and prospects. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 28 (4), 120–127.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MWC.001.2000384.
Research, A.M., June 2021. Tracking-as-a-Service Market by Component (Software and
Service) Insights: 2030. URL . (Accessed 28 March 2022).
Research, Innovation, 2020. Enabling Technologies for Industry 5.0. URL . (Accessed
20 March 2022).
Research, Innovation, 2021. Industry 5.0. URL . (Accessed 20 March 2022).
Research, Innovation, Jan 2022. Industry 5.0, a transformative vision for Europe. URL
. (Accessed 20 March 2022).
Rosa, R.L., et al., 2021. An energy-autonomous wireless sensor with simultaneous
energy harvesting and ambient light sensing. IEEE Sens. J. 21 (12), 13744–13752.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2021.3068134.
Roy, C., et al., 2021. Micro-safe: Microservices- and deep learning-based safety-as-aservice architecture for 6G-enabled intelligent transportation system. IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst. 1–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2021.3110725.
Rubab, N., Zeb, S., et al., 2022. Interference mitigation in RIS-assisted 6G systems for
indoor industrial IoT networks. In: 2022 IEEE 12th Sensor Array and Multichannel Signal Processing Workshop. (SAM), pp. 211–215. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
SAM53842.2022.9827809.
Rupa, C., et al., 2021. Industry 5.0: Ethereum blockchain technology based dapp smart
contract. Math. Biosci. Eng. 18 (5), 7010–7027. http://dx.doi.org/10.3934/mbe.
2021349.
Saadati, Z., Barenji, R.V., 2022. Toward industry 5.0: cognitive cyber-physical system.
In: Industry 4.0: Technologies, Applications, and Challenges. Springer, pp. 257–268.
Salvaris, M., Dean, D., Tok, W.H., 2018. Microsoft AI platform. In: Deep Learning with
Azure. Springer, pp. 79–98.
Schein, K.E., Rauschnabel, P.A., 2021. Augmented reality in manufacturing: Exploring
workers’ perceptions of barriers. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage. 1–14. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/TEM.2021.3093833.
Schluse, M., Priggemeyer, M., Atorf, L., Rossmann, J., 2018. Experimentable digital twins—Streamlining simulation-based systems engineering for industry 4.0.
IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 14 (4), 1722–1731. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2018.
2804917.
Setiawan, F., Prabono, A.G., Khowaja, S.A., Kim, W., Park, K., Yahya, B.N., Lee, S.-L.,
Hong, J.P., 2020. Fine-grained emotion recognition: Fusion of physiological signals
and facial expressions on spontaneous emotion corpus. Int. J. Ad Hoc Ubiquitous
Comput. 35 (3), 162–178. http://dx.doi.org/10.1504/IJAHUC.2020.110824.
Shahzadi, S., Iqbal, M., Chaudhry, N.R., 2021. 6G vision: Toward future collaborative
cognitive communication (3C) systems. IEEE Commun. Stand. Mag. 5 (2), 60–67.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOMSTD.001.2000044.
Shao, S., et al., 2021. Data trusted sharing delivery: A blockchain assisted softwaredefined content delivery network. IEEE Internet Things J. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/JIOT.2021.3124091.
Sharma, M., Sehrawat, R., Luthra, S., Daim, T., Bakry, D., 2022. Moving towards
industry 5.0 in the pharmaceutical manufacturing sector: Challenges and solutions
for Germany. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage..
Sharma, S., Singh, G., Sharma, M., 2021. A comprehensive review and analysis of
supervised-learning and soft computing techniques for stress diagnosis in humans.
Comput. Biol. Med. 134, 104450.
Shi, Y., Lian, L., Shi, Y., Wang, Z., Zhou, Y., Fu, L., Bai, L., Zhang, J., Zhang, W.,
2023. Machine learning for large-scale optimization in 6G wireless networks. IEEE
Commun. Surv. Tutor. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2023.3300664.
Sicari, S., Rizzardi, A., Coen-Porisini, A., 2022. Security & privacy issues and challenges
in noSQL databases. Comput. Netw. 108828.
Sindhwani, R., Afridi, S., Kumar, A., Banaitis, A., Luthra, S., Singh, P.L., 2022. Can
industry 5.0 revolutionize the wave of resilience and social value creation? A
multi-criteria framework to analyze enablers. Technol. Soc. Early access, 101887.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2022.101887.
Soltanali, H., Rohani, A., et al., 2021. A comparative study of statistical and soft
computing techniques for reliability prediction of automotive manufacturing. Appl.
Soft Comput. 98, 106738.
Song, H., Chauvel, F., Nguyen, P.H., 2020. Using microservices to customize
multi-tenant software-as-a-service. In: Microservices. Springer, pp. 299–331.
Stergiou, C., Psannis, K.E., Gupta, B.B., Ishibashi, Y., 2018. Security, privacy &
efficiency of sustainable cloud computing for big data & IoT. Sustain. Comput.:
Inform. Syst. 19, 174–184.
Strazdas, D., et al., 2020. Robots and wizards: An investigation into natural human–
robot interaction. IEEE Access 8, 207635–207642. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2020.3037724.
Sud, K., 2020. Understanding REST APIs. In: Practical Hapi. Springer, pp. 1–11.
Sun, Y., Peng, M., et al., 2021. Harmonizing artificial intelligence with radio access
networks: Advances, case study, and open issues. IEEE Netw. 35 (4), 144–151.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.011.2000656.
Sun, Y., Qin, S., Feng, G., Zhang, L., Imran, M.A., 2020. Service provisioning framework
for RAN slicing: User admissibility, slice association and bandwidth allocation. IEEE
Trans. Mob. Comput. 20 (12), 3409–3422.
Sun, J., et al., 2022. Robust beamforming for localization-aided millimeter wave
communication systems. IEEE Wirel. Commun. Lett. 11 (6), 1278–1282. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/LWC.2022.3164153.
Systems, K.R., Jan 2021. Matrix production: an example for Industrie 4.0. URL .
(Accessed 10 March 2022).
Tange, K., et al., 2020. A systematic survey of industrial internet of things security:
Requirements and fog computing opportunities. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 22 (4),
2489–2520. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2020.3011208.
Tataria, H., et al., 2021. 6G wireless systems: Vision, requirements, challenges, insights,
and opportunities. Proc. IEEE 109 (7), 1166–1199. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
JPROC.2021.3061701.
Thakur, P., Sehgal, V.K., 2021. Emerging architecture for heterogeneous smart cyberphysical systems for industry 5.0. Comput. Ind. Eng. 162, 107750. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.cie.2021.107750.
Tsang, Y., Wu, C., et al., 2021. Unlocking the power of big data analytics in new
product development: An intelligent product design framework in the furniture
industry. J. Manuf. Syst..
Tuli, S., et al., 2022. HUNTER: AI based holistic resource management for sustainable
cloud computing. J. Syst. Softw. 184, 111124.
Tzanakaki, A., et al., 2013. Virtualization of heterogeneous wireless-optical network
and it infrastructures in support of cloud and mobile cloud services. IEEE Commun.
Mag. 51 (8), 155–161. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2013.6576354.
Ullah, S.A., et al., 2022. Deep RL-assisted energy harvesting in CR-NOMA communications for NextG IoT networks. In: 2022 IEEE Globecom Workshops. (GC Wkshps),
pp. 74–79. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/GCWkshps56602.2022.10008522.
Vakaruk, S., et al., 2021. Forecasting automated guided vehicle malfunctioning with
deep learning in a 5G-based industry 4.0 scenario. IEEE Commun. Mag. 59 (11),
102–108. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.221.2001079.
Villamizar, M., et al., 2015. Evaluating the monolithic and the microservice architecture
pattern to deploy web applications in the cloud. In: 2015 10th Computing Colombian Conference. (10CCC), pp. 583–590. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ColumbianCC.
2015.7333476.
Vinuesa, R., et al., 2020. The role of artificial intelligence in achieving the sustainable
development goals. Nature Commun. 11 (1), 1–10.
Vitturi, S., Zunino, C., Sauter, T., 2019. Industrial communication systems and their
future challenges: Next-generation ethernet, IIoT, and 5G. Proc. IEEE 107 (6),
944–961. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2019.2913443.
Wang, Y., Forbes, R., Elzur, U., Strassner, J., et al., 2020a. From design to practice:
ETSI ENI reference architecture and instantiation for network management and
orchestration using artificial intelligence. IEEE Commun. Std. Mag. 4 (3), 38–45.
Wang, Y., Kinsner, W., Zhang, D., 2009. Contemporary cybernetics and its facets of
cognitive informatics and computational intelligence. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern.
B 39 (4), 823–833. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSMCB.2009.2013721.
Wang, F.-Y., Qin, R., Wang, X., Hu, B., 2022a. MetaSocieties in metaverse: MetaEconomics and MetaManagement for MetaEnterprises and MetaCities. IEEE Trans.
Comput. Soc. Syst. 9 (1), 2–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TCSS.2022.3145165.
Wang, S., Qureshi, M.A., Miralles-Pechuan, L., Huynh-The, T., Gadekally, T.R., Liyanage, M., 2021a. Explainable AI for B5G/6G: technical aspects, use cases, and
research challenges. pp. 1–44, arXiv, https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.04698.
Wang, Y., Song, W., et al., 2022b. A systematic review on affective computing: Emotion
models, databases, and recent advances. Inf. Fusion.
Wang, D., Yang, K., Xin, J., 2021b. A computational developmental model of perceptual
learning for mobile robot. IEEE Trans. Cogn. Dev. Syst. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TCDS.2021.3128179.
Wang, P., et al., 2019a. Data fusion in cyber-physical-social systems: State-of-the-art
and perspectives. Inf. Fusion 51, 42–57.
Wang, X., et al., 2019b. A tensor-based big-data-driven routing recommendation
approach for heterogeneous networks. IEEE Netw. 33 (1), 64–69. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/MNET.2018.1800192.
S. Zeb et al.
Wang, Y., et al., 2020b. Smart additive manufacturing: Current artificial intelligenceenabled methods and future perspectives. Sci. China Technol. Sci. 63 (9),
1600–1611.
Wang, Q., et al., 2021c. Digital twin for human-robot interactive welding and welder
behavior analysis. IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sin. 8 (2), 334–343. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/JAS.2020.1003518.
Wang, Z., et al., 2022c. Mobility digital twin: Concept, architecture, case study, and
future challenges. IEEE Internet Things J. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2022.
3156028.
Wollschlaeger, M., Sauter, T., Jasperneite, J., 2017. The future of industrial communication: Automation networks in the era of the internet of things and Industry 4.0. IEEE
Ind. Electron. Mag. 11 (1), 17–27. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MIE.2017.2649104.
Xiloyannis, M., et al., 2021. Soft robotic suits: State of the art, core technologies, and
open challenges. IEEE Trans. Robot. 1–20. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2021.
3084466.
Xu, X., Lu, Y., Vogel-Heuser, B., Wang, L., 2021a. Industry 4.0 and industry
5.0—Inception, conception and perception. J. Manuf. Syst. 61, 530–535.
Xu, J., Yang, G., Sun, Y., Picek, S., 2021b. A multi-sensor information fusion
method based on factor graph for integrated navigation system. IEEE Access 9,
12044–12054.
Xu, F., et al., 2021c. <Formula><tex>DNN</tex></formula>: Achieving predictable
distributed DNN training with serverless architectures. IEEE Trans. Comput. 1.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TC.2021.3054656.
Yang, B., et al., 2018. Cost-efficient NFV-enabled mobile edge-cloud for low latency
mobile applications. IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. 15 (1), 475–488. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2018.2790081.
Yetı≥, H., et al., 2020. Optimization of mass customization process using quantuminspired evolutionary algorithm in industry 4.0. In: IEEE International Symposium
on Systems Engineering. pp. 1–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISSE49799.2020.
9272247.
Yin, Y., Huang, Q., Gao, H., Xu, Y., 2021. Personalized APIs recommendation with
cognitive knowledge mining for industrial systems. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 17
(9), 6153–6161. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2020.3039500.
Zaidi, S.A.R., Shakir, M.Z., et al., 2020. Guest editorial: Design and analysis of
communication interfaces for industry 4.0. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 38 (5),
797–802. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSAC.2020.2983815.
Zeb, S., Mahmood, A., et al., 2022a. Industrial digital twins at the nexus of nextg
wireless networks and computational intelligence: A survey. J. Netw. Comput. Appl.
103309.
Zeb, S., Rathore, M.A., Hassan, S.A., Raza, S., Dev, K., Fortino, G., 2023. Toward
AI-enabled nextg networks with edge intelligence-assisted microservice orchestration. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 30 (3), 148–156. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MWC.015.
2200461.
Zeb, S., Rathore, M.A., et al., 2021. Edge intelligence in softwarized 6G: Deep learningenabled network traffic predictions. In: 2021 IEEE Globecom Workshops. pp. 1–6.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/GCWkshps52748.2021.9682131.
Zeb, S., et al., 2020a. Impact of indoor multipath channels on timing advance for URLLC
in industrial IoT. In: IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops.
(ICC Workshops), pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICCWorkshops49005.2020.
9145066.
Zeb, S., et al., 2020b. On TOA-based ranging over mmwave 5G for indoor industrial
IoT networks. In: IEEE Globecom Workshops. (GC Wkshps, pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/GCWkshps50303.2020.9367555.
Zeb, S., et al., 2022b. Analysis of beyond 5G integrated communication and ranging
services under indoor 3D mmwave stochastic channels. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 1.
Zhang, Y., Ives, Z.G., 2020. Finding related tables in data lakes for interactive
data science. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD International Conference on
Management of Data. pp. 1951–1966.
Zhang, K., et al., 2022. A coordinated multi-energy trading framework for strategic
hydrogen provider in electricity and hydrogen markets. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 1.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2022.3154611.
Zhou, X., et al., 2022. 2D federated learning for personalized human activity recognition
in cyber-physical-social systems. IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng. 1. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/TNSE.2022.3144699.
Shah Zeb received the B.E. degree in Electrical Engineering
(EE) from the University of Engineering and Technology,
Peshawar, Pakistan, in 2016. He received the M.S. degree in Electrical Engineering from National University of
Sciences and Technology (NUST), Pakistan, in 2019. He
is currently pursuing Ph.D. degree in EE at NUST, Pakistan, where he works as a Research Associate with the
Information Processing and Transmission (IPT) Lab, School
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (SEECS),
NUST, Pakistan. His research interests include emergingenablers for Beyond-5G/6G wireless networks and industrial
communication.
Aamir Mahmood received the B.E. degree in electrical
engineering from the National University of Sciences and
Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan, in 2002, and the M.Sc.
and D.Sc. degrees in communications engineering from the
Aalto University School of Electrical Engineering, Espoo,
Finland, in 2008 and 2014, respectively. He worked as
a Research Intern with Nokia Research Center, Helsinki,
Finland, in 2014, a Visiting Researcher with Aalto University
from 2015 to 2016, and a Postdoctoral Researcher with
Mid Sweden University, Sundsvall, Sweden, from 2016 to
2018, where he has been an Assistant Professor with the
Department of Information Systems and Technology, since
2019. His research interests include Industrial IoT, 5GTSN integration, AI/ML for radio network optimization and
management, RF interference and coexistence management,
network time synchronization, and wireless positioning.
Sunder Ali Khowaja received the Ph.D. degree in Industrial
Information Systems Engineering from Hankuk University of
Foreign Studies, South Korea. He is currently an Assistant
Professor at Department of Telecommunication Engineering,
University of Sindh, Pakistan. He is also a regular reviewer
of notable journals including IEEE Transactions, IET, Elsevier, and Springer Journals. He has also served as a TPC
member for workshops in A* conferences such as Globecom
and Mobicom. His research interests include Data Analytics
& Machine Learning for Computer Vision applications.
Kapal Dev is currently serving as Assistant Lecturer at Munster Technological University (MTU), Ireland and formerly
he was senior researcher at same University. Previously,
he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with the CONNECT
Centre, Trinity College Dublin (TCD). He is founding chair
of IEEE ComSoc special interested group titled as Industrial
Communication Networks. He is serving as Associate Editor
in NATURE, Scientific Reports, Springer WINE, HCIS, IET
Quantum Communication, IET Networks, Area Editor in
Elsevier PHYCOM. He performed duties as Guest Editor (GE)
in IEEE Network, IEEE TII, IEEE TNSE, IEEE TGCN, IEEE
STDCOMM. He has published over 40 research papers majorly in top IEEE Transactions, Magazines and Conferences.
His research interests include Wireless Communication
Networks, Blockchain and Artificial Intelligence.
Syed Ali Hassan received the B.E. degree in electrical
engineering from the National University of Sciences &
Technology (NUST), Islamabad, Pakistan, in 2004, the M.S.
degree in mathematics from Georgia Tech in 2011, and the
M.S. degree in electrical engineering from the University of
Stuttgart, Germany, in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, USA, in 2011. His research interests include signal
processing for communications with a focus on cooperative
communications for wireless networks, stochastic modeling,
estimation and detection theory, and smart grid communications. He is currently working as an Associate Professor with
the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
(SEECS), NUST, where he is the Director of the Information
Processing and Transmission (IPT) Lab, which focuses on
various aspects of theoretical communications. He was a
Visiting Professor with Georgia Tech in Fall 2017. He also
held industry positions with Cisco Systems Inc., CA, USA,
and with Center for Advanced Research in Engineering,
Islamabad.
Mikael Gidlund received the Licentiate of Engineering
degree in radio communication systems from the KTH Royal
Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, in 2004, and
the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Mid Sweden
University, Sundsvall, Sweden, in 2005. From 2008 to 2015,
he was a Senior Principal Scientist and a Global Research
Area Coordinator of Wireless Technologies with ABB Corporate Research, Västerås, Sweden. From 2007 to 2008, he
was a Project Manager and a Senior Specialist with Nera
Networks AS, Bergen, Norway. From 2006 to 2007, he was
a Research Engineer and a Project Manager with Acreo AB,
S. Zeb et al.
Hudiksvall, Sweden. Since 2015, he has been a Professor of
Computer Engineering at Mid Sweden University. He holds
more than 20 patents (granted and pending applications) in
the area of wireless communication. His current research
interests include wireless communication and networks,
wireless sensor networks, access protocols, and security. Dr.
Gidlund is an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS.
Paulo Bellavista received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees
in computer science engineering from the University of
Bologna, Italy. He is currently a Full Professor of distributed
and mobile systems with the University of Bologna. His
research interests include from pervasive wireless computing
to online big data processing under quality constraints and
from edge cloud computing to middleware for industry 4.0
applications. He serves on several editorial boards, including IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS
(Associate EiC), ACM CSUR, JNCA (Elsevier), and PMC
(Elsevier). He is the Scientific Coordinator of the H2020
BigData Project IoTwins.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Acta Astronautica
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/actaastro
Towards disruptions in Earth observation? New Earth Observation systems
and markets evolution: Possible scenarios and impacts☆
Gil Denisa,⁎
, Alain Claveriea
, Xavier Pascob
, Jean-Pierre Darnisc
, Benoît de Maupeoua
,
Murielle Lafayed
, Eric Morela
a Airbus Defence and Space, 31 rue des cosmonautes, 31402 Toulouse, France
b Fondation pour la Recherche Stratégique, 4 bis rue des pâtures, 75016 Paris, France
c Istituto Affari Internazionali,Internazionali, Via Angelo Brunetti, 9, 00186 Roma, Italy d Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales, 18 avenue Edouard Belin, 31401 Toulouse, France
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Earth Observation
New space
Very high resolution
Revisit
GEOINT
Constellations
Services
Business models
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the trends in Earth observation (EO) and the possible impacts on markets of the new
initiatives, launched either by existing providers of EO data or by new players, privately funded. After a
presentation of the existing models, the paper discusses the new approaches, addressing both commercial and
institutional markets. New concepts for the very high resolution markets, in Europe and in the US, are the main
focus of this analysis. Two complementary perspectives are summarised: on the one hand, the type of system
and its operational performance and, on the other, the related business models, concepts of operation and
ownership schemes.
Until now, Earth observation systems for the most critical institutional needs are mainly dedicated assets
owned and operated by governments or public organisations, often at national level. Even in the case of dual use
missions, the governmental and commercial operations are in general fully segregated for the very high
resolution satellites.
Recent evolutions could affect this paradigm. Firstly, the increased performance of commercial satellites has
a high degree of convergence with defence needs: 25–30 cm resolution is now the benchmark or at least a very
short term target for commercial missions. The second evolution is the development of hybrid procurement
schemes, combining proprietary missions and data buy framework contracts, partly triggered by the budgetary
constraints of public customers, some failures in the execution of large spy satellites contracts and by the
willingness to foster the competitiveness of industry on the export market.
New space is another trend, which is more disruptive. This trend begun in the Silicon Valley and spread
worldwide, arousing our expectations, sometimes excessively. This new model involves not only start-ups but
also big web actors with substantial investment capacity. Both aim to transforming space into a commodity,
taking benefit from the convergence between Information technology and EO. Beside the massive constellations
for broadband Internet access, some initiatives have been launched for Earth observation markets, targeting
high resolution and high revisit. Last but not least, more and more countries, the newcomers, invest in their own
EO capacity, confirming the soft power dimension of space but also opening new opportunities for international
or regional cooperation.
As many unpredictable events may occur, even in a short time frame, the last part of the paper has a
prospective dimension. Based on market trends and industrial stakes, it discusses the realism and likelihood of
possible scenarios and identifies their impacts on the EO landscape and the main stakeholders involved, in
particular in Europe:
– The governmental and institutional actors, using Earth observation data for their operational missions, with
an evolving balance between sovereign assets and external services.
– The commercial operators of very high resolution satellites, with the new market opportunities and the
possible emergence of worldwide champions.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2017.04.034
Received 16 December 2016; Accepted 26 April 2017
☆ Special thanks to Fabienne Grazzini, Nathalie Pisot, Marie-Christine Delucq, Rob Postma, Laura-Kate Wilson, Magalie Vaissière (ESA), David Hello (Terranis), Lionel Kerrelo
(GEO4i). ⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: gil.denis@airbus.com (G. Denis), alain.claverie@airbus.com (A. Claverie), x.pasco@frstrategie.org (X. Pasco), jp.darnis@iai.it (J.-P. Darnis),
benoit.demaupeou@airbus.com (B. de Maupeou), murielle.lafaye@cnes.fr (M. Lafaye), eric.morel@airbus.com (E. Morel).
Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
Available online 04 May 2017
0094-5765/ © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of IAA. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).
MARK
– The satellite manufacturers and their competitiveness.
– The role of nations and space agencies, including the non-dependence or national sovereignty and
international cooperation dimensions.
Based on the comparison of three “radical” scenarios, the conclusion shows that there are opportunities for
service providers and satellite manufacturers. Even without clear answer to the future industrial, technical and
political structure of EO systems, relevant indicators to be monitored during the next three-five years are
identified. The last section focuses on Europe and the role of institutions in order to support European
champions and small and medium companies in the new worldwide competition.
1. Objectives and structure of the paper
1.1. Overview
This paper reviews the new initiatives and new trends in Earth
observation (EO). Addressing both commercial and institutional
applications of optical satellites, new systems and concepts for the
very high resolution markets are the main focus of this analysis.
Earth observation systems for the most critical institutional needs,
including the defence intelligence, are mainly dedicated assets
owned and operated by governments or public organisations.
Recent evolutions, such as the high degree of convergence between
the defence needs and the commercial capacities (30-cm resolution
is the new benchmark), challenge this paradigm. Three categories of
stakeholders are involved: the established commercial operators, the
so-called new space actors, aiming at transforming space as a
commodity, and nations with new ambitions in space, as instrument
of sovereignty and soft power.
While many papers address the conditions likely to attract private
investment and venture capital by imitating the Silicon Valley spirit,
our analysis focuses on the market and industrial dimension of Earth
Observation imagery and related services. Both for large and small
companies, investors or shareholders will support new initiatives if
there is a good growth potential. Three “radical” scenarios, with very
distinct growth options are analysed. Driving factors are identified as
well as the consequences (threats and opportunities) on the stakeholders. One of the key issues addressed is to assess if the current
champions can be disrupted by the new players. Some recommendations are also proposed.
Nomenclature
BA business Angel
BASIC broad Area Satellite Imagery Collection
B2B business to business
B2C business to consumer
B2G business to government
CAGR compound annual growth rate
CE90 circular Error at 90% confidence
CIBORG commercial Initiative to Buy Operationally Responsive
GEOINT
CMG control moment gyroscope
CNES centre National d′Etudes Spatiales
COTS commercial-off-the-shelf
CRADA cooperative R&D Agreement
CVC corporate Venture Capital
DAP direct Access Partner (Digital Globe)
DARPA defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DEM digital Elevation Model
DGA délégation Générale pour l′Armement.
DOD US Department of Defence
DRS direct Receiving Station (Airbus Defence and Space)
DSP délégation de Service Public (contractual scheme for the
commercial distribution of Pleiades imagery)
DTM digital Terrain Model
EAR export Administration Regulations
EARSC European Association of Remote Sensing Companies
EC European Commission
EDRS European Data Relay Satellite
EO Earth Observation
EU European Union
EUSC European Union Satellite Centre
FIA future imagery Architecture
G2G Government to government
GCP Ground Control Point
GFW global Forest Watch
GSD ground Sampling Distance
HR high Resolution
IDIQ indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity
IMINT image Intelligence
IOT internet Of Things
IT information Technologies
ITAR international Traffic in arms Regulations
KH key Hole satellites family
LBS location-Based Services
LEO low Earth Orbit
MR medium Resolution
MS member States (Europe)
MTF modulation Transfer Function
MS member State
NGA National Geospatial Agency
NIIRS National Imagery Interpretability Rating Scale
NIMA National Imagery and Mapping Agency
NRO National reconnaissance office
NSG National System for Geospatial Intelligence
NSP National Security Policy
NSR Northern Sky Research
NTM National Technical Means
PAN panchromatic imagery
PDD Presidential Decision Directive
PPP Public Private Partnership
P/F platform
R&D research and development
SAR synthetic Aperture Radar
SLA service Level Agreement
SIA satellite Industry Association
S/C spacecraft
SME small and Medium enterprise
SSO Sun Synchronous Orbit
UAV unmanned Aircraft Vehicle
VC venture Capital
VHR very High Resolution
WB World Bank
WRI World Research Institute
XS multispectral imagery
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
416
1.2. Structure of the paper
Section 2 introduces the current landscape of Earth Observation
and the main changes. It also draws an historical perspective, highlighting the evolution of policy context and international environment
since the first spy-satellites launched during the cold war. In Section 3,
we describe the challenges faced by the data providers and satellites
manufacturers: higher resolution and higher revisit, a bit like trying to
square the circle. The profile of the main stakeholders is summarised in
Section 4, with a specific focus on New Space trends and its actors,
often privately funded.
Section 5 describes the recent evolution of the market and the new
perspectives in this new context. Scenarios for the future identified as
possible evolutions and their consequences on the role and influence of
the various stakeholders are presented in Section 6. Section 7 provides
a wider perspective of disruptions in GEOINT with some considerations about the strategic scenarios for Europe, where new space actors
are currently nearly absent.
2. Setting the scene: historical perspective and new trends
2.1. Introduction
Different types of Earth observation models have been developed
over the last forty years bringing significant changes in paradigms:
– Public data with Landsat in the US.
– Development of the commercial market initiated by Spot image
(1986) and then by Digital Globe.
– National support to private companies by nations thought anchor
tenant contracts: Digital globe backed by the National Geospatial
Agency (NGA).
– Development of dual systems (defence and commercial): Cosmo
Skymed and Pleiades.
– Purely private investment for SPOT-6 and SPOT-7.
– Development of shared satellites and virtual constellations (DMC,
Disaster Monitoring Constellation).
– The so-called “New space” era and the recent development of Earth
Observations constellations.
2.2. New space and old recipes: historical perspective, evolution of
policy context and international environment
2.2.1. This old good New space
New Space is new, until a newer disruption arrives… Since the
launch of Landsat 1 in 1972 and the failed attempt to privatize this
programme with EOSAT (Earth Observation Satellite Company),
several disruptive events have shape the EO history.
2.2.2. SPOT 1: the advent of commercial era
From this point of view, in 1986, SPOT 1 launch and the decision of
the French government and CNES to use a commercial model for image
distribution were a revolution.
Two months after this launch, SPOT 1 was tasked to acquire the first
10-meter images after the explosion of reactor n°4 at the Chernobyl
nuclear plant in Ukraine (Fig. 1). These images demonstrated the
potential role of commercial satellites in support of intelligence missions:
no other imagery, either from civil satellites (Landsat resolution was too
coarse) or from US spy satellites (the images were classified), was able to
witness the reality of the disaster behind the Iron Curtain.
SPOT 1 demonstrated one of the main benefits of commercial
remote sensing for intelligence missions: that it can be shared with
anyone. The US newspaper “USA today” called SPOT satellite “The
ultimate skycam”. In the nineties the French took the leading role in
this commercial market although the data sales revenues covered only
the cost of satellite operations.
2.2.3. Towards US leadership on the commercial market
Already in 1983, Spot Image Corporation was considered by the
Wall Street Journal as an “Invader”, illustrating the willingness of the
US government to restore the US dominance on this market. In the
seventies Carter’s Administration identified the opportunity for the US
to develop a commercial market in order to capitalize on the huge
investment in space already done.
Taking into account the lessons learnt, successive US Administrations
(Reagan, Bush and Clinton) built up the foundation of the US policy on
the commercial market expressed in the Clinton Administration Policy on
Remote Sensing Licensing and Exports (1994).
An important milestone is undoubtedly the launch of Ikonos-2 in
September 1999: Ikonos-2 was the first commercial Earth Observation
able to collect images with a ground sampling distance below 1-meter
(0.82 m GSD at Nadir in panchromatic mode). US took the lead of the
race for higher resolution (ref [1]).
Innovative approaches adopted by NGA, such as Clearview,
NextView and Enhanced View, awarded to Digital Globe and Space
Imaging in 2003, were the cornerstones for the implementation of the
new US policies. They have substantially changed the procurement
schemes: instead of relying only on dedicated assets owned and
operated by governments, often at national level, these framework
programmes were the first Private Public Partnership (PPP) in Earth
Observation.
2.2.4. Autonomy or dominance
For security concerns US Administrations for the two last decades
have favoured Commercial Services aimed at minimizing the proliferation or the uncontrolled dissemination of very high resolution images.
US players, such as Digital Globe, offer the best resolution to deter
countries who could plan to acquire their own EO satellites. Robert
Cardillo, director of the NGA, recently stated (Ref [2]): “I recognize
that there are two sides to the world’s growing transparency”.
2.2.5. Google Earth: the beginning of “New Space”
In this context, the introduction of Google Earth in June 2005,
based on a virtual globe created by Keyhole Inc., triggered also a
disruption, in democratising access to satellite imagery, even if criticisms have been made with respect to the threat to privacy or national
security.
Google Earth opened the door to full private investment from nonSpace players.
2.2.6. HELIOS, a unique example of cooperation in EO for defence
The implementation of French political decisions to acquire
France’s own optical space system (HELIOS 1) in 1984 in support of
national sovereignty and nuclear deterrence policy has taken full
benefit of the SPOT experience, paving the way of the future duality
concept.
HELIOS 1 and SPOT 4 were based on the same platform built by
former Matra Espace (now Airbus Defence and Space), the optical
Fig. 1. In 1986, Chernobyl disaster seen by SPOT 1. Copyright CNES - Distribution
Airbus DS
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
417
instruments for both systems built by former Aérospatiale Cannes (now
TAS). CNES expertise on overall system architecture, control ground
segment, user ground segment and operations (Spot Image) was key
for support the development of the HELIOS ground system and its
handover by the military users for the operations and maintenance.
HELIOS remains the unique prototype of international military
cooperation in space imagery. Spain, Italy, for HELIOS 1, and then
Belgian, Greece, Germany have the right to task HELIOS 2 satellites for
their own needs following specific arbitration rules under government
to government (G2G) agreements, and to receive and process the
corresponding images. As compensation, the national partners fund
the participation of their industry to the realization of part of the
satellites and the ground segments, or, for Italy and Germany,
exchange SAR data, coming from respectively Cosmo Skymed and
SAR-Lupe satellites for HELIOS optical data.
2.2.7. Towards dual use and export markets
15 years after HELIOS, the Pleiades system was designed as a full
dual system, able to provide imagery to both commercial/civil and
military users with appropriate security and priority rules. After 5 years
of operations this duality concept is considered as a success. Italy with
Cosmo-Skymed implemented the same concept: the satellites are
shared between the defence organisation and the commercial ones.
This model is an alternative of the US one to respond to the lack of
market maturity.
In parallel, in the middle of nineties, France and the United
Kingdom developed earth observation satellites for the export market,
under ITAR regulation. The rationale of this market is to offer to space
as instruments of sovereignty:
– Integrity of the image (no modification by third parties).
– Full access of the satellite resources.
– Confidentiality of national areas of interest.
2.2.8. SPOT-6: when EO satellites are privately funded
Another major innovation occurred in France in 2012 with the
launch of SPOT-6, aimed at ensuring the continuity of wide-swath
high-resolution observation services provided by the SPOT-5 mission.
In this case, the disruption is the funding model: while the two
Pleiades spacecraft were publicly funded, SPOT-6 and SPOT-7 opened
a new era: for the first time in the remote-sensing industry, satellite
development costs have been funded entirely with private funds
provided by Airbus Defence and Space.
2.2.9. Radar case
The commercial High resolution radar satellites emerged in 1995 in
Canada with Radarsat-1 operated by MDA. In 2007, Italy launched the
first radar constellation of 4 satellites, this system is dual.
The German joint venture between the DLR and Airbus Defence
and Space has developed a radar system: TerraSAR-X (2007) and its
twin satellite TanDEM-X (2010). The key application is WorldDEM, a
worldwide high accuracy Digital Elevation Model (DEM). It is worthwhile mentioning that there is no commercial SAR system in the US.
2.2.10. New space, at the crossroads of space and IT
New Space can be considered as the meeting of the Space world with
the IT (Information Technology) one. The first one has developed the
relevant concepts with the associated technologies: e-Corce, Rapid Eye,
when the second one brings the massive development of the Information
technology (big data, analytics) with full private investment. As usual in
the IT world, some of these new players will disappear but some of them
will survive, supported by the NGA’s willingness to consider emerging
players to diversify its imagery supply.
Over time, satellite EO-based services were provided towards
private customers increasing revenues and competitiveness of services
industry. But until recently, acquisition of satellite assets was only
affordable for governments or major economic actors. EO-based
services providers were made sustainable mainly through government
and public procurement.
In parallel, development of the internet increased mass market
interest for geo-information. This context was favourable for crossfertilizing space EO imagery with digital economy, paving the way to
new businesses and services.
2.3. A wind of change in the atmosphere?
The advent of New Space applied to Earth observation is the last
and most visible change (Ref [3]), with the first start-ups, such as
Skybox Imaging (today Terra Bella), created in 2009, and Planet Labs
(today Planet), founded in 2010, proposing constellations of several
small or medium and low-cost satellites. Their objective is to propose
revolutionary operational and business models with cost effective
services combining high resolution and high revisit.
Providing administrations with space imagery and information
added-value products on an operational basis promoted development
of new companies and employment. The expected development of
procurement of geo-information services by US administrations reinforced motivation of entrepreneurs for developing commercial offers
using space assets. This impulse at developing new business using
satellite EO-based services found a favourable relay towards venture
capitalists. Benefiting from first achievements obtained by Space-X and
Blue origin, the space sector was identified as a new promising sector
for making business.
Last but not least, even if less publicized than the new space
ventures, new countries invest in earth observation capacities. Some of
them (Russia, India, China, South Korea) are already active and
recognised players but show new ambitions. There are also newcomers,
buying or building earth observation satellites, as instrument of
sovereignty or soft power, to ensure an independent access to imagery
or to develop its industry.
For the “Traditional Space” the resolution has been a significant
advantage to drive the business within the last 30 years, it moved from
10 m (Spot 1) to 31 cm (Worldview-4). New Space entrepreneurs target
the revisit through consequent constellations with medium or high
resolution sensors. The change of paradigm is not limited to the New
Space initiatives coming from Silicon Valley:
– Airbus Defence & Space for the first time transferred one of its
satellite (SPOT 7) to Azerbaijan (Azersky) in the frame of a wider
cooperation agreement.
– SSTL has created a new hybrid model with DMC3, a satellite
constellation of 3 1 m GSD satellites fully leased by a single company
from China (21AT).
– On the export market with PerúSAT-1, Airbus Defence & Space has
built up a new type of offer combining services (immediate access to
the Airbus fleet of satellites) and classic satellite export.
– Through full ground segment interoperability, both Airbus Defence
& Space with Azercosmos and Digital Globe with Taqnia have
developed strategic partnerships for the exploitation of satellite
constellations.
2.4. Current landscape of Earth Observation
In a nutshell, the current landscape of VHR EO can be summarised
through following trends:
2.4.1. Customer needs and technical performance
– The performance of commercial satellites is increasing: high degree
of convergence with the defence needs. 25–30 cm resolution is now
the benchmark or at least a very short term target for the
commercial missions.
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
418
– Other performance criteria are becoming more and more important
for institutional and commercial operators on top of GSD: volume of
acquired surface per day, reactivity and revisit frequency, image
freshness, video capability, multispectral capability, automatic processing, delivery mechanisms, etc.
– The performance of ground infrastructures and distribution
platforms (data and services) becomes paramount: huge increase of space imagery data to be processed exploited and
distributed.
– Satellite lifetime is much longer (10 years) than before, enabling a
better business case.
2.4.2. Market and competition
– There is a continuous and worldwide growth of the VHR imagery
market.
– Military institutions especially in US are increasingly reliant on VHR
commercial imagery providers with appropriate security rules.
– The value chain is shifting from the raw data to services and
applications.
– Value for money: there is a strong pressure to reduce infrastructure
and operational costs.
– Hybrid procurement schemes, combining proprietary missions and
data buy framework contracts, partly triggered by the budgetary
constraints of public customers and nations.
– Increasingly, the new comer countries invest in their own EO
capacity, confirming the soft power dimension of space but also
opening new opportunities for international co-operation or commercial agreements.
– New space and disruptive initiatives are not only developed by startups but also by large web actors with a huge investment capacity.
Both aim at transforming space as a commodity.
– To complete this global picture, new players are targeting the export
market: South Korea, China and Israel.
2.4.3. Regulations
– VHR Imagery remains highly sensitive information and legislation
could continue to evolve impacting the new business models.
3. The digital Earth challenge: one Earth, one meter, one
day… or more?
3.1. High resolution and high revisit: like squaring the circle around
the Earth
Commercial providers of EO imagery are used to say that resolution
or Ground Sampling Distance (GSD) is not the sole criterion for
choosing a geospatial data source. Depending on the specific application, revisit time, speed of delivery to the customer, radiometric and
spectral quality, geolocation accuracy and acquisition capacity (km2
/
day) are other key performance factors.
Nevertheless, both for defence and commercial markets, there is a
worldwide and continuous race for sharper images and higher revisit
(Fig. 2).
For Low Earth Orbit, increasing the resolution of the sensor means
that the swath, the area covered by the satellite during its pass over a
region, becomes smaller. In the case of polar orbits, it means a longer
revisit time for a given area as the satellite orbits the globe (the typical
cycle is 14 orbits per day).
In order to serve many applications requiring both data freshness
and regular updates (e.g. agriculture, site monitoring for intelligence or
geo-marketing).
Basically, swath and number of orbits per day give an indication of
the number of satellites needed for a daily coverage of the whole Earth.
In their quest for better performance and acquisition capacity, engineers and satellites try to find the smarter trade-off between
resolution and revisit for a specific market.
For a given GSD, several solutions can reduce the revisit time and
increase the acquisition capacity: steerable mirrors, agility of the
platform or multiple satellites, specific orbits (geo-synchronous, inclination), etc. Beyond a single satellite, small or large constellations
are popular solutions. While the established data providers rely on
small or virtual constellations of agile satellites, new comers seem to
bet on a large number of small and low-cost satellites. It is worthwhile
recalling a couple of basic rules of physics and space mechanics in
order to better understand the current and future initiatives and
business cases.
3.2. New space and old physics
10 m, 1 m, 50 cm… 30 cm GSD is the new benchmark for very high
resolution satellites.
Commercial and marketing people would like to believe that
Moore’s law, predicting that the density of integrated circuits doubles
approximately every two years, drives also the evolution of the
resolution of earth observation satellites.
Unfortunately, system engineers and optical specialists temper
their enthusiasm each time they recall that Kepler’s law and
Rayleigh’s Criterion remain applicable. The first one is related to the
orbit parameters and the second one to the performance of an earth
observation instrument.
In a nutshell, Kepler's law states that a space-borne sensor can’t fly
at low altitudes and stay stationary over our heads. Roughly speaking,
Kepler caps the revisit time and acquisition capacity of a single, nadirpointing satellite.
Rayleigh’s criterion defines the minimum resolvable detail for a
specific observation instrument. The resolution of any imaging system
is limited by diffraction. For a given wavelength, the angular resolution
is inversely proportional to the aperture of the instrument (i.e. the
diameter of the main mirror). Other parameters such as the Modular
Transfer Function (MTF) are used to specify optical performance but
Rayleigh’s criterion is very useful for a first and simple estimate.
The aperture of the instrument and the size and mass of the mirror
are key difficulties facing the satellite manufacturers. A large telescope
needs a large satellite.
Even with the miniaturisation of components, ensuring the accurate
and stable but rapid pointing of a large instrument requires a
sophisticated platform, with star-trackers, accurate inertial measurement units and control moment gyroscopes (CMG).
This is not always cutting-edge technology but, even with a product
approach, that comes at a cost, in particular for the small number of
“exquisite satellites” used for reconnaissance or for dual-use applications.
New space actors target less expensive data collection systems, with
compromises or new approaches on the image performance features. It
Fig. 2. The Digital Earth challenge, a wealth of pixels.
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
419
does not mean poor performance: integration with IT and software
open new avenues, such as a new breakdown of functions between
space and ground segments or advanced data processing and fusion
with GCP/DTM in order to mitigate the reduced stability of smaller
platforms (e.g. Blackbridge announced 10 m CE90 accuracy using
Landsat GCP, suitable for some applications).
New space actors make the assumption that commercial VHR
systems are firstly designed to meet the needs of defence and
governmental users.
From their point of view, they are therefore not always well suited
for commercial applications (e.g. cost, revisit time, global coverage)
and a large proportion of the resource is pre-empted, leaving limited
capacity for civilian use. Pleiades dual use model is a notable exception.
It explains also why the new space initiatives shall not be seen as a
homogeneous trend. Design choices made by Planet, Terra Bella or
UrtheCast, focusing either on resolution or revisit show different
visions of business and markets to be addressed.
3.3. Small pixels and big data
An important driver is the volume of data captured each day by the
Earth Observation Systems. Even before the era of new space, there
were two main approaches:
– Capture every point each day (as meteorological satellites do in LEO
such as Metop or Terra).
– Capture any point each day (the operational model for most of the
current VHR satellites such as Pleiades or WorldView-3).
The main EO data providers use the second option. Some of the
New Space actors have chosen the first solution, possibly limited to
land surface area (29% of the Earth’s surface area).
3.3.1. A wealth of pixels
In both cases, a wealth of pixels is acquired by the satellite
instrument. The first option is obviously the most challenging one in
terms of data volumes: for instance 57 terapixels (tera=1012) for a full
Earth coverage at 3 m GSD or 5.7 petapixels (peta=1015) at 30 cm GSD.
Focusing on land surfaces only reduces the total volume by a factor of
3.
Even with a very efficient image compression algorithm and a
datalink offering a comfortable bandwidth, the transmission time
between the spacecraft and the ground remains significant.
As there are only few minutes of visibility between the ground
receiving station and the satellites, the number of ground stations shall
fit the total capacity of the system. An alternative is the use of data relay
satellites (such as EDRS already implement on some Copernicus
satellites).
It is worthwhile mentioning that the performance of the future
satellite system will depend increasingly on its ground-based infrastructure.
Last but not least, access to space remains a key issue: new launcher
concepts targeting affordable access to space for small or medium-size
satellites are emerging but they have still to demonstrate the reliability
and their performance. Fig. 3 summarises the “Digital Earth
Challenge”.
3.4. The needs of defence and intelligence
It is, of course, not possible to discuss the detailed requirements of
the main intelligence missions and to describe the performance of
current or planned system. But it is worthwhile having a look on the
National Imagery Interpretability Rating Scale (NIIRS) and the main
GSD thresholds enabling a particular intelligence task (detection,
reconnaissance or identification).
Even if developed in the early seventies, the National Imagery
Interpretability Rating Scale remains a very useful scale. Originated in
the Intelligence Community, NIIRS is a task-based scale for rating
imagery acquired from imaging systems. It was defined in order to
predict image interpretability: this analysis cannot be done from simple
physical image quality measures (such as GSD or MTF). The NIIRS
consists of 10 graduated levels 0–9), with several interpretation tasks
or criteria within each level. With a NIIRS 2 panchromatic image, for
example, image analysts are able to detect large hangars at an airfield,
while on NIIRS 6 imagery they are able to distinguish between models
of small/medium helicopters.
Five typical GSD thresholds can be defined with respect to the main
geo-intelligence tasks (detection, reconnaissance, identification and
description):
– Above 10 m, the detection performance is poor. It reaches only 25%
for an image with a 10-m GSD.
– Around 4–5 m, satisfaction rate for detection reaches 50% and first
reconnaissance of large assets (buildings, vessels) becomes possible.
– Between 1 and 2 m, the reconnaissance performance increases
significantly but identification hit rate remains poor.
– Identification tasks are performed much more efficiently (satisfaction above 50%) with a GSD around 30–40 cm.
– 10–15 cm GSD images enable detailed description.
Fig. 3. When New space meets old physics: a pale blue dot, hard to digitize. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of
this article)
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
420
The minimal requirements to meet NGA needs with commercial
imagery (3 mission layers such as BASIC) can be found in the report of
the expert panel chaired by Peter Marino in 2007 (ref [4]).
4. A new game of thrones: the usual suspects, the space
invaders and new nations in a worldwide competition
This section gives an overview of the EO imagery landscape in
September 2016 with a short presentation of the main providers of EO
data and services.
4.1. Main providers of EO data and services
4.1.1. The usual suspects
The two champions are Digital Globe (US) and Airbus Defence and
Space (Europe).
DigitalGlobe is today the worldwide leader. It offers today the
sharpest imagery (30 cm GSD) with WorldView-3 and WorldView-4
(launched in November 2016). DG’s first market is US administration
(63.7% in 2015 and 2016) with 55% for NGA as anchor customer
(framework contract). In 2015, DigitalGlobe communicated on its
“steady business with the U.S. and other governmental customers”
compared to disappointing results to the private sector showing the
challenge to address both non-governmental customers and a large
number of customers (Ref [5]). DigitalGlobe and TAQNIA (Saudi
Arabia) recently entered a joint venture for a small constellation.
Since June 2014, DigitalGlobe is allowed by US government to collect
and sell imagery at the best available resolutions (up to 25 cm
panchromatic and 1.0 m multispectral GSD). In February 2017,
Digital Globe entered into a merger agreement with MacDonald,
Dettwiler and Associates Ltd.
Airbus Defence and Space Intelligence division is the second
champion and first commercial operator: SPOT 1 operations started
in 1986. Its uniqueness is the capacity to offer both VHR optical
(Pleiades-1A and Pleiades 1B) and X-band radar imagery (TerraSAR-X
and TanDEM-X). Airbus Defence and Space provides also HR / wide
swath imagery with SPOT-6 and SPOT-7. There is no major anchor
tenancy contract but the twin Pleiades satellites have been funded by
the French government, in a dual use scheme.
It was not anymore the case for SPOT 6 and SPOT 7: satellite
development costs have been funded entirely by private funds provided
by Airbus Defence and Space. The first market is the commercial
market. The Geo-intelligence division is backed by Airbus Defence and
Space (Space Systems) for the development of new satellites. For
Airbus Defence and Space, the next important milestone is the
estimated end of life of Pleiades-1A and Pleiades-1B around year
2020 (Pleiades follow-on, end of DSP). Timely and predictable renewal
of space assets, performance improvement (resolution and revisit) and
continuity of data supply are essential conditions to maintain customers’ trust and fidelity. As announced at the World Satellite Business
Week by Nicolas Chamussy, Head of the Business Line Space Systems,
Airbus Defence and Space is designing and building a new constellation
of optical satellites, comprising four identical and very agile sensors
delivering very high-resolution imagery.
Despite their differences, DigitalGlobe and Airbus Defence and
Space share similar elements of profile: they deliver high quality VHR
imagery (up to 30 cm), with a focus on acquisition capacity and
powerful distribution services, based on a fleet of agile satellites with
large telescopes for VHR imagery, direct receiving stations (DAP or
DRS) and networks of distributors. Most of their revenues come from
image sales, direct access and delivery services, targeting both domestic
and export markets. They propose information services, mainly
through vertical markets, including defence.
The other established commercial actors are Imagesat International
(Israel), e-GEOS (Italy). Imagesat International operates the family of
EROS satellites. EROS-B delivers 0.7 m GSD at nadir from 510 km.
The swath is 7 km. EROS-C is expected to be launched in 2019. It will
deliver 0.4 m GSD from 500 km. e-GEOS operates the Cosmo-Skymed
SAR constellation and distributes Digital Globe imagery in Europe.
4.1.2. The space invaders: welcome to the club?
They can also be called “aliens” or “barbarians” (Ref [6]): they do
not belong to the regular crowd of the “space club”, have their own
rules, coming mainly from the IT world and they are fast and agile, with
a fresh look on entry barriers.
For a few years, several private companies have emerged in the U.S.
with the project to develop and operate space systems on an industrial
basis with disruptive commercial objectives.
4.1.3. The rise of New Space
These firms, mainly based in the Silicon Valley or near Seattle, bet
on low-cost technology to provide more affordable space systems and
services both for earth observation and for telecommunications.
These projects are designed to maximize the benefits reaped from
Commercial off-the-shelf technologies, from reduced manufacturing
costs as well as from leaner industrial processes. The massive use of
high-performance COTS technologies has already proved the feasibility
of constellations of several tens of cubesats weighing around 5 kg and
costing a few thousands of dollars per unit. But New Space is not
always “small is beautiful”-oriented: some initiatives are based on
medium-size or even large satellites.
4.1.4. The nations
Whether they are veterans in space activities (China or India) or
newcomers deciding to have their own EO capacities, more and more
nations are becoming active players in Earth Observation. This affects
both the competition and the accessible market.
For example, SI imaging Services (South Korea) distributes since
mid-2016 VHR imagery (GSD < 50 cm) acquired by Kompsat-3A.
Another example is the drastic reduction of EO data imported by
China, since the “Middle Kingdom” operates high and very high
resolution satellites. Soon or later, China will enter the worldwide EO
market as a new provider.
4.2. Focus on new Space: business not as usual?
4.2.1. New space: the old good recipe of the Silicon Valley
The “new space” trend appeared recently. New private actors are
more and more active in the space ecosystem with two different
profiles:
– Many start-ups and small and medium size enterprises (SME) are
betting on the development of very small satellites, not only for
technology testing and education but also for operational missions.
– The big players of the Web sphere are increasingly interested by
Space and able to invest massively: Elon Musk with SpaceX is the
most famous example but Google and Facebook announced also
their own initiatives. Their assumption is the disruption will be
triggered by the convergence between advanced information technologies and EO.
The big players with a start-up spirit are very impressive, with a
scalable business model able to impact more than one billion customers, aggressive and agile solutions.
They are able to lower or break the entry barriers of the targeted
market and have a huge cash capacity. In June 2014, a major
announcement was made by Google Inc: an agreement to buy Skybox
Imaging for $500 million in cash. In April 2015, SpaceX announced
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
421
court action to open Air force space Launch mission to competition.
The most significant initiative is Oneweb with a massive constellation
of several hundreds of small LEO satellites providing high speed
connectivity.
Either from start-ups or major actors, these initiatives have
common features. They are launched by private actors, even when
supported by public money or public orders. Even if not based in
California, they apply also the Silicon Valley recipe for success. They
are fast and agile, proposing scalable systems and are convinced that
their dream will become a reality.
The viability of the business plan is perhaps questionable, in
particular when one has in mind the attempts to develop the first
constellations of satellites (Iridium, Globastar, Teledesic, Celestri) but,
as depicted on Fig. 4, the new entrepreneurs are able to raise funds (ref
[7]), sign strategic partnerships and, for some of them, build and
launch satellites and start their operations.
4.2.2. New Space and Earth observation
In the field of space imagery, many firms have planned to use large
constellations of EO satellites. They propose new paradigms and new
visions of the value chain:
– Cheaper systems and ground segments.
– Multi sensors ground processing systems.
– Lower cost / reliability and higher replacement rate.
– B2C / Mass market / Vertical integration.
– Data analytics.
– Free of charge imagery to enter new markets.
– New solutions for Capex / Opex optimization.
– And the scalability, i.e. the capacity to start business before the full
deployment of the system.
“Democratising” the access to space imagery is usually one key
element for their business strategy. Web portals and subscriptions via
Internet are commonly referred as preferred marketing tools. However,
some of these projects seem to clearly address the usual institutional
customer as their reference business partners.
New space in earth observation is mainly an US story, with the
exception of Satellogic in Argentina (Ref [8]) and NorStar Space Data
in Canada. Most of the investment is from the US, in particular from
the Silicon Valley. Other the past ten years, more than 33 projects of
EO satellite constellations have been announced. Despite the bloom of
new satellite EO constellations, many experts remained sceptical on the
capability of all these projects to become operational. On the 33
announcements, today only 9 have actually started and none is fully
operational.
In June 2014, when acquiring Skybox Imaging for 500 M$, Google
surprised space remote sensing experts and traditional players. This
acquisition highlighted the potential economic value of “low-cost”
satellite EO constellations, even if few demonstration satellites have
been launched. The potential threat was taken seriously by established
providers of EO data and services who started to adapt their offer and
their organisation. In 2015, Planet and Urthecast have raised sufficient
funding to acquire the space assets of established competitors such as
Blackbridge and DEIMOS, re-enforcing their business model with a
“traditional” satellite constellation and a client portfolio. These first
buybacks are observed with interest by satellite EO experts and venture
capitalists to understand the dynamic of this new economic ecosystem.
Even if none of the newly announced constellations have reached full
capacity, there are already concrete consequences on the market and
the existing players: the Rapid Eye (Blackbridge) and Deimos acquisitions give better access to market and a customer base for Planet and
UrtheCast but creates an exit strategy for the two former European
players.
A new value chain for “low-cost satellite EO” is being developed
including satellite and sensor manufacturers, integration and tests
providers, communication systems and operations services providers.
Downstream services are been developed, aiming at irrigating economic sectors with appropriated analytics for agriculture, resources monitoring, transports, maritime surveillance and many other sectors. If
stakeholders agree on the fact that few projects will be operational and
that the space EO sector landscape will evolve, no one will make a
prognostic in a domain where agility is the rule of the game, and where
some players have already change their business model twice.
4.2.3. Presentation of the main initiatives
Planet, (formerly Planet Labs) has put into orbit nearly 150
cubesats. Their GSD is between 3 and 5 m. While modest in terms of
pure performance (when compared with 0.30 m resolution from the
best commercial satellites), the main feature of these new initiatives is
the high number of platforms in orbit. This allows very high revisit
rates and makes space sensors much more reactive than when placed
on a few satellites only. Other on-going projects plan to make use of
somewhat heavier satellites, even if they can still be considered in the
class of micro-satellites.
Terra Bella (formerly Skybox Imaging before its acquisition by
Google in 2014) has planned to put up in space a constellation of
around 24 satellites in the next few years. 7 satellites have already been
launched (the last 4 ones in September 2016). The mass is around
100 kg and allow a ground resolution of about 0.90 m as well as
producing short videos. Blacksky Global, located in Seattle, plans to
put into orbit 60 imaging satellites allowing a performance of around
Fig. 4. 2015, a record year for VC investment in space. Source: Spacetec Analysis / Tauri Group data (Ref [7]).
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
422
1 m ground resolution (with an additional video capacity) by 2019.
Already 6 satellites are under preparation. UrtheCast, a Canadian firm
based in Vancouver plans to serve the governmental market with its 8
optical and 8 radar satellites in preparation. This firm targets a highquality phased optical and radar product with 0.50 m and 1–5 m
resolution respectively in the optical and radar domains.
Many other projects (Ref [9]) exist as of today, with different mixes
regarding the number of satellites, the mass, the complexity and the
performances, but with a common objective to reap market shares
using innovative dissemination practices. The table in the Annex
provides a technical overview of the main initiatives. The selection is
not exhaustive and focuses mainly on operators who have already
launched at least one satellite. Known specifications confirm that there
are actually two types of satellites: very small or small ones (less than
50 kg) and medium-size or even large ones (e.g. 670 kg for the
Urthecast optical satellites).
4.2.4. A vast programme indeed
The pitches and value proposals give an indication of plans,
differentiators and ambition of each company. Nearly all promote
information freshness, apps or platforms and data analytics tools.
Urthecast “moves pixels from space to the screen” and states that its
“business model borrows more from DG than form Terra Bella”. Terra
Bella wants to “empower global businesses to make better decisions
with timely, high fidelity imagery and infinite analytics”. Google’s
fingerprint is not too far: “Rethinking geospatial data in a bigger way,
Imagery is only the beginning…”.
Planet’s motto is “See change. Change the World. Anywhere,
anytime”. Planet claims to “design, build and launch satellites faster
than any company or government in history. We use commodity
consumer electronics to build highly capable satellites at drastically
lower costs. With the most advanced satellites launching into orbit
every 3–4 months, our capabilities are on the cutting edge”.
4.2.5. Some innovative private financing
Most of these firms have been supported by private funds.
According to a recent study (ref [10]) performed by Bryce Space and
technology (formerly Tauri Group), the space start-ups (all activities
included) have raised almost $13 Billion of private investments
between 2000 and 2015. For the sole year 2015, a yearly record of
more than $2.3 Billion has been spent in more than 50 investments in
space start-ups in the U.S.
Investments can be of different nature when made by business
angels, venture capitalists, or by major industrial groups eager to make
acquisitions of strategic nature or simply as space enthusiasts.
Obviously, the objectives of those respective types of investors may
be very different. Mainly, expectations on the nature and the level of
return on investments can be very distinct, business angels being more
inclined to support the space activity of a start-up on the mid to longterm while some venture capitalists are more demanding for rapid
financial results.
From the standpoint of space imagery activity, venture capitalist
financing but also the interest manifested by major groups has
formed the bulk of the resources for fresh start-ups. It must be noted
that this phenomenon is rather new in a field that had been
supported until now by very few private financers. It must also be
noted that such investments can be highly rewarding. The example
of Terra Bella comes immediately in mind when Google paid more
than $480 Million for acquiring it, while only a total of $91 Million
had been invested in the start-up by a few venture capitalists. The
benefits for them were well worth the initial effort. Planet has
managed to go through five rounds of investments representing in
2016 about $206 Million contributed by 17 investors and bought
recently Terra Bella.
4.2.6. Mixed with some level of government support
Obviously, many questions remain unanswered about the reality
and the size of the market for such new economic actors. This explains
the importance of initial investments for sustaining the first years of
operations.
At a minimum, one can note in the U.S. a real interest from the
public institutions for supporting this activity. A bit like in the case of
early support for more traditional operators like Digital Globe for many
years now, the U.S. government through the National Geospatial
intelligence Agency (NGA) has declared many times its enthusiasm
for the new comers. In 2015, a first initiative known as NextGen
Tasking Initiative has been announced to sustain these new commercial activities, especially to help for the development of new methods
for the collection, processing and dissemination of commercially
generated data.
This interest has found its official expression in an agency document titled Commercial Geoint Strategy published the same year by
the NGA (ref [11]). Six months later, the creation of an “Outpost
Valley” close to Silicon Valley start-ups was announced via the
reinforcement of the NGA Californian Branch.
More recently even, a new Commercial Initiative to Buy operationally Responsive GEOINT (CIBORG) has been publicized with the
explicit goal to support the new space imagery industry both for federal
users (ref [12]). Terra Bella, UrtheCast, Planet and BlackSky Global
have been identified as the first potential interested parties. The first
CIBORG contracts shall be passed early 2017 with an expectedly rising
yearly budget over the period 2018–2022.
4.2.7. Beyond Earth Observation
New endeavours beyond the sole imagery may emerge very soon for
future commercial constellations. The announcement made in July
2016 about the cooperative venture between Lockheed Martin and
HawkEye 360 to develop a small sat constellation for radio-frequency
mapping is a good example of possibly evolving missions for small
satellites.
If these techniques are deployed operationally, their multi-purpose
character can be key to reorganize the missions of each specialized
constellation. A possible trend may be to end up with global “spacebased utilities” capable of carrying out mixed and adaptable missions.
4.2.8. Other actors
Some start-ups do not plan to fly their own satellites: based in Palo
Alto, Orbital Insights, for instance, has recently received $20 Million in
new investment, including $5 Million from In-Q-Tel, the investment
arm of the US intelligence community. Orbital insights receives its data
through contracts with EO data owners. While gathering data on a
large scale from external sources, the start-up develops software to
extract insights from satellite and aerial imagery. Typical Analytic data
products are:
– Counting cars on retail parking lots.
– Gauging the amount of oil stored in tanks (floating lids shadows).
– And a new list of targets: trucks, ships, trains, plants, deforestation
(WRI), WB in Sri Lanka.
A second interesting example is SpaceKnow, also based in Silicon
Valley. Founded in 2013, SpaceKnow uses space imagery and other
data sources to track global economic trends from space through their
Analytics-as-a-Service products (analytics, alerts and indices). They
target a wide range of commercial and governmental clients across all
major industries. SpaceKnow SMI (China Satellite Manufacturing
Index) is the first trading index based on satellite data to be featured
on the Bloomberg Terminal. SpaceKnow SMI for China is based on the
monitoring of over 6000 industrial facilities across China to measure
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
423
levels of manufacturing activity.
4.3. Time to stop playing? Next steps?
The space activity landscape may radically change in its very nature
in the coming years.
New comers from the web and from the information technology
world have already contributed to change the balance in a significant
manner.
In this respect, it is interesting to compare the current situation with
the one that prevailed in the 1990′s when initial projects for gigantic
telecommunication constellations had been envisioned by some heavy
weights of the industry (such as Microsoft) but ultimately failed.
While some people tend to warn about a possible new internet
“bubble” that may end with a similar fate, two considerations can be
presented to moderate the relevance of this analogy.
First, technology has evolved and new small satellites have improved in terms of performance/cost and performance/size ratios. If
not totally overcome, some technological obstacles (not all, as recalled
in Section 3) tend to disappear or to be of less crucial importance in the
design of the space and ground systems. For example, LEO communication systems can now be developed with a good level of efficiency.
In addition, comparing the support from the web industry in the
1990′s and today gives a clear indication of the huge progresses made
by this industry and by its financial and industrial strategies regarding
its massive needs for broad-band telecommunication and information
dissemination worldwide.
The interest of some powerful players (e.g. Google) and the level of
their financial capabilities will undoubtedly influence the market
landscape.
5. Shifting lines and new boundaries: market evolution and
perspectives
5.1. EO value chain: market figures in 2015, main trends and
evolution
5.1.1. Overview
Well-known global consulting companies such as Euroconsult,
Bryce Space and Technology or Northern Sky Research (NSR) publish
regular forecasts and updates. Professional associations such as EARSC
or Eurospace provide also comprehensive figures on the health of their
respective industry and describe the market trends.
Their assessments of total market value differ but they agree on the
main trends and evolutions. Except if specifically stated, the figures used
in this section are based on the report “Satellite-based Earth Observation,
Market Prospects to 2025” released by Euroconsult (Refs [13,14]).
Commercial data market reached $1.7 billion in 2015 (6% growth on
2014), largely driven by defence and IMINT ($1.1 billion). All other
market shares are below 10%. According to Euroconsult, Optical data
represented 84% of the market. SAR data (16%) has not experienced the
same ramp-up, except in maritime surveillance. Value-added services
market reached $3.2 billion in 2015 (Fig. 5). In 2016, new entrants
continue to raise capital, develop satellites and deploy initial constellations.
5.1.2. Market trends and drivers
From a very broad perspective, EO development is closely linked to
the worldwide digitalisation of our societies, with endless appetite for
information, increasing number of data sources and need for interoperability, finance and economics, interconnected ecosystems (governments, industry, commerce) and last but not least security issues,
national prestige and soft power.
In a nutshell, the global EO landscape is as follows:
– More and more commercial EO satellites, both for governments and
private companies, will be launched over the next decade: over 400
satellites ( > 50 kg) compared to 163 over 2006–2015, from 35
countries.
– In addition 1200 small satellites ( < 50 kg) could be launched with
the growth of constellations.
– 50 countries are now investing in EO programmes.
– Environmental monitoring, food security and climate change are top
priorities in political agendas. Border monitoring and Eastern
tensions are major trends.
– In 2025, the market for commercial EO data is expected to reach $3
billion (6% CAGR over 2015–2025). Current market forecast for
value-added services is $5.3 billion for 2025 (5% CAGR).
– Regionally, North America will remain the first market (forecast >
$1 billion in 2024). Asian markets, Latin America (forecast: $350
million in 2024) and Africa ($65 million in 2024) are expected to
have strong growth profiles. Natural resources management, engineering and infrastructure, LBS and Non-US defence are the main
activities supporting growth.
– The number of commercial satellites is expected to increase
significantly, fostered by the growing demand and the number of
new entrants in the commercial market. Business and environmental intelligence are their new Eldorado.
– New regulations and evolution of ITAR restrictions (supporting the
competitiveness of US industry and services) will boost the VHR
data market. More operators will try to address this market.
One shall add the free and open data sets delivered under
Copernicus programme, providing a wealth of environmental data
likely to catalyse added-value services and data analytics, but also with
a possible impact on the sales of medium-resolution data. Here, the two
key questions are:
Fig. 5. Commercial EO data market 2015 and Value-added services market 2015 (source: Euroconsult, ref [13]).
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
424
– Will the development of added-services compensate the drop of
imagery sales at least for medium and high resolution)?
– Who will be the main beneficiaries of this evolution?
New Space adds a new dimensions and potential game changers
with new entrants from ICT domains, a platform-based economy and
shorter mission cycles.
5.1.3. Structure of the value chain, evolution of prices and market
demand
Three risks associated to these growth prospects can affect the main
data providers:
– The evolution of prices, influenced by increased availability of VHR/
HR, impact of free imagery and the redistribution of value between
the data and the services.
– The evolution of international demand, when small and large
countries invest in their own EO capacities, while they were
accounted so far as major commercial opportunities.
– The increasing number of suppliers.
Until now, data prices are mainly driven by « image quality ». GSD
is important but geolocation accuracy, image freshness and radiometric
accuracy are also part of the criterions. The usual model (except for
direct reception of telemetry) is the price per square kilometre or the
price per image.
5.1.4. From scarcity to abundance
In this context, standard imagery prices could drop drastically. A
typical example is the evolution of the EO sales in China. Until recently,
China was buying imagery from foreign suppliers. Since 2011, the
volume of medium-resolution data acquired by Chinese satellites
exceeds the imported share and China meets its needs independently
(Ref [15]).
A similar move affects the higher resolution products. The strategy
of the various suppliers to mitigate this risk depends on their profile.
There are two main, non-exclusive options (Fig. 6).
The “high end approach”: the usual suspects will seek to secure
their revenues with differentiated products, taking advantage of their
existing or future high end assets, i.e. in further increasing imagery
resolution and targeting customers needing these new VHR data and
acknowledging their value.
They will also develop the use of new IT platforms and service hosting,
at least for their main vertical markets. The key criteria in this scenario: a
significant percentage of total value comes from EO image value.
The “service-based strategy” of the new entrants: it is not only a
low-cost approach: it makes the assumption that the EO will become a
commodity and that the value of their products will be the information
and the services created from the EO data and from other data sources.
5.1.5. B2G, B2B or B2C: B2C rules applied to B2B
The pricing is thus based on service value. The global value
increases because the volume of services and the number of customers
increase. The challenge is to propose as far as possible standardized
products. The feasibility and the benefits of an evolution towards more
“horizontal markets” have to be demonstrated. In this situation the
customer becomes a consumer.
In both cases, the specific solution for the optimization of CAPEX
and operational costs will determine the strategy of each operator.
5.2. Shifting lines and new boundaries: position in the value chain,
resolution and revisit, data, services and information
5.2.1. Focus on EO data
Fig. 7 is a tentative representation of the commercial EO data
market evolution, with two types of changes. On the horizontal axis,
there is a shift between the resolution boundaries, from the right side to
the left side, corresponding to the trend toward higher resolution. On
the vertical axis, the vertical arrows show the factors driving the growth
or the contraction of a specific segment.
One tricky question is the appropriate number of segments to
consider in the analysis of EO data. Apart from the core military needs,
three segments are usually defined by the commercial operators:
medium resolution, high resolution and very high resolution.
The segmentation is mainly based on the offer and does not
necessarily fit the actual demand. Market evolutions, growth perspectives and interactions between segments could justify a finer-grained
analysis, in particular for orphan segments or overlaps between
different offers.
In particular, a narrower definition of VHR (for instance < 30–
40 cm) could open a new avenue for “less high VHR” (e.g. between
50 cm and 1 m), if its price is attractive compared to the one of the
sharpest imagery. Beyond GSD, similar trade-offs can be made with
other performance parameters (geolocation accuracy, spectral resolution, etc).
It could mean that a “high-end” option could find its own niche,
even is this market segment is mainly addressed by “low-cost”
products. Table 1 summarises, in a nutshell, the shifting factors and
growth drivers.
Fig. 6. Trends in commercial imagery - Resolution versus revisit, two strategies.
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
425
5.2.2. Typology of information services and customers
In all areas, service market is the main (or first) growth opportunity
for the new operators. From satellite manufacturing to service delivery
to the end user, the EO value chain is usually structured in tiers with
the upstream, midstream and downstream layers, as depicted on Fig. 8.
The main components of a generic service chain based on EO data are:
– EO Imagery and other data sources.
– Processing and access middleware.
– Mid-stream and downstream infrastructure (algorithms, cloud,
analytics, etc.)
– Service providers, with possible hosting in mid-stream infrastructures or as external components.
One can identify several types of services: depending on the weight
of image data compared to other data (data-agnostic services), there
may be opportunities for EO data owners or satellite operators, EO data
brokers or for pure service players.
Another important factor is the level of automation (processing,
advanced analytics, role of models) and the need for human expertise
in the information production process.
Both for institutional and private customers, the need to integrate
customer data in service production can raise security and confidentiality issues and justify sometimes a local implementation of the service.
For activities which are usually implemented directly by the
customer (GEOINT, Insurance, etc.), the readiness to outsource the
service production is obviously a critical point. Typical markets and
maturity (use of EO data and services) are presented in Tables 2, 3.
6. Food for thought: scenarios for the future
6.1. Introuduction
This part of the paper has a prospective dimension. It discusses the
realism and likelihood of possible scenarios of market development and
identifies their impacts on the EO landscape and the main stakeholders
involved. Three main scenarios have been identified as “extreme options”.
It would probably not be realistic to expect that one of these
scenarios may actually happen but this tool is useful to forecast market
evolutions and interactions between market segments. These scenarios
are not necessarily exclusive. This section provides also a first review of
the driving factors and possible consequences (threats and opportunities) on the main actors.
Fig. 7. Shifting lines and new boundaries; evolution of EO data supply.
Table 1
Evolution of the EO data landscape. Shifting factors and growth/contraction drivers.
Very high resolution High resolution Medium resolution
Shifting factors • Increased use of commercial data in
IMINT (+).
• More monitoring needs (+).
• Budgetary constraints and impact
on national means (+)
• Regulations and export rules (-)
• High competition (+)
• Success of services offers (+)
• Regulation and dissemination control
(-)
• Success of the commercial and institutional service offers
using this range of data. Evolution towards higher-end (+).
• Evolution of public missions such as Copernicus NG /
Copernicus Security (+)
Growth or contraction
drivers
• Increasing use of commercial
satellites (+)
• Increased capacity (+)
• Increased competition and
newcomers (-)
• New national missions (-)
• Competition from aerial market and
other sources (-)
• One size fits all impact on customer
base (-)
• Quantitative development of services
with lower costs (+)
• New national mission (-)
• Market saturation or competition with
open data (-).
Not applicable
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
426
6.2. Between business as usual and market disruptions: some science
fiction
6.2.1. Scenario 1: solid revenues from the VHR data for the
intelligence community
This scenario is based on a steady continuity of the VHR market,
with a sustainable or growing demand of the defence and IC for highend products.
In parallel, a significant market share comes from commercial
customers (domestic and export markets), ready to pay a premium for
high-class imagery. The main driving factors are:
– Evolution of defence and commercial markets using VHR imagery.
– Regulations and export control rules, also depending on dissemination policies implemented by new countries (e.g. China).
– The availability of high performance online distribution systems
(e.g. OneAtlas by Airbus Defence and Space).
Main opportunities are related to the evolution of the global threats
and instability (increasing needs for GEOINT) and the sustained
demand for accurate geo-information in the main vertical markets.
The threats are linked to the evolution of intelligence needs (other
priorities such as cybersecurity, ELINT), the use of other sensors
(UAVs, HAPS or ground-based assets) and the obstinacy of competitors
(commercial companies or new countries) to enter this market beside
their initial business. Another risk is the possible gap between
intelligence needs and commercial needs. The needs of some commercial customers could be met with lower resolution (50 cm to 1 m) data,
with a direct impact on price sensitivity.
Service development opportunities for GEOINT missions are not
obvious, as long as the readiness to outsource remains low. The
institutional human resources constraints can trigger innovative
schemes with private providers with two conditions:
– Ensure sensitive data integrity and confidentiality and system
security.
– Define new governance rules.
6.2.2. Scenario 2: a new Eldorado with EO-based services for
commercial applications
Convert promises into tangible achievements… The expected explosive growth in geo-information services and applications materialises. This success depends on:
– The actual implementation of some of the planned constellations.
– The confirmation of commercial demand in key sectors.
– The public demand and the readiness of the public sector to outsource this activity.
Fig. 8. EO services – Structure of the value chain. Background image: Ricardo Liberato (Licensed under CC-BY-SA).
Table 2
Types of services.
« Image +» services Specialised services and niches markets Vertical markets Horizontal approach
“Image-only” services (real time, time
series, etc.)
Thematic or Geographic specialisation Defence, agriculture, oil and gas,
assurance, etc.
Geo-marketing, geo-analytics, monitoring,
LBS
Automated processing High Expertise
Customer intimacy
B2B or B2G rules B2B or B2G rules B2B or B2G rules B2C or B2B2C rules applied to B2B
or B2G
Close link with the satellite owner Tailor-made solutions. Ready-to-wear. One size fits all.
Fragmented ecosystem of VAC and SME Standard product portfolio for families of
customers
Customer = consumer.
Main target for new space actors
Table 3
Types of customers.
Defence Civil institutional Commercial Consumer
market
Typical
activities
Mapping Cartography Agriculture,
oil and gas,
insurance, etc.
Mapping,
LBS, etc. for
web actors
Intelligence Environmental
C2-ISR monitoring
Maturity High High Variable Low
Growth
potential
Medium High High High
Customers 100 100-1000s 1000s Millions
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
427
– The demonstration of EO data value in the information production
and the benefits of platform-based analytics.
Main opportunities are:
– The development of new services for new markets with game changers
on demand side, related either to global environmental issues (adaptation to climate change, water and food security, insurance, etc.) or to
new commercial usages (geo-marketing, mapping and LBS, etc.)
– Successful implementation of services in areas where space data
plays a major role and can’t be substituted.
The main threat is the “hype effect” with the collapse of new
initiatives due to lack of funding or a viable business models. Dataagnostic services (terrestrial networks of sensors, IOT, crowd-based
sensing) pose another threat (see scenario 3).
6.2.3. Scenario 3: EO becomes a commodity («banalization») and
strong competition with other sources of information
“There is really not that much demand”: even if only two or three
new initiatives succeed, there is a risk of oversupplying the market.
This scenario is roughly a nightmare variant of scenario 2. The main
unknown is the actual role of space data in a big data world.
The wealth of data will also come from other information sources
(drones and HAPS, crowd-based and in situ in a connected world). In
particular, in the case of high revisit, the need for real time information is
often linked to tactical needs and direct action / response with security
forces, first responders, troops, etc. In this case, in-field operators carry
sensors (e.g. police helicopters, short range UAVs) and this model can be
very efficient. Crowd-sourcing is another trend, possibly fostered by the
development of mobile devices and networks (incl. IOT). If EO data
become really a commodity with huge competition between data and
satellite owners, there is an opportunity for pure content aggregators or
data brokers, without investment in proprietary data collection systems.
An evolution towards source-agnostic service provision is also credible:
most of end users (GEOINT can be an exception) are sensor/data
agnostic: they want the information not the data.
6.3. Consequences and impacts: focus on Europe
In a worldwide competition where the disruptive offers are mainly
initiated in the US, the accessible market share for European actors is a
strategic issue, with commercial consequences but also stakes in
relation with sovereignty and non-dependence. This section reviews
the possible consequences and impacts on the main stakeholders:
– GEOINT community.
– EO data and services providers.
– Satellites manufacturers.
– Nations and institutions.
6.3.1. GEOINT community
The United States have adopted a well-publicized policy that is
intended to make the best use of future constellations for government
and intelligence needs. Mid-2015, a so-called “NextGen Tasking
Initiative” has been launched by the National Geospatial Intelligence
Agency (NGA) with the goal to develop new methods for collecting,
processing and disseminating commercially generated information for
intelligence purposes.
Web and cloud-based solutions have been particularly highlighted
at this occasion. Even more recently, the head of NGA has confirmed an
effort to devote several tens of million dollars from the FY 2017 budget
to directly feed up the most prominent start-ups of the domain. More
generally, these declarations are fully in line with a “Commercial
Geoint Strategy” published in October 2015 (ref [11]): NGA makes no
secret of the relevance of future commercial constellations for the U.S.
government.
In the European Union, it seems that some Member States have
also expressed interest in these developments. In France for example, a
recent report mandated by the French Government (ref [16]) has
insisted on the changes induced by the rise of the new commercial
space sector and the need to adapt the institutional practices and
procedures to nurture theses evolutions. Similar studies have been
commissioned in Germany. However, the level of governmental
involvement is far below what can be seen in the U.S. in the rise of
the security and defence-oriented utilizations of the New Space. It is
highly likely that a number of obstacles linked to real-world intelligence
and defence issues, such as data policy and security or public-private
relationships will remain to be overcome for some time before it
becomes a new standard for the practitioners.
Since the end of the cold war, the defence budgets have significantly
and regularly decreased in Europe. In countries such as France,
Germany or Italy, the priority to space have been more or less assured
due to instable geostrategic situation, but not enough to enable the
implementation of robust and consistent military space capacities
(equipment, human resources to operate and exploit, training, etc).
As an example, Europe has no space early warning capacity to face
increasing threats coming from some rogue countries equipped with
ballistic missiles. We can assume the following trends in the coming
years:
– More and more dual systems especially in the field of hybrid
security/defence needs: maritime, borders and critical sites surveillance, control of inter-national treaties, etc. with funding shared
between defence and civil entities or even private operators.
– More civil space assets owned and operated by private
companies assuring guaranteed and secured access of data to
military customers.
– Limitation of state owned systems to those strictly connected to national security and sovereignty: identification
optical systems, SIGINT space systems, etc.
– More and enlarged cooperation and sharing processes
between European partners. The current SAR/optical data
sharing implemented between France, Germany and Italy is a
virtuous process which shall be reinforced and enlarged in the
future.
– More synergies with civil IT technologies (big data, cloud,
automatization of processes, fusion of data, etc.) in ground segment
and operations in order to follow the rapid evolution of technology
and the exponentially increasing amount of space data to be
processed by the military operational users.
In brief, the objective of defence actors will be to use more space
assets with less or same amount of money and people. Moreover this
growing and strategic use of space capacities and data either for
military, dual or civil uses stresses the importance of the security of
these capacities which are today vulnerable to external threats. A
specific effort is required at the level of major European space
countries.
6.3.2. European space ecosystem: from satellites to services
The service ecosystem is heterogeneous with various profiles:
SMEs, large web actors, large GIS actors.
According to a study prepared by EARSC (European Association of
Remote Sensing Companies) on the State and Health of the European
EO Services Industry (ref [17]), 451 companies were active in the
domain of EO services in Europe (and Canada) in 2014. The majority of
companies (63%) have less than 10 employees (95% < 50 people). The
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
428
total sector employment is 6811 persons in 2014. The total revenues
for the EO Services sector in 2014 reached €910 million (€786 million
in 2012) and is growing at a rate of around 7.6% p.a.
The new space context means new opportunities (with new EO data
sources) but also more competition and a risk of information dominance by a small number of worldwide champions (monopoly) or
global service providers backed by the large web actors.
The priority support action should be to secure the market position
of the commercial VHR data providers. Market analysis confirms that
the public sector has a key role in helping its European champions:
even if a European NGA will not be easily implemented, anchor-tenant
contracts can be developed by a public sector in its customer role with a
new balance between patrimonial assets or in-house activities and
external services. In her report on “open space” (Ref [16]), Genevieve
Fioraso recommends a “Buy European Act”.
The value-adding EO services in Europe are in an emerging state
and delivered by a very fragmented base of suppliers. The consolidation
of this supply chain (through mergers or strategic agreements) leading
to European champions is an option but this fragmentation is not
necessarily a weakness. It can mean a closer link with the final
customers and a solid territorial footprint.
In this case, the main need is to strengthen networking between
local commercial actors. This assumption is the rationale behind
Eugenius, A European Group of Enterprises for a Network of
Information Using Space, an initiative started by Terranis, a French
SME, in cooperation with a core team of European service providers.
Targeting the development of Copernicus downstream services, the
objective is to federate and transform isolated SMEs into a powerful
network of expert partners serving their proximity customers.
Eugenius concept is based on three foundations: the regional hubs
(geo-information service platforms), the applicative tools (thematic
software suites for specific needs such as agriculture, risk assessment,
coastline monitoring) and a set of organisational and commercial rules
between Eugenius partners. GEO4i is another good example: this
French SME combines the expertise of image analysts and geomatics
skills from the Ministry of Defence. GEO4i emphasises its close relation
with the final customer and its capacity to propose ad hoc solutions.
Fig. 9 highlights the potential use of medium resolution data as
information source for added-value services. A coherence map of two
radar images (Sentinel-1) reveals the activity detected between the 8th
March 2016 and the 20th March 2016. It allowed detecting many
passages of vehicles and showed intense activity. This suspicious
activity is confirmed by the optical image (Sentinel-2) acquired
March, 11th.
6.3.3. Opportunities for satellite manufacturers
Market forecasts predict $39 billion in manufacturing revenues
over the period 2015–2024, an 80% increase over that of the previous
decade. It is obviously an opportunity for European satellite manufacturers and the related supply chain, if they are competitive on the
worldwide market and sometimes ready to invest as partners in new
ventures. Recent successes in the telecommunication domain (OneWeb
or O3B) show that European space industry was able to play the game.
The support of space agencies is key, for the preparation of the future
(non-dependence and critical technologies, disruptive technologies,
etc.) and a contribution to “de-risking” activities (ref [18]).
The relation between space industry and space agencies could
evolve from a customer / supplier relationship to a cooperation / codevelopment approach (“together in the driver’s seat”). The situation is
much more complex for the IT component, as there is no European
champion, able to compete with Google or Amazon on the mid-stream
segment. Being able to change this situation is questionable, even if it
raises serious issues with respect to security and sovereignty.
6.3.4. Between sovereignty and dominance
Governments are responsible for regulations (including export control
and data policies) but these regulations can also become incentives for the
development of services and infrastructures. Governments have also a
significant role to play in agreements between governments (G2G) and
support to export activities, both for infrastructures and services: one can
anticipate an evolution of the concept of sovereignty, with hybrid
procurement schemes, between full ownership (e.g. PerúSAT-1) and
guaranteed access to information, helping to mitigate a risk of information
dominance by a single country. In a world of continental states, these
recommendations apply also to Europe and its 28 Member States.
Lessons learnt from Copernicus implementation (ref [19]) could help to
define an innovative and efficient scheme for a new generation of
Copernicus with a security component.
6.3.5. The cost of non-Europe
Towards a more coordinated approach between Member States in
Europe for GEOINT missions? Or even shared capacities? Is it
realistic? The European Union Satellite Centre remains the main focal
point in Europe for imagery and GEOINT sharing. Its functioning is
based on the fair exchange of information between all member States
as soon as it has been produced by the centre on request of one or
several member States. In this context, high performance commercial
imagery has been playing a key role, allowing the dissemination of
homogeneous information among the member States in a context when
national intelligence procedures might have impede the sharing of
intelligence generated by national systems. It is clear that such regional
arrangements can provide avenues for commercial systems to become
key providers of sensitive but sharable data on a collective basis.
6.4. GEOINT disruptions: considerations about the strategic scenario
for Europe
The “New space” paradigm represents a mix of visionary entrepreneurial operations bonding with a large amount of investments coming
for a very proactive venture capitalist ground. Main IT players are
investing in the EO sector in order to be able to offer an always more
Fig. 9. Added value services for GEOINT, derived from Sentinel imagery. Clandestine
refineries in Deir ez Zor (Syria). Credit: GEO4i.
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
429
integrated set of services, based on worldwide data retrieving, transmission and processing (Ref [20]).
This is indeed an incredible boost for the EO and GEOINT sector
which, for a long time, was linked to institutional markets, both in the
US and in Europe. But furthermore, this vision to provide an “all
inclusive” value added service chain on Earth is sometimes presented
as propaedeutic for space exploration and human colonization of planet
Mars. Even if Elon Musk or Jeff Bezos have to be considered very
seriously, also observing their achievements in the launching activities,
this grand vision has to be scrutinized in order to draft scenarios and
recommendations for EU GEOINT sector.
In a pure market logic, the consequences could be highly disruptive:
the integration of EO space based capabilities within an IT commercial
offer, integrated in apps developed by Alphabet or other Silicon Valley
champions, seems able to wipe out the EU industrial and technological
effort, based on a long term investment, often triggered by technology
push, relying on a public demand. On the other hand, new constellations can potentially provide better performances than existing EU
systems, relying on a more frequent revisiting time, a factor paving the
way for a set of new applications able to push on the side the technical
performances of institutional systems such as defence ones. This type
of thinking pushes the European space champions to try to position
themselves inside a renewed chain of added value in order to stay in the
game. This calls for offers of services such as agreements or sub
contracts with IT companies willing to produce and launch satellites, or
the development of European IT clusters in order to valorise existing
data gathering capabilities through processing and service development. It is a mix of response between collaboration and competition
with the main US initiatives. But on another hand a resilient scenario
shall be taken into consideration: European capabilities in terms of EO
and GEOINT are developed by companies which are also strategic, both
at national and EU level.
If we have in mind the French, German and Italian cases, we can
observe a mix where States partially own some key companies (directly
or sometimes through public agencies), companies able to produce an
applied technology which can serve the national security interests of
those states.
In a nutshell, those companies are strategic not only in terms of
products and applications to be used for national security purposes, but
also because they represent a specific know-how and capability which
shall be maintained in order to keep a reasonable level of independence.
6.4.1. Independence and interdependence
This question of independence is a key issue. IT companies are
often (and rightly) perceived as highly pervasive, with huge risks on
individual rights, rule of law and democracy. The growing control of the
information chain by a few multinational US based companies has to be
carefully monitored in order to avoid some totalitarian effect based on
the capacity to retrieve and process all kind of data. Europe hasn’t
developed such an integrated company. Space capabilities however
represent a sector where Europe has always kept a decent level of
technology, with some fields of excellence. The fact that Europe is able
to master the technologies of the entire space chain represents an asset
for today and tomorrow.
It is a key feature in terms of autonomy, but it is now an asset for
EU independence in terms of information gathering and processing.
If we take for granted a huge development of GEOINT capabilities
following the “new space” boost, there is a danger to loose some
pieces of the chain if the “Alphabet” or “Amazon” market driven
trend pushes the EU products out of the market. Loosing such
capacities would also be synonym of the loss of an autonomous and
reliable information gathering. For example one can be cautious in
terms of defence and security decisions based on US IT gathering
and processing, also because huge IT companies can have objectives
rather different than the ones of EU governments. Let’s recall that
France has been the first country to invest in defence EO satellite, a
decision reinforced by the difficulties in obtaining satellite intelligence from the US ally during the Balkans conflicts. The main EU
countries (Italy, Germany) have followed, considering that they shall
reach some autonomous capabilities. GEOINT capabilities shall be
considered as a key feature of an EU resilient capability. And this is
the reason why public R & D projects but also public demand shall
sustain the space EO sector, in order to avoid that important pieces
of technologies or companies finished completely preyed by some
Silicon Valley money drop.
This trend also calls for a major awareness at MS and EU levels, a
priority agenda to be translated in EU cooperation frameworks such
as Copernicus or the bilateral agreements between the main
European countries. These strategic considerations shall lead to a
quite conservative but also resilient paradigm: in order to maintain
the control over the GEOINT chain, Europe shall pursue its current
programme in order to maintain know how but also autonomous
capabilities.
Some thinking shall also be made to understand whether there is an
optimum for the size of the market. In Europe over the last decades, the
paths between Europeanisation trends and national ones were diverFig. 10. EO services – A new gold rush… and opportunities for Europe structure of the value chain.
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
430
ging. Often, Europe is presented as a minimum size market in order to
ensure the sustainability and the growth of European industrial
capabilities. This analysis is based on the concept of minimum level
of concentration for technology and capital.
This logic was also present when the supply side has been pooled,
meaning the creation of EADS (today Airbus) on one side and the
merging of Alcatel Space and Alenia Space on another hand. If we
take for granted the progressive integration of the EU market, those
industrial mergers follow that trend. But we have also noticed
contradictory elements, such as the correspondence between public
programmes and national champions: it is easier to provide public
support on a national basis than on a pan European one.
Furthermore today’s technical disruption involves small teams of
engineers and technicians.
After many years with pressure to always think bigger, we can
observe some prudence towards the MS level which represents often a
guarantee in terms of continuity and has the advantage of a “natural”
ground of expertise from academia to industry. Furthermore countries
such as France, Germany or Italy are today relying on regional
technological clusters, a relatively small dimension which is synonym
of a virtuous mix with research and development capabilities.
Those clusters can also foster the development of smaller companies able to make their way in the application market, the key driver for
the commercialization of technologies. The space sector in general, and
specifically in Europe, does not rely on a huge organisation, but rather
extremely qualified middle-size entities. The growth or at least the
preservation of this system could be identified as a strategic goal for
Europe. If US IT companies penetrate and conquer the EO sector
through their holistic applications, this could threaten the very
existence of the EU producers. The relations between Space EO
industries and IT applications oriented service providers is a very
touchy issue, that shall be dealt with a cautious, if not resilient,
approach.
7. Conclusions: and the winner is?
“Predictions can be very difficult - especially about the future.”
(Niels Bohr, attributed).
7.1. Trends to watch…
Who will be the winner?
Can European industry secure its role and competitiveness with
respect to the growing influence of the large US actors, the New Space
dynamism in the Silicon Valley? And will the promise of a huge growth
of the geoinformation market fostered by the convergence between IT
and EO become a reality?
It is too early to answer. The next three or five years will be very
interesting with trends and key indicators to be monitored:
– Actual implementation of the new space initiatives and consolidation of the landscape.
– Evolution of the market of the VHR (all market segments between
30 cm and 1 m) and respective shares of Digital Globe, Airbus
Defence and Space and potential newcomers.
– Actual development of the EO services and profile of the top winners
(SME, web actors, midstream actors), level of outsourcing by public
sector and degree of consolidation of the service supply chain.
– Evolution of the defence market and governmental policies.
European perspective (mutualisation, capacity sharing, European
policies).
– New space countries investing in their own capacities and/or acting
as new providers (e.g. China).
Will we see new and hybrid service schemes instead of black or
white options (including data policies) and new dimensions of dual use
between Public and Private, Civil and Defence, National sovereignty
and collective instruments (e.g. capacity sharing)?
Even if it does not provide a clear answer to the future industrial,
technical and political structure of EO systems, this study shows that
the EO markets and related industrial landscape can evolve significantly or even be disrupted in the coming years.
The consequences of the possible scenarios can affect the main
stakeholders involved, in particular in Europe (Fig. 10).
7.2. A new gold rush?
The current situation is similar to California Gold rush in 1849 with
lot of gold miners. Beside the development of service companies,
satellite manufacturers can find their way and become the new shovel
sellers.
Small is beautiful and Silicon Valley entrepreneurs, often space
enthusiasts, are very active. But one can observe that European
champions, both big companies and SMEs, have already demonstrated
their agility and ability to stay ahead and propose competitive products
and solutions. OneWeb is a typical example in telecommunication.
PerúSAT-1, built in less than 24 months in Airbus Defence and Space
“Projects Factory©” is another one in Earth Observation.
Despite the increasing influence of the private investment, public
sector support for commercial initiatives, not only via policy-making,
regulations and preparation of the future (R & D) but also as customer,
plays a key role to fostering the development of its world-class
champions and its ecosystem of SMEs. There are obviously opportunities in Europe:
– Strengthen the European champions: accompany R & D, involvement in risk sharing and develop anchor tenancies.
– Stimulate and support an ecosystem of innovative SMEs in EObased services for defence, institutional and commercial applications.
– Foster European space and defence policy/market (capacity sharing
/ mutualisation).
– And some open questions such as the dependence on mid-stream
infrastructure built outside Europe.
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
431
Annexure. New constellations for Earth Observation (non-exhaustive list, green part: at least one satellite in operation in orbit)
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
432
References
[1] “Alternative Futures: United States Commercial Satellite Imagery in 2020”, Report
prepared for the Department of Commerce by Robert A. Weber and Kevin M.
O′Connell, Innovative Analytics and Training, November 2011. See 〈https://gis.
idaho.gov/pdf/Framework/Imagery/IAT_DoC_Alternative_Futures_
Commercial_Satellite_Imagery.pdf〉.
[2] “Team GEOINT: This is Our Moment”, Remarks as prepared for Robert Cardillo,
Director, National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, US Geospatial Intelligence
Forum GEOINT Symposium, Washington, June 2015. See 〈https://www.nga.mil/
MediaRoom/SpeechesRemarks/Documents/2015/20150623_GEOINT_As_
Delivered.pdf〉.
[3] “EO embracing the new space environment: the significance of EO smallsat
constellations”, Earth imaging Journal, July 2015, Euroconsult, Canada, Adam
Keith. See 〈http://eijournal.com/print/articles/earth-observation-embracing-thenew-space-environment-the-significance-of-eo-smallsat-constellations〉.
[4] “Independent Study of the roles of commercial remote sensing in the future
national system (NSG)”, Final report of the panel chaired by Pete Marino, July
2007.
[5] “See a Better World”, 2015, annual report, Digital Globe.
[6] “Des Aliens et des barbares : une révolution dans l′observation de la Terre”, Thierry
Rousselin, Revue Prospective Stratégique, n°45, 1st trimester 2016.
[7] “Financial landscape for space-related ventures in Europe”, Spacetec Partners,
slides presented during the workshop Access to Finance for European space
industry, European Commission, DG GROW Brussels, 3 May 2016.
[8] “Satellogic on its way to launching 300 satellite constellation for Earth
Observation”. Satellitetoday, Caleb Henry, March 2016.
[9] “2016: State of the Satellite Industry Report”, prepared by Bryce Space and
Technology (formerly The Tauri Group) for Satellite Industry Association, June
2016. See: 〈https://brycetech.com/downloads/SIA_SSIR_2016.zip〉.
[10] “Start-Up Space: Rising Investment in Commercial Space Ventures”, Bryce Space
and Technology (formerly The Tauri Group), January 2016. See: 〈https://
brycetech.com/downloads/Start_Up_Space.zip〉.
[11] “Commercial GEOINT Strategy”, National Geospatial- Intelligence Agency, October
2015, 15 p. See: 〈https://www.nga.mil/MediaRoom/PressReleases/Documents/
2015/NGA_Commercial_GEOINT_Strategy.pdf〉.
[12] “CIBORG Introductory Industry Day”, Slides presented by NGA, 16 June 2026.
〈https://interact.gsa.gov/sites/default/files/CIBORG
%20IndustryDay16Jun2016FINAL%2016-493%20Release%20%281%29.pdf〉.
[13] “Satellite-Based Earth Observation: Market Prospects to 2025”. Report prepared by
Euroconsult, 9th edition, September 2016.
[14] “Earth Observation: state of play and future prospects”, presented by Adam Keith,
Managing Director, Euroconsult Canada. Summit on Earth Observation Business,
15th September 2016.
[15] “China Launches High-resolution Commercial Imaging Satellite”, Peter de Selding,
Space News, October 2015. See: 〈http://spacenews.com/china-launches-highresolution-commercial-imaging-satellite〉.
[16] “Open Space, l′ouverture comme réponse aux défis de la filière spatiale”, Fioraso
Geneviève, Rapport au premier Ministre, Paris, France, July 2016, 170 p. See:
〈http://www.gouvernement.fr/sites/default/files/liseuse/7791/master/index.
htm〉.
[17] “A survey into the state and health of the European EO services industry”, Study
prepared by EARSC. September 2015. See: 〈http://earsc.org/file_download/265/
EO+industry+survey+september+2015+vf.pdf〉.
[18] “The challenge of future space systems and services in Europe: Industrial
competitiveness without a level-playing field”, Gil Denis (Airbus Defence and
Space) and Xavier Pasco (Fondation pour la Recherche Stratégique). Presented at
IAC 2013 (Pekin). Published in New Space (Vol. 3, No. 1) March 2015. DOI: 10.
1089/space.2013.0034.
[19] “GMES and the development of Earth observation services: threats and opportunities for the service industry”, Gil Denis (Airbus Defence and Space), Toulouse
Space Show 2010, Space ECO workshop.
[20] “NewSpace: New business models at the interface of the space industry and digital
economy. Opportunities for Germany in a connected world”. Study prepared for the
German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy by SpaceTec Partners
and BHO Legal. See: 〈https://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/DE/Publikationen/
Studien/bmwi-new-space-geschaeftsmodelle-an-der-schnittstelle-von-raumfahrtund-digitaler-wirtschaft.pdf?__blob=publicationFile & v=7〉.
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
433
ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia CIRP 107 (2022) 21–27
2212-8271 © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the International Programme committee of the 55th CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems
10.1016/j.procir.2022.04.004
© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the International Programme committee of the 55th CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems
Keywords: Lean Manufacturing; Industry 4.0; Wastes; Operations Management
1. Introduction
The operations function exists to create and deliver services
and products [1], and operations management is the practice of
management decision-making and systems design that covers
the input-process-output cycle. The flow of operations –
materials flow, or information flow – from the supplier to the
customer, constitutes the most important task for manufacturing
companies and, through its link to cash flow, it is one of the
areas of management with the highest impact on business
results [2]. Time is one of the most valuable resources with
respect to business effectivity, where the minimization of
production time ensures higher client satisfaction [3].
Eliminating wastes of both time and resources helps improve
manufacturing systems [4]. Moreover, the reduction of
operational costs while preserving a product’s full value is
crucial to defining lean manufacturing [5]. Lean Manufacturing
is amongst the most researched topics in the modern area of
operations management [6]. The origins of lean have been
traced back in time far beyond the automotive era yet is
commonly associated with the power of the Toyota Production
System (TPS) and lean models of operational management.
Lean manufacturing is evolving to become a method of
maximizing a company’s efficiency and reducing its waste with
respect to digital and physical business processes [7]. Any
actions or resources that don’t benefit the customer or client
: I:jf-fB(D
Using Industry 4.0 Capabilities for Identifying and Eliminating Lean
Wastes
Sulaiman Rajaba, Mohamed Afy-Shararaha*, Konstantinos Salonitisa
a
Sustainable Manufacturing Systems Centre, Cranfield University, Bedford, MK43 0AL, UK
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 1234 750111. E-mail address: M.A.Shararah@Cranfield.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper conducts a review of the literature to identify associations in operations between Industry 4.0 capabilities such as Additive
Manufacturing, Augmented Reality, Autonomous Robots, Big Data, Cloud Computing, IIoT, Simulation, and Systems Integration wit h the
commonly identified lean manufacturing wastes of Trans port, Inventory, Movement, Waiting, Overproduction, Overprocessing, Defects, and
Underutilized skills. The paper documents research that links various capabilities and wastes, including how IIoT can be used to reduce defects
in manufacturing, and how it can mitigate overproduction across industries. There is also evidence that big data implementation in manufacturing
has positive effects on reducing waiting times across the manufacturing process and delivery, and that cloud computing techno logies guarantee
better estimates for product and predicted inventory amounts. The research finds impacts on the social aspect of manufacturing by how augmented
reality tools are increasingly used in the manufacturing sector to improve workers’ knowledge, skills, and abilities, and that simulation software
applications are capable of decreasing operator motion wastes. The paper concludes that there is a clear benefit for SMEs in using Industry 4.0
in lean implementation journeys, and it supports the efforts of manufacturing organizations to become leaner using Industry 4.0 capabilities and
solutions.
This is a resupply of 
22 Sulaiman Rajab et al. / Procedia CIRP 107 (2022) 21–27
directly are considered waste [8]. There are seven commonly
identified types of manufacturing waste which are defects,
overproduction, waiting, transportation, overprocessing, and
inventory. Moreover, “underutilized skills” have been added to
the manufacturing waste category by various authors [9.10].
Beginning in 2011, the digitalization of manufacturing has
impacted the industrial revolution, allowing business
processing to happen in real-time [11, 12]. The fourth industrial
revolution, also known as Industry 4.0, is a group of
technological advances used to increase business digitization
and to enable businessesto be a part of an interconnected world
[13]. Industry 4.0 is often categorized by nine enablers, these
are the Internet of Things (IoT), Big Data, Autonomous Robots,
Additive Manufacturing, Cloud Computing, Simulation,
Cybersecurity, Augmented Reality, and Systems Integration
[14]. Research suggests that businesses will see bigger benefits
with the introduction of Industry 4.0. However, Small &
Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) can suffer from the
introduction, due to high investment costs and incorrect scope
and planning within its implementation [15].
Industry 4.0 has been attributed to increased levels of
manufacturing productivity, decreased lead times, and
improved efficacy due to growing amounts of technology in the
industrial and manufacturing fields [16, 17, 18]. It has also been
found to support the implementation of Just in Time systems
through the digitalizing of the supply chain to enable timely and
accurate communication regarding inventory location and
levels [19] and detecting bottlenecks to ensure continuous flow
[20]. Industry 4.0 capabilities and technologies can also be used
to support the implementation of lean manufacturing through
the identification of manufacturing wastes in the manufacturing
system [21]. Lean manufacturing waste can be defined as the
non-use, loss, or over-use of digital and physical business
technologies. This includes but is not limited to simulations,
virtual models, and data analytic systems [7].
The relationship between Industry 4.0 and lean
manufacturing is increasingly explored in the operations
management literature [22, 23, 24, 25]. Although different in
many ways, both concepts share the same goal or increasing
added value [26].Previous studies have explored how JIT can
be supported by a digital supply chain [27], that Jidoka can be
improved via enhanced information sharing using the Internet
of Things [24], and Quality can be enhanced by digitizing the
quality control process [28]. This paper sets out to answer the
question of ‘what are the associations between lean
manufacturing waste and Industry 4.0’, and to explore how the
various Industry 4.0 capabilities can be used to identify and
eliminate the different types of lean wastes in manufacturing.
Identification of the wastes will generate more targeted and
efficient approaches in the lean implementation journey, and
the elimination will further enhance the value provided from
within the manufacturing system. The following section
explains the methodology applied, which is followed by the
research Findings section, and finally the Conclusions section.
2. Methodology
The literature review performed for this paper used
SCOPUS as the database to identify the relevant studies.
Combinations of the following keywords were used to identify
the pool of papers to be screened, “lean manufacturing”,
“wastes”, Industry 4.0”, and “digital”. An excess of 200 papers
were identified and screened at the abstract stage.A total of 53
papers, published between the years of 2008 and 2021, were
chosen as relevant for this study to explore how Industry 4.0
capabilities can be used to identify and eliminatelean wastes in
manufacturing systems. Despite of the great interest in the
concept of Industry 4.0 worldwide, there is no one formally
respected definition for it [29], and although there are many
technologies and capabilities directly related to the
digitalization of manufacturing there still is a lack of agreed
upon classification in the literature. As such, the key Industry
4.0 capabilities identified and used in this research are the
Additive Manufacturing, Augmented Reality, Autonomous
Robots, Big Data, Cloud Computing, the Industrial Internet of
Things (IIoT), Simulation, and Systems Integration. Whereas
the lean manufacturing wastes identified and included were
Defects, Overproduction, Waiting, Transportation,
Overprocessing, Inventory, Underutilized skills, and Motion.
The following section describes the different types of lean
wastes and how the various Industry 4.0 capabilities can
support in their identification within manufacturing systems.
3. Findings
3.1.Defects,IIoT, and Autonomous Robots
Defect waste is producing any product that is not suitable for
use for whatever reason such as defective materials and
components or produced not per specification [30]. The
Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) reduces information defects
and increases product traceability [31, 32]. In the steel industry,
Cao et al. [33] tested the use of a blockchain platform that
allows producers, logistics services providers, and consumers
to participate in information certification on improving steel
products’ information integrity and traceability. Results
indicated that stakeholders in the steel industry were able to
certify steel products, and express confidence in the
information provided on the platform helping them reduce
existing information defects. The authors suggested the
universalization of blockchain technology in other complex
industries to mitigate the information deficiency and defects
problem. Potyrailo [34] proposed an IIoT based sensing
technology for detecting gases in industrial and clinical
environments. Advanced sensors that read many variables, and
act autonomously can reduce risks of gases leaks or unexpected
overflows. The author concluded with the suggestion that the
sensors allow manufacturers to maintain smooth production
without dealing with defective manufacturing environments.
Velandia et al. [35] investigated the problem of defects in
crankshafts manufacturing. They proposed a feasible solution
capable of reducing process and product defects along the
assembly line. The authors recommended the placement of
radio-frequency identifiers on bolts along the assembly line.
They also suggested the placement of a reading antenna on the
gantry overlooking every step of the manufacturing process
line. A reading of bolts will be taken at every stage, and
immediate corrections will be made once any deviation is
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.
Sulaiman Rajab et al. / Procedia CIRP 107 (2022) 21–27 23
detected and flagged by the automated system. The Industrial
Internet of Things (IIoT) capability has shown to have a clear
impact on the identification of defective products and
components at the various stages of production. Whereas the
use of autonomous robots on the floor, which are machines
programmed to achieve a task or a collection of functions in the
manufacturing process [36], increases standardization and
mitigates the occurrence of errors and defects on the production
line, and stations. This helps the manufacturer achieve a better
integration level, as well as flow improvement[37, 38].
3.2.Overproduction and IIoT
Overproduction waste is manufacturing extra products that
are not required or have no customer demand [30], it is a major
cause of other types of manufacturing wastes including
inventory and waiting. Ghouat et al. [39] suggested that
Industry 4.0 carries significant improvements on the production
systems of manufacturers. First, the use of IIoT increases the
real-time data collection of customer needs making the
manufacturing of only desired products realized. Second, the
enhancement of machine-to-machine communication increases
optimal production generating only needed amounts requested
by customers. Xu and Chen [40] proposed an IIoT based
framework to enhance the implementation of Just-in-Time
manufacturing, and thus avoid overproduction. The authors
identified the frequently cited challenges surrounding the
application of JIT in manufacturing settings. Then, the authors
proposed a solution to address these challenges based on IIoT
technologies. The proposed framework is celebrated to enhance
lean manufacturing production and reduce excessive
communication among varying departments in the enterprise.
Korchagin et al. [41] used ARENA to simulate the effects of
IIoT technologies on the lean production of the aviation
industry in Russia and China. Based on a Boeing case study, the
authors concluded that the use of IIoT results in the lean
manufacturing of safe and quality aircraft products. The authors
suggested that this application is profitable, and implementable
across countries, and industries. The use of the Industrial
Internet of Things has been associated with the identification of
overproduction, as well as the implementation of JIT which aids
in the reduction of overproduction.
3.3. Waiting and Big Data
“Waiting” waste is the delay time for employees such as
equipment downtime, delay in processing, being out of stock of
materials, or production equipment not ready [30]. Kho et al.
[42] integrated big data analytics solutions to decrease lead time
in the manufacturing process. Within a manufacturing shop
floor, the authors proposed a radio frequency identificationbased solution to track time at each stage of the manufacturing
process. Results indicated that manufacturing time at each
phase of the batch input manufacturing decreased since the big
data solution suggested needed changes in the process. Big data
analytics improves manufacturer’s ability to build to order
systems. Consumers may channel their preferences along the
manufacturing process allowed by intelligent data systems that
integrate consumers’ desires in the manufacturing process of
products [43]. Ye et al. [44] concluded that big data analytics
decreased waiting time in tracking products, their locations, and
features. The authors suggested that manufacturers increase
their supply chain efficiency by relying on intelligent big data
transportation systems. The use and the analysis of big data
capabilities have shown to have an impact on the identification
of waiting wastes and on increasing the operators’ productivity.
3.4. Transportation, Big Data, and SystemsIntegration
Transportation waste is the movement of components and
products between stations that aren’t required to reach
customers’ needs [30]. Big Data applications in transportation
manufacturing sectors carry a wide range of positive benefits
[45]. The authors surveyed 320 manufacturers across industries
and reported positive gains on their supply chain sustainability
performance because of implementing big data analytics.
Specifically, big data analytics helped manufacturers improve
their circular economy practices, and sustainable supply chain
activities, which resulted in efficient lean transportation. Bag
[46] concluded a positive relationship between the
implementation of big data and sustainable supply chain
practice among South African engineering companies. The
author suggested that big data applications improve real-time
knowledge about problematic routes, equipment, vehicles,
personnel, and suppliers making manufacturers correct their
choices to guarantee smooth transportation quickly. Moktadir
et al. [47] demonstrated how big data analytics is an important
element in the establishment of robust transportation systems in
the manufacturing field. The authors reported that once the data
types are known to the manufacturer and a big data tool is
specified, waste in the supply chain phase will be minimized.
Similarly, the use and the analysis of big data capabilities has
shown to have an impact on the identification of transportation
wastes and on increasing the transporters’ productivity. System
integration refers to the increased connectivity and linking of
cyber-physical systems in the manufacturing operation. The
more connected the systems are within an operation, the easier
the detection of waste sources, and customers’ needs, which
aids manufacturers in providing further value to their customers
– which is the core concept of lean [48].On the other hand, the
more diverse systems are, and the more technically advanced
they are, the harder their integration is. Therefore, it is best for
manufacturers to standardize their systems and tools to
guarantee higher degree of integration, which will result in
enhanced continuous flow and improvement at all levels of the
operation [49, 50].
3.5.Overprocessing and Big Data
Overprocessing waste is the addition of unrequired
processes to produce a product or utilizing a more capable
machine when a simpler one would be sufficient for the task at
hand [30]. The application of big data analytics in the
manufacturing process is a promising practice enhancing lean
manufacturing outcomes [51]. Abell et al. [52] applied big data
to manufacturing process control and proposed a new method
to improve quality assurance called process monitoring for
quality. The authors implemented their new proposed
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.
24 Sulaiman Rajab et al. / Procedia CIRP 107 (2022) 21–27
assessment method in the battery industry and found significant
improvements in process streamlining and standardization.Big
data tools could be linked with machines to autonomously
correct any deviations from standardized processes using the
information generated and recommended by the intelligent
data-based systems [33]. Majeed et al. [53] proposed a
framework for integrating big data analytics for optimizing
manufacturing processes. Applying the framework in 3D
printing company, the proposed application resulted in benefits
for products manufacturing. Big data analytics helped
automated machines identify customers’ needs and integrate
them into every phase of the manufacturing process.
3.6.Inventory and Cloud Computing
Inventory waste is all the materials, components, or products
in storage for a longer than necessary [30]. Cloud computing
technologies guarantees better estimates for product and
predicted inventory amounts compared to traditional software
downloads on personalized computers [54]. Cloud computing
increases the cost-effectiveness of inventory handling by
eliminating the need for servers, as well as human-related
services rendered in inventory management on-site. Inventory
amounts could be accessed anytime, anywhere, a nd from any
device with a high degree of accuracy. This saves time spent on
updating computer software and systems used to estimate
inventory, as well as manage it [55]. Most importantly, cloud
computing allows manufacturers to centralize inventory
management activities. All processes relevant to inventory
organization, arrangement, and ordering could be handled in
one location, the cloud, where every stakeholder has access to
the needed information [56].
3.7.Underutilized Skills and Augmented Reality.
Underutilized skills waste is the failure of tapping into
employees’ skills and knowledge to make improvements [30].
Augmented reality tools are increasingly used in the
manufacturing sector to improve workers’ knowledge, skills,
and abilities in lean manufacturing and Industry 4.0
applications [57]. Augmented reality tutorials, programs, and
workshops could be delivered to demotivated individuals who
are not utilizing their skills to achieve lean objectives at the
workplace. Augmented reality could be used to teach managers
how to reward hard work, recognize employees, and stimulate
innovation [58]. Augmented reality could open new horizons
and avenues to the application of technical skills endowed by
manufacturers’ personnel [59]. The technology could be used
in demonstrating additive manufacturing processes or
simulated optimized systems [60]. Moreover, employees could
utilize their existing knowledge to achieve the desired future
states of optimized quality products and processes [61].
3.8. Motion, Simulation, and Additive Manufacturing
Motion waste is the unnecessary human movement, whether
on the shop floor or micro-movement within a workstation [30].
Simulation software applications have been shown to have the
capability of decreasing motion wastes [62]. Lean
manufacturing experts could design optimal workstation
layouts, and physical environments and assess their efficiency
by using simulation software. Simulation software could
eliminate wastes in the production planning phase [63] by the
evaluation of alternative planning strategies to determine the
optimal course of action. Simulations allow the design of
process maps and the test of insertion or deletion of different
phases to generate the most effective and efficient results
desired. Manufacturing simulations allow manufacturers to
integrate siloed operations within the general system by
eliminating excess resources, people, or equipment. Moreover,
simulation platforms allow manufacturers to evaluate the
performance of their process designs [64, 65]. Additive
manufacturing refers to the creation of high-dimensional
objects by the disposition of materials like 3D printing [66].
Additive manufacturing saves large amounts of resources and
minimizes the waste of operator motion, resources, costs, and
energy used in production [67], this helps manufacturers
achieve the objectives of lean manufacturing.
4. Discussion and Conclusions
The literature review has shown how Industry 4.0
capabilities and their different applications have a significant
and growing role in the successful implementation of lean
manufacturing initiatives, as shown in Fig. 1.
The different solutions provided by these capabilities can be
used in the process of identifying andeliminatinglean wastes.
The identification of the lean wastes will have a clear benefit
for SMEs, as they typically operate on small transformational
budgets related to the lean implementation journeys, therefore
Fig. 1. The associations between the Industry 4.0 capabilities
and lean wastes
Big Data
Cloud Computing
Augmented Reality
Simulation
Industrial Internet of
Things
Defects
Overproduction
Waiting
Transportation
Overprocessing
Inventory
Underutilized Skills
Motion
Industry 4.0 Capability Associations Lean Manufacturing Waste
Autonomous Robots
Systems Integration
Additive
Manufacturing
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.
Sulaiman Rajab et al. / Procedia CIRP 107 (2022) 21–27 25
having digital capabilities that improve the identification of
waste and will ensure that the transformational budgets are
allocated effectively. This will result in successful lean
journeys that deliver more efficient and productive
manufacturing systems.
It can be concluded that all lean manufacturing wastes can
be identified, as well as eliminated, using various digital tools
that are considered part of Industry 4.0. This research has
shown how IIoT mitigates overproduction across industries,
and how its implementation is associated with a lower process
and product defects. Moreover, the implementation of big data
in manufacturing has been found to have positive effects on
reducing waiting times across the manufacturing process and
delivery, as well as transportation of parts, and the need for
overprocessing. Studies have also shown how instant access to
records stored on the cloud can reduce inventory, and how
augmented reality can be used for upskilling of operators and
in the identification of unutilized skills. Finally, how simulation
and digital modelling has been extensively used in the
identification and reduction of motion. Further research that
builds on this work would seek to understand the relationships
between Industry 4.0 and lean manufacturing, such as the
associations linking Industry 4.0 capabilities with lean
manufacturing metrics, and how Industry 4.0 can improve the
lean manufacturing tools.
References
[1] Slack, N., & Lewis, M. (2011). Operations strategy. Harlow, England.
[2] Afy-Shararah, M. and Rich, N. (2018), "Operations flow effectiveness: a
systems approach to measuring flow performance", International Journal
of Operations & Production Management, Vol. 38 No. 11, pp. 2096-2123.
[3] Johansson, P. E., & Osterman, C. (2017). Conceptions and operational use
of value and waste in lean manufacturing–an interpretivist approach.
International Journal of Production Research, 55(23), 6903-6915.
[4] Santosa, W. A., & Sugarindra, M. (2018). Implementation of lean
manufacturing to reduce waste in production line with value stream
mapping approach and Kaizen in division sanding upright piano, case
study in: PT. X. In MATEC Web of Conferences (Vol. 154, p. 01095).
EDP Sciences.
[5] Nassereddine, A., & Wehbe, A. (2018). Competition and resilience: Lean
manufacturing in the plastic industry in Lebanon. Arab Economic and
Business Journal, 13(2), 179-189.
[6] Mackelprang, A. W., & Nair, A. (2010). Relationship between just-intime manufacturing practices and performance: A meta-analytic
investigation. Journal of Operations Management, 28(4), 283-302.
[7] Romero, D., Gaiardelli, P., Powell, D., Wuest, T., & Thürer, M. (2018,
August). Digital lean cyber-physical production systems: the emergence
of digital lean manufacturing and the significance of digital waste. In IFIP
International Conference on Advances in Production Management
Systems (pp. 11-20). Springer, Cham.
[8] Nadeem, K., & Siddiqui, D. A. (2017). The Effect of Strategic Orientation
on Green Supply Chain Practices and Performance: A Case of
Manufacturing Companies in Pakistan. Nadeem, K. and Siddiqui, DA
(2017). The Effect of Strategic Orientation on Green Supply Chain
Practices and Performance: A Case of Manufacturing Companies in
Pakistan. Asian Business Review, 7(2), 59-70.
[9] Wahab, ANA, Mukhtar, M., & Sulaiman, R. (2013). A conceptual model
of lean manufacturing dimensions. Procedia Technology, 11, 1292-1298.
[10] Ghobadian, A., Talavera, I., Bhattacharya, A., Kumar, V., Garza-Reyes,
J. A., & O'regan, N. (2020). Examining legitimatisation of additive
manufacturing in the interplay between innovation, lean manufacturing
and sustainability. International Journal of Production Economics, 219,
457-468.
[11] Bartodziej, C. J. (2017). The concept industry 4.0. In The concept
industry 4.0 (pp. 27-50). Springer Gabler, Wiesbaden.
[12] Jagtap S, Bader F, Garcia-Garcia G, Trollman H, Fadiji T & Salonitis K
(2020) Food logistics 4.0: opportunities and challenges, Logistics, 5 (1)
Article No. 2.
[13] Kang, H. S., Lee, J. Y., Choi, S., Kim, H., Park, J. H., Son, J. Y., ... &
Do Noh, S. (2016). Smart manufacturing: Past research, present findings,
and future directions. International journal of precision engineering and
manufacturing-green technology, 3(1), 111-128.
[14] Zheng, T., Ardolino, M., Bacchetti, A., & Perona, M. (2021). The
applications of Industry 4.0 technologies in manufacturing context: a
systematic literature review. International Journal of Production Research,
59(6), 1922-1954.
[15] Sommer, L. (2015). Industrial revolution-industry 4.0: Are German
manufacturing SMEs the first victims of this revolution?. Journal of
Industrial Engineering and Management, 8(5), 1512-1532.
[16] Bittighofer, D., Dust, M., Irslinger, A., Liebich, M., & Martin, L. (2018,
June). State of Industry 4.0 across German companies. In 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Engineering, Technology and Innovation
(ICE/ITMC) (pp. 1-8). IEEE.
[17] Saxena, P., Papanikolaou, M., Pagone, E., Salonitis, K., & Jolly, M. R.
(2020). Digital manufacturing for foundries 4.0. In Light Metals 2020 (pp.
1019-1025). Springer.
[18] del Castillo AC, Patsavellas J, Salonitis K & Emmanouilidis C (2021)
The productivity impact of the digitally connected 5 - layer stack in
manufacturing enterprises, Procedia CIRP, 104, 342-350.
[19] Zelbst, P. J., Green Jr, K. W., Sower, V. E., & Abshire, R. D. (2014).
Impact of RFID and information sharing on JIT, TQM and operational
performance. Management Research Review.
[20] Rosin, F., Forget, P., Lamouri, S., & Pellerin, R. (2020). Impacts of
Industry 4.0 technologies on Lean principles. International Journal of
Production Research, 58(6), 1644-1661.
[21] Mouritz, A. P. (2020). Review of z-pinned laminates and sandwich
composites. Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing,
106128.
[22] Krzysztof Ejsmont, K., Gladysz, B., Corti, D., Castaño, F., Mohammed,
mdd-Cj5)2BI-RjC-gIO7:-CbRI2-)i)b*RjC@ –
Current trends and future perspectives. Cogent Business & Management,
7(1), 1781995.
[23] Buer, S. V., Strandhagen, J. O., & Chan, F. T. (2018). The link between
Industry 4.0 and lean manufacturing: mapping current research and
establishing a research agenda. International journal of production
research, 56(8), 2924-2940.
[24] Kolberg, D., & Zühlke, D. (2015). Lean automation enabled by industry
4.0 technologies. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 48(3), 1870-1875.
[25] Wagner, T., Herrmann, C., & Thiede, S. (2017). Industry 4.0 impacts on
lean production systems. Procedia Cirp, 63, 125-131.
[26] Prinz, C., Kreggenfeld, N., & Kuhlenkötter, B. (2018). Lean meets
Industrie 4.0–a practical approach to interlink the method world and
cyber-physical world. Procedia Manufacturing, 23, 21-26
[27] Zelbst, P. J., Green Jr, K. W., Sower, V. E., & Abshire, R. D. (2014).
Impact of RFID and information sharing on JIT, TQM and operational
performance. Management Research Review
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the public
26 Sulaiman Rajab et al. / Procedia CIRP 107 (2022) 21–27
[28] Garcia-Garcia, G., Coulthard, G., Jagtap, S., Afy-Shararah, M.,
Patsavellas, J., & Salonitis, K. (2021). Business process re-engineering to
digitalise quality control checks for reducing physical waste and resource
use in a food company. Sustainability, 13(22), 12341
[29] Mrugalska, B., & Wyrwicka, M. K. (2017). Towards lean production in
industry 4.0. Procedia engineering, 182, 466-473.
[30] Thakur, A. (2016). A review on Lean Manufacturing implementation
techniques: A conceptual model of Lean Manufacturing dimensions.
REST Journal on Emerging trends in Modelling and Manufacturing, 2(3),
62-72.
[31] Karmakar, A., Dey, N., Baral, T., Chowdhury, M., & Rehan, M. (2019,
March). Industrial internet of things: a review. In 2019 International
Conference on Opto-Electronics and Applied Optics (Optronic) (pp. 1-6).
IEEE.
[32] Garcia-Garcia G, Coulthard G, Jagtap S, Afy-Shararah M, Patsavellas J
& Salonitis K (2021) Business process re-engineering to digitalise quality
control checks for reducing physical waste and resource use in a food
company, Sustainability, 13 (22) Article No. 12341.
[33] Cao, Y., Jia, F., & Manogaran, G. (2019). Efficient traceability systems
of steel products using blockchain-based industrial Internet of Things.
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 16(9), 6004-6012.
[34]Potyrailo, R. A. (2016). Multivariable sensors for ubiquitous monitoring
of gases in the era of internet of things and industrial internet. Chemical
reviews, 116(19), 11877-11923.
[35] Velandia, D. M. S., Kaur, N., Whittow, W. G., Conway, P. P., & West,
A. A. (2016). Towards industrial internet of things: Crankshaft
monitoring, traceability and tracking using RFID. Robotics and
Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 41, 66-77.
[36] Valamede, L. S., & Akkari, A. C. S. (2020, February). Lean
Manufacturing and Industry 4.0: A Holistic Integration Perspective in the
Industrial Context. In 2020 9th International Conference on Industrial
Technology and Management (ICITM) (pp. 63-68). IEEE.
[37] Buer, S. V., Strandhagen, J. O., & Chan, F. T. (2018). The link between
Industry 4.0 and lean manufacturing: mapping current research and
establishing a research agenda. International Journal of Production
Research, 56(8), 2924-2940.
[38] Amjad, M. S., Rafique, M. Z., Hussain, S., & Khan, M. A. (2020). A
new vision of LARG Manufacturing—A trail towards Industry 4.0. CIRP
Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology, 31, 377-393.
[39] Ghouat, M., Haddout, A., & Benhadou, M. (2021). Impact of Industry
4.0 Concept on the Levers of Lean Manufacturing Approach in
Manufacturing Industries. International Journal of Automotive and
Mechanical Engineering, 18(1), 8523-8530.
[40] Xu, Y., & Chen, M. (2018). An Internet of Things based framework to
enhance just-in-time manufacturing. Proceedings of the Institution of
Mechanical Engineers, Part B: Journal of Engineering Manufacture,
232(13), 2353-2363.
[41] Korchagin, A., Deniskina, A., & Fateeva, I. (2019). Lean and energy
efficient production based on internet of things (IOT) in aviation industry.
In E3S Web of Conferences (Vol. 110, p. 02124). EDP Sciences.
[42] Kho, D. D., Lee, S., & Zhong, R. Y. (2018). Big data analytics for
processing time analysis in an IoT-enabled manufacturing shop floor.
Procedia Manufacturing, 26, 1411-1420.
[43] Cadavid, J. P. U., Lamouri, S., Grabot, B., Pellerin, R., & Fortin, A.
(2020). Machine learning applied in production planning and control: a
state-of-the-art in the era of industry 4.0. Journal of Intelligent
Manufacturing, 1-28.
[44] Ye, Y., Wang, M., Yao, S., Jiang, J. N., & Liu, Q. (2019). Big data
processing framework for manufacturing. Procedia CIRP, 83, 661-664.
[45] Edwin Cheng, T. C., Kamble, S. S., Belhadi, A., Ndubisi, N. O., Lai, K.
H., & Kharat, M. G. (2021). Linkages between big data analytics, circular
economy, sustainable supply chain flexibility, and sustainable
performance in manufacturing firms. International Journal of Production
Research, 1-15.
[46] Bag, S. (2017). Big data and predictive analysis is key to superior supply
chain performance: a South African experience. International Journal of
Information Systems and Supply Chain Management (IJISSCM), 10(2),
66-84.
[47] Moktadir, M. A., Ali, S. M., Paul, S. K., & Shukla, N. (2019). Barriers to
big data analytics in manufacturing supply chains: A case study from
Bangladesh. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 128, 1063-1075.
[48] Husen, Y. A. (2020, June). Integration of Lean Manufacturing and
Industry 4.0: A Conceptual Framework. In Proceedings of the 3rd Asia
Pacific Conference on Research in Industrial and Systems Engineering
2020 (pp. 272-277).
[49] Balaji, V., Venkumar, P., Sabitha, M. S., & Amuthaguka, D. (2020).
DVSMS: Dynamic value stream mapping solution by applying IIoT.
WbE-) -13.
[50] Sanders, A., Elangeswaran, C., & Wulfsberg, J. P. (2016). Industry 4.0
implies lean manufacturing: Research activities in industry 4.0 function as
enablers for lean manufacturing. Journal of Industrial Engineering and
Management (JIEM), 9(3), 811-833.
[51] Belhadi, A., Zkik, K., Cherrafi, A., & Sha'ri, M. Y. (2019).
Understanding big data analytics for manufacturing processes: insights
from literature review and multiple case studies. Computers & Industrial
Engineering, 137, 106099.
[52] Abell, J. A., Chakraborty, D., Escobar, C. A., Im, K. H., Wegner, D. M.,
& Wincek, M. A. (2017). Big data-driven manufacturing—processmonitoring-for-quality philosophy. Journal of Manufacturing Science and
Engineering, 139(10).
[53] Majeed, A., Lv, J., & Peng, T. (2019). A framework for big data driven
process analysis and optimization for additive manufacturing. Rapid
Prototyping Journal.
[54] Qi, Q., & Tao, F. (2019). A smart manufacturing service system based
on edge computing, fog computing, and cloud computing. IEEE Access,
7, 86769-86777.
[55] Wu, D., Rosen, D. W., Wang, L., & Schaefer, D. (2015). Cloud-based
design and manufacturing: A new paradigm in digital manufacturing and
design innovation. Computer-Aided Design, 59, 1-14.
[56] Georgakopoulos, D., Jayaraman, P. P., Fazia, M., Villari, M., & Ranjan,
R. (2016). Internet of Things and edge cloud computing roadmap for
manufacturing. IEEE Cloud Computing, 3(4), 66-73.
[57] Jagtap S, Saxena P & Salonitis K (2021) Food 4.0: implementation of
the augmented reality systems in the food industry, Procedia CIRP, 104
1137-1142.
[58] Egger, J., & Masood, T. (2020). Augmented reality in support of
intelligent manufacturing–a systematic literature review. Computers &
Industrial Engineering, 140, 106195.
[59] Ong, S. K., Yuan, M. L., & Nee, A. Y. C. (2008). Augmented reality
applications in manufacturing: a survey. International journal of
production research, 46(10), 2707-2742.
[60] Cai, Y., Wang, Y., & Burnett, M. (2020). Using augmented reality to
build digital twin for reconfigurable additive manufacturing system.
Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 56, 598-604.
[61] Wang, X., Ong, S. K., & Nee, A. Y. (2016). A comprehensive survey of
augmented reality assembly research. Advances in Manufacturing, 4(1),
1-22.
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the art
Sulaiman Rajab et al. / Procedia CIRP 107 (2022) 21–27 27
[62] Coors, T., Pape, F., Kruse, J., Blohm, T., Beermann, R., Quentin, L., &
Poll, G. (2020). Simulation assisted process chain design for the
manufacturing of bulk hybrid shafts with tailored properties. The
International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 108, 2409-
2417.
[63] Mourtzis, D. (2020). Simulation in the design and operation of
manufacturing systems: state of the art and new trends. International
Journal of Production Research, 58(7), 1927-1949.
[64] Baumer-Cardoso, M. I., Campos, L. M., Santos, P. P. P., & Frazzon, E.
M. (2020). Simulation-based analysis of catalyzers and trade-offs in Lean
& Green manufacturing. Journal of Cleaner Production, 242, 118411.
[65] Shararah, M. A., El-Kilany, K. S., & El-Sayed, A. E. (2010). Component
based modeling and simulation of value stream mapping for lean
production systems. In FAIM Conference (pp. 881-888).
[66] Ghobadian, A., Talavera, I., Bhattacharya, A., Kumar, V., Garza-Reyes,
J. A., & O'regan, N. (2020). Examining legitimatisation of additive
manufacturing in the interplay between innovation, lean manufacturing
and sustainability. International Journal of Production Economics, 219,
457-468.
[67] Brito, M. F., Ramos, A. L., Carneiro, P., & Gonçalves, M. A. (2019).
Ergonomic Analysis in Lean Manufacturing and Industry 4.0—A
Systematic Review. Lean Engineering for Global Development, 95-127.
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.
COPYRIGHT AND CITATION CONSIDERATIONS FOR THIS THESIS/ DISSERTATION
o Attribution — You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license, and indicate if
changes were made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that
suggests the licensor endorses you or your use.
o NonCommercial — You may not use the material for commercial purposes.
o ShareAlike — If you remix, transform, or build upon the material, you must distribute your
contributions under the same license as the original.
How to cite this thesis
DPHDOO
ADOPTION OF CYBERSECURITY PRACTICES FOR SMMES
 by
Mohamed Varachia
217020541
RESEARCH DISSERTATION
A dissertation submitted in fulfilment for the Degree
of
Masters in Commerce
in
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT
at the
COLLEGE OF BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS
UNIVERSITY OF JOHANNESBURG
Supervisor: Dr Stella Bvuma
Co-supervisor- Prof. Antonio Pooe
December 20
DECLARATION
I hereby certify that the dissertation submitted by me for the degree of MCom (Information
Technology Management) is my independent work and has never been submitted by me for a degree
at another university.
Mohamed Varachia
217020541
1
ABSTRACT
The significance of small, medium and micro enterprises (SMMEs) cannot be understated, as
they are essential to job creation and innovation. This research aimed to understand the
adoption or non-adoption of cybersecurity practices by SMMEs in South Africa. The objectives
of this research were separated into two aspects: establishing whether SMMEs are adopting
cybersecurity practices and the extent of their understanding, knowledge, and skills regarding
implementing common cybersecurity practices. The second aspect of the objectives was
understanding to what extent SMMEs are making use of cybersecurity practices and the level
of integration with their digital technologies. The methodology used for this research is a
descriptive qualitative approach with a case study strategy. Responses received were
obtained from nine SMMEs using semi-structured questionnaires for in-depth interviews. The
findings suggest SMMEs face challenges adopting cybersecurity practices, with costs of
adoption being a common factor and the awareness and understanding by employees
regarding cybersecurity practices being another. In addition, some participants indicated the
need for external assistance tailored for SMMEs to implement cybersecurity. Several
participants indicated they frequently experienced phishing scams and had measures to
combat such threats. Through the research findings, evidence was provided that made it
apparent that due to the advancements in digital technologies, there was a need for SMMEs
to be protected from threats. However, many respondents indicated that they had
implemented some cybersecurity practices from the enterprise's inception, which further
establishes that enterprises have a certain level of understanding. The understanding of
cybersecurity and its components was evident, and there was integration into the digital
technologies used by the enterprise. The SMMEs that participated in this research study
provided data that was used to develop a framework that can be implemented by SMMEs that
will assist them with their adoption of cybersecurity practices.
Keywords: SMMEs, Cybersecurity practices, Adoption, SMME framework 
2
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
3
Table of Contents
DECLARATION.................................................................................................................... 0
ABSTRACT.......................................................................................................................... 1
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS..................................................................................................... 2
LIST OF FIGURES ............................................................................................................... 6
LIST OF TABLES................................................................................................................. 7
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS.................................................................................................. 8
Chapter 1- Introduction ...................................................................................................... 9
1.1 Background ................................................................................................................. 9
1.2 Problem statement .................................................................................................... 11
1.3 Research aim ............................................................................................................ 13
1.4 Research objectives .................................................................................................. 13
1.5 Research questions................................................................................................... 14
1.6 Research methodology.............................................................................................. 14
1.7 Research design........................................................................................................ 14
1.8 Significance of the research....................................................................................... 15
1.9 Dissertation layout ..................................................................................................... 16
1.10 Conclusion............................................................................................................... 17
Chapter 2 - Overview of SMMEs....................................................................................... 18
2.1 Introduction................................................................................................................ 18
2.2 Background of SMMEs .............................................................................................. 18
2.2.1 Overview of formal and informal SMMEs in South Africa..................................... 18
2.3 Defining SMME.......................................................................................................... 19
2.4 Challenges faced by SMMEs..................................................................................... 21
2.5 Role and Importance of SMMEs ................................................................................ 22
2.6 Conclusion................................................................................................................. 24
Chapter 3 - Adoption of Cybersecurity by SMMEs ......................................................... 26
3.1 Introduction................................................................................................................ 26
3.2 Defining cybersecurity ............................................................................................... 26
3.3 Cybersecurity practices ............................................................................................. 27
3.3.1 National Cybersecurity Policy Framework for South Africa (NCPF)..................... 29
3.3.2 National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)....................................... 30
3.3.3 Control Objectives for Information and Related Technologies (COBIT)............... 31
3.3.4 Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL)............................................ 33
3.3.5 International Standards Organization (ISO) 27000 series.................................... 35
3.3.6 Center for Internet Security (CIS) Critical Security Controls ................................ 37
3.4 SMMEs and cybersecurity ......................................................................................... 39
4
3.5 Challenges for SMMEs regarding cybersecurity ........................................................ 39
3.5.1 Insufficient funds for cybersecurity ...................................................................... 39
3.5.2 Inadequate training and awareness..................................................................... 40
3.5.3 Actions by decision-makers with cybersecurity.................................................... 40
3.6 Cybersecurity resilience............................................................................................. 41
3.7 Conclusion................................................................................................................. 44
Chapter 4 - Research Methodology ................................................................................. 45
4.1 Introduction................................................................................................................ 45
4.2 Research................................................................................................................... 45
4.3 Research philosophy ................................................................................................. 46
4.3.1 Positivism............................................................................................................ 47
4.3.2 Interpretivism ...................................................................................................... 47
4.4 Research approach ................................................................................................... 48
4.5 Research design........................................................................................................ 49
4.6 Research methods .................................................................................................... 50
4.7 Justification for methodology and approaches used in the study ............................... 51
4.8 Target population and sample size ............................................................................ 52
4.9 Data collection instruments, sources, and procedures............................................... 53
4.10 Data analysis........................................................................................................... 55
4.11 Ethical consideration................................................................................................ 56
4.12 Conclusion............................................................................................................... 57
Chapter 5 - Data Analysis................................................................................................. 58
5.1 Introduction................................................................................................................ 58
5.2 Process of data analysis............................................................................................ 59
5.2.1 Coding ................................................................................................................ 59
5.2.2 Analysis of themes .............................................................................................. 60
5.3 Data analysis............................................................................................................. 60
5.3.1 Owner/manager profile........................................................................................ 60
5.3.2 The understanding of cybersecurity..................................................................... 64
5.3.3 The meaning of cybersecurity to the enterprise................................................... 65
5.3.4 Digital technology used by the enterprise............................................................ 65
5.3.5 Cybersecurity practices being used by the enterprise ......................................... 67
5.3.6 The need to have cybersecurity .......................................................................... 70
5.3.7 Cyber-attack experience by the enterprise .......................................................... 71
5.3.8 Measures in place by the enterprise to combat attacks ....................................... 73
5.3.9 Cybersecurity awareness by the enterprise......................................................... 74
5.3.10 Cybersecurity support being utilized.................................................................. 75
5
5.3.11 Challenges of cybersecurity practices adoption................................................. 77
5.3.12 Types of support needed for the adoption of cybersecurity practices ................ 78
5.4 General comments given by participants ................................................................... 79
5.5 Discussion of the data analysis.................................................................................. 82
5.6 Cybersecurity framework for SMMEs......................................................................... 84
5.6.1 Identification of enterprise cybersecurity requirements........................................ 86
5.6.2 Implementation of cybersecurity practices........................................................... 86
5.6.3 Cybersecurity practices training and awareness ................................................. 86
5.6.4 Tools for discovery of vulnerabilities.................................................................... 87
5.6.5 Protection and response tools............................................................................. 87
5.6.6 Cybersecurity support ......................................................................................... 87
5.7 Conclusion................................................................................................................. 87
Chapter 6 - Conclusions and recommendations ............................................................ 89
6.1 Introduction................................................................................................................ 89
6.2 Research objectives .................................................................................................. 89
6.3 Research findings summary ...................................................................................... 90
6.4 Research contribution................................................................................................ 92
6.5 Limitations ................................................................................................................. 92
6.6 Future research ......................................................................................................... 93
6.7 Conclusion................................................................................................................. 93
References ........................................................................................................................ 94
Appendix A...................................................................................................................... 108
Appendix B...................................................................................................................... 113
Appendix C...................................................................................................................... 117
Appendix D...................................................................................................................... 119
Appendix E...................................................................................................................... 120
Appendix F ...................................................................................................................... 122
6
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.1: Dissertation Layout ........................................................................................... 16
Figure 2.1: NIST cybersecurity framework .......................................................................... 31
Figure 2.2: COBIT 2019 Framework ................................................................................... 33
Figure 2.3: Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL).......................................... 35
Figure 5.1: Steps of coding ................................................................................................. 60
Figure 5.2: Cybersecurity framework for SMMEs ................................................................ 85
7
LIST OF TABLES
Table 2.1: National Small Business Act classification of SMMEs ........................................ 19
Table 2.2: Key indicators of SMMEs ................................................................................... 20
Table 2.3: Challenges faced by SMMEs.............................................................................. 21
Table 2.4: SMME creation of jobs ....................................................................................... 23
Table 3.1: Difference between framework and standards of cybersecurity .......................... 27
Table 3.2: Difference between guidelines and best practices of cybersecurity .................... 28
Table 3.3: Summary table of cybersecurity practices being used ........................................ 38
Table 4.1: Philosophical assumptions ................................................................................. 46
Table 5.1: Owner/manager profile....................................................................................... 61
Table 5.2: Years of operation and sector............................................................................. 62
Table 5.3: Age range and level of skills of owners/managers.............................................. 63
Table 5.4: Digital technology used ...................................................................................... 66
Table 5.5: Indication of cybersecurity practices................................................................... 68
Table 5.6: Cybersecurity practices adopted ........................................................................ 69
Table 5.7: Cyber-attack experience..................................................................................... 72
8
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
SMMEs Small, medium and micro enterprises
SPSS Statistical package for the social sciences
GDP Gross domestic product
SEDA The Small Enterprise Development Agency
NDP The National Development Plan
NSBA South African National Small Business Act
SBD Small Business Development
DTIC The Department of Trade, Industry and Competition
EDD The Department of Economic Development
NCPF National Cybersecurity Policy Framework for South
Africa
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology
COBIT Control Objectives for Information and Related
Technologies
ITIL Information Technology Infrastructure Library
ISO International Standards Organization
CIS Center for Internet Security
IT Information technology
POPIA Protection of Personal Information Act
IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
IEC International Electrotechnical Commission
9
Chapter 1- Introduction
1.1 Background
It has long been appreciated that small, medium and micro enterprises (SMMEs) have the
potential to contribute positively to the creation of jobs in emerging economies by around 50
percent (World Bank, 2020). In addition, an estimated 90 percent of enterprises in emerging
FRXQWULHVDUH600(VWKXVPDNLQJWKHPFULWLFDOWRWKHKHDOWKRIWKHVHFRXQWULHVHFRQR(Saah, 2021; Wiid & Cant, 2021; Telukdarie, Philbin, Mwanza & Munsamy, 2022). Given that
SMMEs need to increase productivity and efficiency in order to survive, digital technology
adoption becomes critical for their survival and, as a result, the adoption of technologies by
SMMEs has increased and been prioritised (Adam & Alarifi, 2021; Afolayan & De la Harpe,
2020; Classen, Garbutt & Njenga, 2021: Mabunda, 2021; Telukdarie et al., 2022). Digital
technology professionals regard the COVID-19 pandemic as a force that was disruptive in that
it provided challenges or opportunities for many SMMEs (Akpan, Udoh & Adebisi, 2022;
UHJXUHF7RPLL)X UMDQ7RPLL-Pupek, 2021; Khalil, Abdelli & Mogaji, 2022).
The adoption of digital technology allows SMMEs to improve business processes through the
enhancement of organisational competencies, however, this comes with the responsibility to
protect data (Classen et al., 2021; Crotty & Daniel, 2021; Telukdarie et al., 2022). Adopting
digital technology entails, amongst other things, dealing with cybersecurity. Efficient
cybersecurity frees enterprises to focus on innovation which results in increased profits (Ajmi,
Aldhubaiban, Alqahtani, Ur Rahman & Mahmud, 2019; Classen et al., 2021; Lloyd, 2020;
Telukdarie et al., 2022). Economies worldwide rely on SMMEs for their success as they
contribute to employment creation while contributing to the growth of the gross domestic
product (GDP) (Modisane & Jokonya, 2021).
7KHHPHUJHQFHRIGLJLWDOWHFKQRORJLQWKHODVWGHFDGHLVVHHQDVDVWLPXOXVIRU600(V
success. Globally, SMMEs have made great strides when adopting these digital technologies
as it has resulted in high levels of success and sustainability (Classen et al., 2021; Mutobvu,
2020; Tendai, Nicole & Tafadzwa, 2018). It is appreciated that the adoption of technologies
brings many advantages  one such advantage being the retention of customers, which is
essential for the growth and sustainability of the business. However, according to Ajmi et al.
(2019), there are risks attached to the digital technology used to protect agai
10
SMMEs on the African continent contribute to the sustainable growth and development of their
countries, which enables the poorest of nations to progress to developing countries thus
HQDEOLQJWKHPWRFRPSHWHLQJOREDOPDUNHWV&KLXNLUD600(VDUHFULWLFDOWRDFRXQWUV
economy: in South Africa SMMEs provide job opportunities to an estimated 64 percent of the
workforce (Small Enterprise Development Agency (SEDA), 2021). Thus, the importance of
SMMEs in South Africa cannot be overemphasised; in fact, the government acknowledges
their importance by implementing practices focused on promoting such enterprises (Gumbi &
7ZLQRPXULQ]L6DDK6('7HOXNGDULHHWDO600(VFRQWULEXWLRQ
to the South African economy is significant, contributing an estimated 38.8 percent to the GDP
(SEDA, 2020).
SMMEs face challenges such as limited finances and resources. The COVID-19 pandemic
has exacerbated these challenges resulting in, for example, the collapse of businesses due to
a lack of digital technology adoption while, on the other hand, pushing many to adopt digital
technology (Adam & Alarifi, 2021; Classen et al., 2021; Hasanat, Hoque, Shikha, Anwar,
Hamid & Tat 2020; Telukdarie et al., 2022). During the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic, the
survival of SMMEs was on the line; those that successfully adopted digital technologies
survived, with many remaining competitive (Classen et al., 2021; Guo, Hang, Yuang & Guo,
2020). What is not clear is the level of cybersecurity practices and whether they were taken
into consideration when deploying the technologies.
The Small Enterprise Development Agency (SEDA) (2021) reported in its SMME update for
the 1st quarter of 2021 that there was an 11 percent decline in the number of SMMEs as a
result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The importance of digital technology in improving
productivity and sustainability of SMMEs during the pandemic was highlighted by Gerald,
Obianuju and Chukwunonso (2020) and Guo et al. (2020). Various authors have found that
adopting digital technologies comes with various challenges, such as the costs, and the
acquisition of the necessary skills and knowledge required for the implementation of these
technologies (Classen et al., 2021; Gerald et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2020). The pressure to
adopt digital technology ranges from internal factors, such as decreasing productivity and
profits, to external factors, such as changes in the market and not gaining a competitive
advantage (Tam, Rao & Hall, 2021; Telukdarie et al., 2022). A primary concern when adopting
digital technologies is the threat of cybercrime because, unless protection strategies are in
place, SMMEs will be at risk.
The adoption of digi
11
& Lee, 2020). A study conducted in Indonesia by Yudhiyati, Putritama and Rahmawati (2021)
found that enterprises display naivety regarding the risks of cyber threats as they do not take
the prevention and early detection of cybersecurity breaches seriously. SMMEs should look
at the failure to adopt cybersecurity being a threat to survival or a cause of downfall. Because
SMMEs are often predominantly concerned about their bottom line they fail to carry out regular
maintenance and upgrades to crucial systems, which results in criminals infiltrating the
HQWHUSULVHVFRPSXWHU systems (Yudhiyati et al., 2021). A common problem caused by a lack
of cybersecurity are breaches that result in the exposure of data (Pieterse, 2021).
A strategic focus needs to be taken on cybersecurity adoption by SMMEs due to the negative
impact an attack can have on SMMEs; the cost of not adopting cybersecurity practices can be
extremely high. There should rather be an adoption of a cybersecurity framework, standard,
policy or practice by SMMEs than allowing themselves to be completely exposed to
cybersecurity breaches. The daily occurrence of cybersecurity attacks requires a workforce
with the appropriate skills needed to combat attacks (Shojaifar, Fricker & Gwerder, 2020). The
current literature does not address the level of cybersecurity adoption by SMMEs (Alahmari &
Duncan, 2021; Chibanda & Kabanda, 2022; Kabanda, Tanner & Kent, 2018; Pieterse, 2021;
Tam et al., 2021), nor are there any studies that focus on the adoption of cybersecurity
practices by South African SMMEs.
Research predicts that the cost of cybersecurity attacks worldwide will reach 10.5 trillion
dollars per annum by 2025 (Morgan, 2020). If cyberattacks affect large enterprises, then
smaller enterprises, i.e., SMMEs, are not safe and they need to implement cybersecurity
control measures (Pieterse, 2021). Kaspersky has expressed concern that the cybersecuity
measures currently adopted by South African SMMEs are not adequate (Monzon, 2022).
According to Chibanda and Kabanda (2022), the annual cost of cyberattacks in South Africa
is estimated to be 2.2 billion rand. The dependence on digital technology escalates the
cybersecurity threat landscape of SMMEs.
1.2 Problem statement
The world of business is fast-paced and as a result, digital technology is seen as the way for
many enterprises to progress and remain competitive, which increases the risk regarding the
privacy of data and security of information (Classen et al., 2021; Kanafi, Arnarson & Bremdal,
7HOXNGDULHHWDO,QWRGDVZRUOGLWLVUDUHWRILQGDSDUWRIDFRXQWU s economy
not affected by the advancement of digital technology; therefore, although it has enhanced
and improved many aspects, t
12
Fernández, Ortiz, Compastié, Martínez, Pérez, Kourtis, Xylouris, Mlakar & Tsarsitalidis, 2021;
Telukdarie et al., 2022).
There are numerous strategies, policies and practices that have been created to assist
enterprises with their cybersecurity. Most SMMEs undervalue the data they hold and become
easy targets (Tam et al., 2021). Although practices used for cybersecurity may seem that they
should only be implemented in larger organisations, this perception is incorrect as SMMEs are
most in need of capabilities related to cybersecurity (Monzon, 2022). SMMEs in South Africa
lack the necessary skills and knowledge related to cybersecurity, therefore, there needs to be
an understanding of the adoption of cybersecurity practices by SMMEs (Alahmari & Duncan,
2021; Pieterse, 2021). There is a perception by many that SMMEs lack defences against
cyberattacks (Shojaifar & Järvinen, 2021). According to the literature, SMMEs are not informed
about the importance of cybersecurity, resulting in them not adopting precautions and
exposing themselves to high risk (Alahmari & Duncan, 2021; Chibanda & Kabanda, 2022;
Kabanda et al., 2018; Pieterse, 2021; Ponsard & Deprez, 2018; Tam et al., 2021). SMMEs
are multifaceted and require cybersecurity appropriate for their needs and capabilities.
A system's integrity, availability and confidentiality can be compromised through cybersecurity
breaches; when systems are exposed and breached, there need to be measures in place to
counter such attacks; however, SMMEs lack such capabilities, leaving them helpless, and
recovery then becomes a major concern (Kritzinger, Da Veiga & Van Staden, 2022). SMMEs
have long been viewed as the solution to South Africa's economic problems; this was
recognised as early as 1995, when the Minister of the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI)
recognised their potential in the value they add to the economy (Molo, 2019). Furthermore,
Afolayan and De la Harpe (2020), Rogerson and Rogerson (2020) and Wiid and Cant (2021)
agree that the significance of SMMEs cannot be understated as they are vital to growth due
to job creation and innovation.
SMMEs with inappropriate cybersecurity and a lack of risk-management strategies position
themselves in a disadvantaged situation regarding cyber threats (Pieterse, 2021). Those that
use digital technology to capture data from suppliers and customers, including SMMEs, are
responsible for protecting customer and employee information according to the South African
Protection of Personal Information Act (POPIA) (2013). According to Tiainen (2021), the
increasing instances of cybercrime are requiring enterprises to implement cybersecurity
measures to prevent and mitigate cyber-attacks. Cybersecurity has become a necessity as
attacks are becoming more prevalent (Moyo & Loock, 2021). The adoption of cybersecurity
practices, therefore, needs to be placed at the top of business owners' priorities and needs to
filter throughout the enterprise. The role of SMMEs in an economy has been a national priority 
13
in both developed and developing countries. The National Development Plan (NDP) specifies
the need to support and grow SMMEs as they are viewed as the catalyst for the realisation of
goals related to socio-economic issues (Lukhele & Soumonni, 2021; Matekenya & Moyo,
2022).
According to Jideani, Leenen, Alexander and Barnes (2018), different enterprises cannot
implement the same cybersecurity frameworks, strategies, policies, or practices as each
organisation is unique. Therefore, strategies, policies and practices designed for larger
enterprises cannot be cut and pasted into an SMME and be expected to work. A cybersecurity
strategy, policy and practice that is specifically designed to enhance the capabilities of SMMEs
is needed. Although some cybersecurity frameworks, strategies, policies, and practices are
now trying to accommodate small enterprises, the need is still there for a non-generic,
customized framework that takes into account lack of skills and resources (Kritzinger et al.,
2022). Various studies have been conducted on cybersecurity practices, such as the studies
conducted by Chibanda and Kabanda (2022) and Mabunda (2021) which focused on
cybersecurity practices by larger enterprises and its overall impact from the perspective of the
South African government. There is a gap in the literature around studies specifically centred
on the adoption of cybersecurity practices by South African SMMEs. In addition, a framework
should be developed to assist with the adoption of cybersecurity practices specifically focused
on SMMEs because currently there is no framework that is centred around cybersecurity
practice adoption by SMMEs.
1.3 Research aim
The concern regarding the adoption of various digital technologies by SMMEs hinges on
whether they are aware of the importance of cybersecurity and the risks associated with
cybersecurity and digital technology adoption. The aim of this research is to gain an in-depth
understanding of the adoption or non-adoption of cybersecurity practices by SMMEs. Such a
study is important and necessary because of the vital role SMMEs play in the economy. In
addition, the study will be used to understand the level of awareness by SMME owners
regarding cybersecurity adoption practices and to understand the reasons behind nonadoption. In addition, a framework for cybersecurity practices and their implementation in
SMMEs will be developed.
1.4 Research objectives
General objective
The main goal of this study is to comprehend the reasons for the adoption or non-adoption of
cybersecurity practices by South African SMMEs.
14
Specific objective
1. Establishing whether South African SMMEs are adopting cybersecurity practices as well as
the extent of their understanding, knowledge, and skills regarding the implementation of
common cybersecurity practices.
2. Understanding to what extent SMMEs are making use of cybersecurity practices and the
level of integration with their digital technologies.
1.5 Research questions
1. Do SMMEs understand cybersecurity practices?
2. What influences SMMEs to adopt cybersecurity practices?
3. What barriers do SMMEs face when adopting cybersecurity practices?
4. What level of adoption are SMMEs integrating cybersecurity practices?
5. Does the adoption of cybersecurity practices protect SMMEs from cybersecurity attacks?
6. What kind of support do SMME require to adopt cybersecurity practices?
1.6 Research methodology
Research can be defined as the investigative undertakings by persons in pursuit of discovery
in a way that is systematic (Saunders, Lewis & Thornhill, 2015). Saunders et al. (2015) claim
that interpretivism emphasizes the relevance of people's subjective emotions and individual
experiences as they play a role in generating personal meaning, and the methodological
objective of interpretivism is to gain knowledge and understanding of these meanings.
Interpretivism is concerned with the experiences of people in their environments. According to
Creswell and Creswell (2017), the use of interpretivism is commonly linked to a qualitative
methodological approach. Interpretivism takes into account the differences between
circumstances and cultures while attempting to provide richness from the insights perceived
(Alharahsheh & Pius, 2020). This research adhered to the interpretive paradigm as it allowed
the researcher to be concerned with grounded investigative explorations aimed at creating
and constructing theories; furthermore, written responses were used to provide additional
information about the phenomenon being investigated. The researcher was thus able to better
understand the research participants and develop a rapport with them.
1.7 Research design
The aim of a research design is to establish an appropriate framework for guiding each stage
of the research process in a study (Sileyew, 2019). The choice of research design is reliant
on the purpose of the study (Al-Ababneh, 2020). Sahay (2016) states that researchers need 
15
to make important decisions when planning their research design. Generally, the use of a
quantitative approach entails using a deductive approach which may involve hypothesis
testing and establishing causal relationships between measurable and quantifiable variables
(Sahay, 2016). The inductive approach to research involves a bottom-up process that involves
going from individual specific observations to generalised conclusions. Therefore, the
inductive approach is known as theory-building research, as it is used in a qualitative study
(Nayak & Singh, 2021). However, this research will make use of a deductive approach as the
researcher discovered through a literature review that SMMEs are not implementing
cybersecurity practices. as they lack the necessary resources. Furthermore, this research
study will produce a framework for cybersecurity practices and their implementation in
SMMEs; the use of the data collected to create a framework is commonly associated with a
deductive approach (Saunders et al., 2015). According to Yin (2014), a qualitative research
study can begin with a deductive approach as it allows for the testing of current theories. The
research strategy that will be used in this research study is the case study strategy, as this will
allow for an in-depth exploration of real-life situations (Yin, 2014).
This research study did not require the application of a quantitative method as the research
objectives did not depend on the measurement of variables. Furthermore, the use of a
qualitative method provides factual results which would facilitate a deductive analysis of the
information collected regarding the motives or reasons for the acceptance or non-acceptance
of cybersecurity practices by SMMEs. This research is concerned with the interpretation of the
information and gaining an in-depth understanding, answering the questions who, what, why,
when and how rather than merely providing quantifiable data (Mellinger & Hanson, 2016;
Rahman, 2016). The research study used a qualitative approach as this allowed the
researcher to use an interpretive philosophy (Denzin & Lincoln, 2011). According to Nayak
and Singh (2021) and Saunders et al. (2015), an interview conducted for research allows the
researcher to build a rapport with participants, which allows responses to be genuine as the
participants are willing to pay attention and provide appropriate responses.
1.8 Significance of the research
Those in the cybersecurity field can use these research findings to provide an indication of the
key variables that play a role in the adoption of various cybersecurity strategies, policies, or
practices by SMMEs. SMMEs can use the proposed research to better understand their level
of adoption and analyse their systems to find ways to improve their cybersecurity. The South
African government can use the proposed research to help them understand the level of
cybersecurity adoption by SMMEs in the country, which enables the government to establish
regulations that will allow regulatory bodies to act upon and enforce practices regarding
cybersecurity. The research can further be used by those who need to create practices and 
16
frameworks to help them understand the issues of smaller enterprises regarding cybersecurity
and their reluctance or willingness to use specific practices. The proposed research would add
further insights to the growing literature on the topic.
1.9 Dissertation layout
Figure 1.1: Dissertation Layout
Chapter 1:
Introduction
Chapter 4:
Research Methodology
Chapter 2:
Overview of SMMEs
Chapter 3:
Adoption of Cybersecurity by
SMMEs
Chapter 5:
Data Analysis
Chapter 6:
Conclusion
17
1.10 Conclusion
This chapter introduced the background to the study while providing the aim of the study. In
addition, the research questions were presented with their objectives. The problem statement
was also introduced along with the research methodology, research design and layout of the
dissertation.
18
Chapter 2 - Overview of SMMEs
2.1 Introduction
In the first part of this chapter a brief historical background to SMMEs will be provided and the
difference between formal and informal SMMEs clarified. The second part of this chapter will
define what the term SMME means and how a business can be classified as an SMME. The
third part of this chapter introduces the challenges that SMMEs are facing currently. The fourth
and final part of this chapter provides information on the role and importance of SMMEs.
2.2 Background of SMMEs
The early 1990s was a difficult period for South Africa due to the social and economic
pressures that the country faced; many challenges, such as unemployment, poverty and
inequality were identified. To this day the country is facing an increasing level of the same
challenges (Masama & Bruwer, 2018). This has prompted the government to launch an
initiative to recognise SMMEs and recognise their importance to the country (Amra,
Hlatshwayo & McMillan, 2013; Beall, Crankshaw & Parnell, 2000). This recognition was
accomplished through the implementation of the National Small Business Act (1996), which
was designed to stimulate the growth of SMMEs. It has been 28 years since South Africa
became a democracy, yet poverty and unemployment levels are still rising. The NDP highlights
the need to support and grow SMMEs as they are seen as the vehicle that enables the
realisation of goals related to socio-economic issues (Lukhele & Soumonni, 2021; Matekenya
& Moyo, 2022).
In South Africa, SMMEs can be seen as formal or informal. The next section discusses these
settings to explore the understanding of how they are characterised. The study seeks to
distinguish between the two.
2.2.1 Overview of formal and informal SMMEs in South Africa
In South Africa SMMEs can either be formal or informal businesses; a formal SMME is
regarded as one that meets the following criteria (Bromhall, 2022):
x It is registered formally and is protected
x It is taxed by the government
x Its employees receive fixed-term contracts
x It adheres to legal requirements
An informal SMME meets the following criteria (Bromhall, 2022):
x It is not formally registered
x It is not regulated by the gover
19
 It is usually run by self-employed individuals
x It has limited employment
2.3 Defining SMME
Since SMMEs can be defined using various criteria, there is no single agreed-upon definition
that is used to define SMMEs. The European Commission defines small businesses (SMEs)
primarily by the number of employees. In South Africa, an SMME is a business entity that is
separate and distinct and includes cooperatives and non-governmental organisations, where
the entities are managed by one or more owners (National Small Business Act, 1996). They
may consist of subsidiaries and branches from a variety of economic sectors and sub-sectors.
This definition originates from the National Small Business Amendment Acts 26 and 29 (2003;
2004). The National Small Business Act (1996) divided small businesses into four categories:
micro, including survivalist enterprises, very small, small and medium.
South Africa uses various criteria when defining small businesses, such as the total number
of assets, annual turnover and number of employees (Marnewick, 2014; Tladi & Kekwaletswe,
2020). In 2019 the Minister of Small Business Development (SBD), Lindiwe Zulu, changed the
criteria defining small businesses to annual turnover and number of employees (Revised
Schedule 1 of the National Definition of Small Enterprise in South Africa, 2019). The purpose
of the act's amendments was to eliminate certain provisions that did not correspond to the
state of the economy at the time.
Table 2.1 below provides information on how SMMEs are categorised according to National
Small Business Act.
Table 2.1: National Small Business Act classification of SMMEs
Classification Number of
employees
Turnover Annually
(Rands)
Gross Assets
(Rands)
Very small 10 to 20
(Industry dependent)
200 000 to
500 000
(Industry dependent)
150 000 to
500 000
(Industry dependent)
Small Fewer than 50 2 000 000 to
25 000 000
(Industry dependent)
2 000 000 to
4 500 000
(Industry dependent)
Medium 100 to
200
(Industry
dependent)
4 000 000 to
50 000 000
(Industry
dependent)
2 000 000 to
18 000 000
(Industry
dependent)
Micro 1 to 5 Less than 150 000 Less than 100 000
Source: National Small Business Act (19
20
The section below provides further details on the five categories that have been presented in
the National Small Business Act (1996).
Micro: These enterprises are not formally registered and are occupants of the informal
economy and are associated with employing one to five employees; examples of these
enterprises are tuck shops and taxis (minibus) (Bvuma & Marnewick, 2020; Rogerson, 2008;
Wiid & Cant, 2021).
Very small: These enterprises consist of professionals such as plumbers and electricians
(artisans), employ fewer than ten employees, and exclude specific sectors that consist of
specified professionals (Bvuma & Marnewick, 2020; Wiid & Cant, 2021).
Small: These enterprises are often formal, they are registered and are viewed as more
established than very small enterprises and may consist of structures that are complex as they
may have an owner-manager operation (Bvuma & Marnewick, 2020; Wiid & Cant, 2021).
Medium: The employment of these enterprises varies from sector to sector, they generally
have 100 to a maximum of 200 employees (Bvuma & Marnewick, 2020; Wiid & Cant, 2021).
These enterprises are viewed as an essential aspect of the economy as their ability to provide
employment is crucial to a country (Mutobvu, 2020).
There needs to be an understanding of how important SMMEs are to South Africa as a whole,
due to their importance in the market. The table below provides the numbers of formal and
informal SMMEs in South Africa, according to the report by the Small Enterprise Development
Agency in quarter one of 2021 (SEDA, 2021).
Table 2.2: Key indicators of SMMEs
Key Indicators 2021 (Q1)
Number of SMMEs 2 325 203
Number of formal SMMEs 667 111
Number of informal SMMEs 1 552 814
Source: SMME quarterly update 1st quarter 2021 (SEDA, 2021)
The table above indicates that there are more informal SMMEs in South Africa than there are
formal SMMEs which further emphasizes the need for increased support of SMMEs in South
Africa.
21
2.4 Challenges faced by SMMEs
According to Erasmus, Reynolds and Fourie (2019) the first two years for SMMEs are critical
because many do not survive beyond two years; an estimated 80% fail after two years
(Erasmus et al., 2019). The Small Enterprise Development Agency (2021) made the critical
observation that there had been a decline in the number of SMMEs with an estimated 11.1
percent fewer SMMEs compared to the previous year. The South African Department of Trade
and Industry (DTI), now known as the Department of Trade, Industry and Competition (DTIC)
after its merger with the Department of Economic Development (EDD) in 2019, produced a
strategy for the development of small businesses in 1995 and identified the challenges that
many small businesses faced at that time (SA Department of Trade and Industry, 1995). The
challenges specified in the document include access to finance, access to markets, regulatory
and legal requirements, access to suitable technology, affordable business premises, and the
quality of infrastructure. According to Maduku and Kaseeram (2021), only 2.3 percent of
businesses are older than 3.5 years, which further indicates the high failure rate of SMMEs.
The current literature indicates that the same challenges that the DTI identified in 1995 still
apply to current SMMEs and are seen as the reason many SMMEs fail (Rogerson & Rogerson,
2020; Wiid & Cant, 2021). The following table itemizes some of the challenges faced by
SMMEs:
Table 2.3: Challenges faced by SMMEs
Challenges Authors Perspective
Access to
finance
The lack of financial access is a significant challenge for many SMMEs
as the ability to have access to finances allows enterprises to invest and
make improvements continuously A study conducted by Wiid and Cant
(2021) concluded that a major challenge faced by both formal and
informal enterprises is a lack of funding. Furthermore, banks are
reluctant to finance SMMEs because they are labelled as high risk as
they do not PHHWWKHEDQNV requirements (Akpo, Ogunlela, Tengeh &
Tengeh, 2021). Ramraj (2018) agrees that commercial banks are
unwilling to lend capital to SMMEs due to their exponential risk factor.
Those SMMEs that initially invest a significant amount of capital are
more likely to see a higher growth than those investing low amounts of
capital, who are more likely to decline (Mutobvu, 2020). However,
Bhorat, Asmal, Lilenstein and Van der Zee (2018) have concluded that
when SMMEs are given access to finances, there are high interest rates
attached to the finances, which results in SMMEs in their start-up phase
being put at a disadvantage while such financial limitations would not
constrain those SMMEs at a more established level. The inability to
access finances can be a disincentive to establish an SMME and further
affects those SMMEs trying to grow and remain competitive (Munnik,
2021). Mabotja (2019) agrees that restrictions to accessing finances is
a disadvantage to SMMEs, which causes a lack of in
22
Access to
markets
The capability of SMMEs to have market access is seen as a challenge
as it determines whether SMMEs will survive or perish (Hlebela, 2020).
Herrington and Coduras (2019) and Rogerson (2013) agree that one of
the leading causes of SMMEs failing is their lack of market access.
When SMMEs have access to a market, they can advance their
understanding of what is required of them to gain access to their
customers and respond to competitors (Bongomin, Munene, Ntayi &
Malinga 2018). SMMEs in South Africa are not alone in their difficulty
accessing markets; it is a challenge for many SMMEs in developing
countries; those providing credit to businesses look at market access to
determine if they qualify to receive credit (Hlebela, 2020; Munnik, 2021).
If access to markets is hampered, then the generation of profits and gain
economies of scale is constrained (Munnik, 2021).
Legal and
regulatory
requirements
TKHOHJDODQGUHJXODWRUUHTXLUHPHQWVLQWURGXFHGEDFRXQWUV
government can weigh more heavily on SMMEs than larger businesses
with the necessary legal resources to adapt and adhere to regulations
(Hlebela, 2020). According to Ramraj (2018), obstacles brought about
by regulations are high in Africa compared to other continents. In
addition, the legality attached to recruitment and dismissal of employees
in South Africa is a challenge for many enterprises as it can lead to
SMMEs not providing an adequate response to change in the economic
environment due to labour law constraints. Compliance with regulations
by SMME owners distracts them from core business activities, resulting
in limited resources being put to maximum use to address regulatory
requirements (Hlebela, 2020).
Lack of skills
and education
A concern for South African SMMEs is that the country's population
contains a low level of skills; furthermore, the low level of business skills
amongst the population is attributed to the inadequate primary and
secondary education, followed by an expensive tertiary system (Munnik,
2021; Hlebela, 2020). Munnik (2021) indicates that skilled individuals
are most likely to seek employment from large businesses due to their
ability to pay an adequate salary, with the prospects of growth and job
security being the key motivators. The context of growth for SMMEs is
limited due to a lack of skills and education (Bhorat et al., 2018). In
addition, the research conducted by Bhorat et al. (2018), provides an
insightful analysis which reached the conclusion that the government
needs to do more to give SMMEs the necessary support to grow and be
sustainable by providing the required education and training for SMME
owners and employees.
The challenges faced by SMMEs are not limited to the above. From a technological
perspective there are challenges such as insufficient funds for cybersecurity, inadequate
training and awareness and actions by decision-makers regarding cybersecurity that will be
discussed further in chapter three.
2.5 Role and Importance of SMMEs
SMMEs are acknowledged for their role as catalysts for economic growth because they create
MREVDQGFRQWULEXWHWRWKHH[SDQVLRQRIDFRXQWUVHFRQRP%RWKD6PXOGHUV&RPEULQN
23
potential in the value they add to the economy (Molo, 2019). Furthermore, Afolayan and De la
Harpe (2020) agree that the significance of SMMEs cannot be understated as they are vital in
providing growth through job creation and innovation. Wiid and Cant (2021) state that SMMEs
LQGHYHORSLQJDQGGHYHORSHGFRXQWULHVDUHWKHGULYHUVRIWKHZRUOGVHFRQRPLHV7KHUHthe sustainability of SMMEs is crucial due to their ability to alleviate a country's economic
problems, such as reducing poverty and providing inclusivity through job creation (Wiid & Cant,
2021).
Although SMME economic contributions may differ from one nation to another, the fact that
98 percent of businesses in countries in the European Union and in the Asia-Pacific region
are SMMEs demonstrates that, due to their sheer numbers, they have a significant impact on
many economies (Moise, Khoase & Ndayizigamiye, 2020; Rotar, 3DPL%RMQHF:LLG
& Cant, 2021). In addition, Nieuwenhuizen (2019) emphasizes the importance of SMMEs as
enterprises that provide many benefits to low and high economies through their contribution
to the economy's growth and role in addressing socio-economic issues such as job creation
and poverty relief. Due to the recent adoption of digital technologies by various sectors, it has
become necessary to explore the use of digital technologies by SMMEs and their
cybersecurity practices given their importance to the economy (Nikumaa, 2022). With the
increasing number of applications and the reliance on digital technologies in their business
operations, SMMEs have become vulnerable to cyber threats, and protection against these
threats is required if they are to remain competitive and increase their opportunities for growth
(Nikumaa, 2022).
SMMEs contribute significantly to South Africa's GDP, with an estimated 35 to 40%
contribution (Wiid & Cant, 2021). One of the goals of the NDP is for SMMEs to provide new
jobs at a rate of 90 percent by the year 2030 (Bhorat et al., 2018). However, Bhorat et al.
(2018) and Hlebela (2020) argue that achieving 90 percent job creation by SMMEs is a farfetched idea due to the lack of an environment conducive to achieving such a goal. Even so,
the effect the SMMEs' contribution to job creation has on employment is shown below in Table
2.4, which reflects KRZYLWDO600(VDUHWRDOOHYLDWLQJ6RXWKIULFDVKLJKXQHPSORPHQWUDWH
Table 2.4: SMME creation of jobs
Indicator 2017(Q3) 2018(Q3) 2019(Q3
24
The table above shows the number of jobs provided by SMMEs from the third quarter of 2018
to the third quarter of 2021 (SEDA, 2019a-2022); it is evident that the number of jobs created
during the third quarter of 2018 was higher than quarter three of 2017 but there was a
significant increase in quarter three of 2019. However, in 2020, due to the COVID-19
pandemic, the number decreased to 10 058 355. Furthermore, in the third quarter of 2021 the
provision of jobs by SMMEs decreased to 9 758 313 (SEDA, 2022). This was due to the
FRXQWUVHFRQRPVWLOOEHLQJLQDUHFRYHUSKDVH
%HFDXVH600(VDUHWKHEDFNERQHRI6RXWKIULFDVHFRQRPLFJURZWKWKHJRYHUQPHQWKDV
created interventions whereby private and public organisations are involved in providing the
necessary support to SMMEs (Afolayan & De la Harpe, 2020; Nieuwenhuizen, 2019). In this
context, cybersecurity also plays a significant role in the digitisation of many of the key
business processes and operations of SMMEs, especially with the continuous and
unpredictable advancement of digital technologies in the world of work (Afolayan & De la
Harpe, 2020; Nieuwenhuizen, 2019; Telukdarie et al., 2022). A number of the empirical studies
that have been conducted have concluded that the support of the government has a positive
impact on SMMEs and their level of success (Bvuma & Marnewick, 2020; Wiid & Cant, 2021).
However, it is not clear whether there has been any support specifically dedicated to
cybersecurity adoption.
Furthermore, Moise et al. (2020) agree that government involvement with SMMEs leads to
sustainability and development; the support the government provides can be technical,
financial, training and infrastructure. However, these are some of the ways the government
gives support to SMMEs in South Africa they still provide support in other forms. Moreover,
according to Van Staden (2022), both local and national governments in South Africa need to
assist SMMEs first and then attend to other matters as this will reduce the failure rate of
SMMEs while improving growth for the future. Therefore, it is vital that when encouraging
SMMEs to operate in the digital economy, there is a dire need to encourage cybersecurity
practices along with technology adoption.
2.6 Conclusion
This chapter summarises the background of SMMEs, the role and importance of SMMEs,
challenges faced by SMMEs and provides an in-depth understanding of the term SMME as
well as what classifies a business to be an SMME. Furthermore, a comprehension of the
relevance of SMMEs, not just to South Africa but to the rest of the globe, is made possible by
the review of a diversity of literature. While there is national acknowledgement on the
importance of SM
25
(Alahmari & Duncan, 2021; Chibanda & Kabanda, 2022; Kabanda et al., 2018; Pieterse, 2021;
Tam et al., 2021).
The next chapter will discuss the adoption of cybersecurity by SMMEs and its various
elements. 
26
Chapter 3 - Adoption of Cybersecurity by SMMEs
3.1 Introduction
This chapter introduces the concept of cybersecurity and explains what it is and describes the
function it serves while defining the cybersecurity. The second part of this chapter will provide
an understanding of current cybersecurity practices and how they are used and how they differ
from one another. The third part of this chapter discusses the link between SMMEs and
cybersecurity while expanding on the challenges faced when adopting cybersecurity practices,
strategies, or frameworks. The final part of this chapter will review the components of the term
cyber resilience.
3.2 Defining cybersecurity
There have been various terms related to security within the information technology (IT) space,
which may often create confusion when defining the concept. Due to cybersecurity being a
comprehensive concept, it is essential to have an understanding of the terminologies relating
to cybersecurity as this provides clarity as to what is needed and what can be expected with
regard to the implementation of cybersecurity. According to Stevens (2018), the term
cybersecurity can be dated back to the 1980s. Cybersecurity can be defined as a way of
defending and protecting the critical information infrastructure within businesses and society
and is also seen as a way of prosecuting international and national policies with the assistance
of IT (Cheng, Pei & Danesi, 2019). However, Cheng et al. (2019) contend that the appropriate
definition of cybersecurity is the protection of information systems, which consist of both
technology and information, from cyberattacks in any form. Furthermore, Dalal, Howard,
Bennett, Posey Zaccaro and Brummel (2022) define cybersecurity as a standard, policy or
strategy used to secure cyberspace operations and offers a wide range of threat reduction.
As can be seen, cybersecurity can have various interpretations that are dependent on what
area within IT infrastructure cybersecurity needs to be applied. However, the primary
understanding of the term is that cybersecurity is there to protect information from
unauthorized access. According to Bada, Von Solms and Agrafiotis (2019), cybersecurity is
part of information security, which falls under the section of information security that consists
of confidentiality, integrity and availability (CIA) against threats from the Internet as, according
to Von Solms and Von Solms (2018), the Internet is the main domain of cybersecurity.
According to Monzon (2022), as commerce moves to an online space, many enterprises
continue to neglect cybersecurity and are constantly seen as targets, especially SMMEs.
27
3.3 Cybersecurity practices
The issue of security regarding IT is a concern shown not only by larger enterprises but smaller
enterprises (Kabanda et al., 2018). Cybersecurity has become a core issue of global concern
and affects all forms of internet or online connectivity. Cybersecurity threats are a danger for
many enterprises as it is accurate and ever-present, as size and sector are of no concern to
those wanting to gain unauthorized access (Ajmi et al., 2019). Every enterprise, irrespective
of whether they are aware of it or not, is becoming a steward of data which requires them to
be responsible for their own protection from intrusion (Crotty & Daniel, 2021). Therefore,
enterprises need to actively protect themselves from attacks and loss of critical information
(Crotty & Daniel, 2021). There are various standards and frameworks that are available for
enterprises to use and implement. However, there are differences between the two concepts,
which is indicated in the table below:
Table 3.1: Difference between framework and standards of cybersecurity
Framework Standards
Act as guidelines that are adopted and can
be implemented by various entities as it
includes many components; however, it
does not stipulate the necessary steps to
achieve its objective.
This is documentation containing
procedures, guidelines and specifications
that ensure there is reliability and
consistency.
The general description is provided as it is
used as a foundation on which achievement
or goal is built.
The documents are established on an
approved agreement; therefore, the general
use is defined.
The ability to provide an overview of
objectives and achievements while
providing a guide for implementation and
guidance and scope description as well as
quality standards that need to be attained.
Created so that it can be a standard which
is regulated, or it can be a propriety
standard.
Some standards can be integrated with
others to reinforce and complement each
other to meet requirements.
Some standards can apply to all types of
organisations; however, certain standards
can only be implemented in specific
organisations.
The standard enables there to be
compliance through its specification, as it
provides steps to be taken for process
completion.
Source: Syafrizal, Selamat and Zakaria (2020)
28
The above table provides clarification on the differences between standards and frameworks.
A standard specifies what is needed to comply. While a framework provides a general
guideline that can be adopted by various entities and does not stipulate steps to be taken.
Cybersecurity standards are sets of technical practices or rules that are generally used to
protect the cyber environment; a cyber environment consists of software, hardware, users and
infrastructure. The main objective of a cybersecurity standard is to mitigate and prevent risks
related to cyberattacks (Syafrizal et al., 2020). The scope of a cybersecurity standard can be
broad, even immense; there are currently a variety of cybersecurity standards, such as
International Standards Organization (ISO) 27019, Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE) 1686, ISO 27000, and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC)
62351; these standards can be categorized as standards that are separate (Leszczyna, 2018).
A cybersecurity framework provides a set of guidelines that assist in the identification and
detection of and response to cyberattacks. Furthermore, cybersecurity frameworks contain
the methods for prevention and recovery.
Table 3.2: Difference between guidelines and best practices of cybersecurity
Guidelines Best Practices
A collection of instructions or documents helps
with the creation of a plan and enables an
idea to be introduced.
This aspect relates to strategies, policies
or procedures that are commonly used.
This component does not relate to a specific
category or methodology.
This activity or instruction is the solution
that is the most cost-effective and
regarded as the best.
This creation can be done by anyone; there is
no limitation.
Organisations in existence that regulate
and recommend best practices and
standards.
Source: Syafrizal et al., (2020)
The above table provides clarification on the differences between guidelines and best
practices, a guideline provides a set of instructions to follow which allows an idea to be
introduced. Best practices are associated with commonly used procedures, strategies or
polices. The use of guidelines is not linked to method or category while best practices are
considered the best solution due to it being the most cost effective. Guidelines can be
developed by anybody as there is no limitation. Best practices are introduced by entities which
regulate best practices and provides recommendations.
The next section introduces various cybersecurity strategies, policies, frameworks, and
procedures that are being utilised.
29
3.3.1 National Cybersecurity Policy Framework for South Africa (NCPF)
There has been a great emphasis placed on implementing cybersecurity frameworks and
policies by governments and organisations as it can aid in the reduction of cyberattacks
(Jideani et al., 2018). Several cybersecurity frameworks exist. One such framework is The
National Cybersecurity Policy Framework for South Africa (NCPF) (2015), which was released
in December 2015 (Jideani et al., 2018).
According to Bote (2019), the NCPF uses elements from other entities such as NATO, the EU
and the United States. The NCPF's purpose is to create a secure cyber environment that
enables the protection of critical digital infrastructure (Jideani et al., 2018). Due to its silo
approach to cybersecurity and the absence of an internationally recognised framework, the
South African government established the NCPF (Van Nieuwkerk, 2022). The NCPF (2015)
has identified problems that are related to cybersecurity in the country, such as:
x An insufficient regulatory framework
x A lack of resources and skills
x No co-ordination
x A lack of awareness
There are crucial institutes that are directly impacted by cybersecurity and are involved with
matters related to cybersecurity, for example, the Centre for Scientific and Industrial Research
(CSIR), South African Police Service (SAPS) and Special Investigative Unit (SIU). The NCPF
provides specific measures for implementation, such as (Bote, 2019):
x The ability to form trust and provide safer use of ICTs
x The measures to take with regard to addressing national security in cyberspace
x Making sure there is alignment between laws through regular reviews and
developments
x Combating threats related to cybersecurity through specific measures
The NCPF functions as a document that is introduced at a top management level while
allowing it to be used as a strategy throughout South Africa. Von Solms (2015) described the
NCPF as limited and vague as it lacks a specific implementation strategy. However, it is crucial
to understand that the NCPF is not the same as other frameworks, such as the ISO and the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), which are practical guidelines.
However, according to Bote (2019), one of the positives from the NCPF is the importance
placed on creating an integrated cybersecurity culture for all. Additionally, the importance
placed on coordination by the NCPF is another positive which, according to Bote (2019), is
often overlooked as it steers away from the need for an approach that is individualistic.
30
same time, the NCPF is policy oriented and provides guidance (Jideani et al., 2018).
Furthermore, the NCPF must be adjusted for different environments and applications. In
addition, according to Van Nieuwkerk (2022), it is uncertain to what degree the NCPF enables
threat management and decision-making at a strategic level.
3.3.2 National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
NIST is a globally known framework for cybersecurity. The NIST cybersecurity framework
allows for information management among various sectors and types of organisations
(Syafrizal et al., 2020). By offering a set of guidelines and best practices, the NIST
cybersecurity framework promotes an expansion of cybersecurity measures. Through the use
of NIST, enterprises are afforded the ability to detect, prevent and respond to a number of
cyber breaches (Ncubukezi, Mwansa & Rocaries, 2020). Additionally, the NIST framework
consists of a risk-oriented collection of risk-oriented guidelines that enable the enterprise to
upgrade its cybersecurity practices (Mahn, Topper, Quinn & Marron, 2021).
The NIST cybersecurity framework contains core functions categorized as follows: identify,
protect, detect, respond, and recover; each has a specific purpose (Ncubukezi et al., 2020).
The identify function enables the correct procedures to be put in place to help tackle any
possible cybersecurity breaches. From the identity function perspective, cybersecurity
compliance by enterprises needs to be based on an understanding of the roles and
responsibilities of assets (Barker, Scarfone, Fisher & Souppaya, 2021; Nkurunziza, 2021).
The activities established at the specified core function are the building blocks for a practical
NIST framework; this core identity function further enhances the ability to link its risk
management strategy with the needs of the enterprise (Barker et al., 2021; Nkurunziza, 2021).
The second of the NIST framework's core functions is protection, whereby adequate and
appropriate safeguards allow for critical services to be carried out. The safeguards put in place
will allow for the minimization of the impact of a possible cybersecurity breach (Nkurunziza,
2021).
According to Ncubukezi et al. (2020), there needs to be appropriate education and training of
personnel throughout the enterprise at various levels. It is seen as an essential aspect of the
second core protection function. Furthermore, the protection function enables access controls
that protect systems from unauthorized access; this core function is also focused on correctly
securing data that promotes protection (Mahn et al., 2021; Syafrizal et al., 2020). The third
core function of the NIST cybersecurity framework is to detect; within this function, essential
activities are developed and implemented to help with the identification of cybersecurity
incidents and conscious monitoring thereof (Nkurunziza, 2021; Syafrizal et al., 2020).
31
The fourth core function of the NIST framework is the response that enables the development
of a response plan that allows the implementation of actions to be taken when cybersecurity
issues are detected (Barker et al., 2021; Ncubukezi et al., 2020). Furthermore, the response
core function allows for the containment of a possible cyber incident (Nkurunziza, 2021).
Additionally, the response functions as a mitigation tool that enables analysis. The last core
function of the NIST framework is recovery which functions as a way for maintenance plans
to take effect whereby functions and services that were affected by a cybersecurity incident
are restored (Nkurunziza, 2021). A part of the recovery function is to have effective and
efficient communication while also ensuring regular updates of recovery plans (Mahn et al.,
2021). The time taken to return to regular operation is drastically reduced as the recovery
response is timely, which limits the impact of a cybersecurity incident (Barker et al., 2021;
Mahn et al., 2021; Ncubukezi et al., 2020).
Figure 2.1: NIST cybersecurity framework
Source: Barker et al., 2021 (2021) and Ncubukezi et al. (2020)
3.3.3 Control Objectives for Information and Related Technologies (COBIT)
The following framework will be discussed: the control objectives for information and related
technologies (COBIT). The COBIT framework was developed for governance and
management in IT, which was created by the ISACA (Nkurunziza, 2021; Sulistyowati,
Handayani & Suryanto, 2020). According to Jideani et al. (2018), the COBIT framework does
contain the essential elements of practices related to cybersecurity. According to Priyadarsini
and Kumar (2022), the COBIT framework is well-recognised, has been put into practice, and 
32
has been implemented worldwide because of its acceptance. Furthermore, using the COBIT
framework allows enterprises to have defined processes that are used for the development of
policy and establishes best practices within the enterprise (Nkurunziza, 2021). The COBIT
framework is internationally accepted as it allows enterprises to reach their objectives and
goals regarding IT initiatives (Priyadarsini & Kumar, 2022).
The COBIT framework consists of six main domains. The first domain is adding stakeholder
value; through this domain, there is the need to provide stakeholders with satisfaction through
the focusing on stakeholder needs (De Haes, Van Grembergen, Joshi & Huygh, 2020; Gerl,
Von der Heyde, Groß, Seck & Watkowski, 2020; Yasin, Arman, Edward & Shalannanda,
2020). The second domain is to acquire a holistic approachWKLVGRPDLVSUSRVHLVWR
ensure all aspects related to the enterprise are synchronized and holistic (De Haes et al.,
2020; Gerl et al., 2020; Yasin et al., 2020). The third domain of the COBIT framework is a
vigorous governance system which includes an element of flexibility which ensures the
system is dynamic and a change in one part is able to filter through to the whole system (De
Haes et al., 2020; Gerl et al., 2020; Yasin et al., 2020). The fourth domain of the COBIT
framework is the separation of governance from management; through this domain, there
is a clear-cut distinction between the activities of management and governance (De Haes et
al., 2020; Gerl et al., 2020; Yasin et al., 2020).
The fifth domain of the framework created is unique to the needs of the enterprise and
entails an approach tailored to the enterprise (De Haes et al., 2020; Gerl et al., 2020; Yasin et
al., 2020). The sixth domain is a governance system that is not limited to the IT department
but covers the entire enterprise (De Haes et al., 2020; Gerl et al., 2020; Yasin et al., 2020).
Through the assessment of the current strategy, a comparison takes effect to observe
alignment with the enterprise's design objectives while still practicing controls in line with
regulatory requirements (Nkurunziza, 2021). According to Tam et al., (2021), bodies in
cybersecurity have recognised that m
33
The COBIT governing body ISACA has stated its intentions toward small and medium
enterprises by integrating such enterprises into their latest standards for 2019 (Tam et al.,
2021).
Figure 2.2: COBIT 2019 Framework
Source: Harisaiprasad (2020)
3.3.4 Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL)
The ITIL framework consists of practices needed for aligning the needs of the enterprise with
IT initiatives (Cook, Gann, Ray & Zhang, 2021). The purpose of the ITIL framework is to
provide a set of best practices and defined processes and provide further guidance (Lopes,
2021). According to Tiainen (2021), ITIL provides a foundation for enterprises as it acts as an
effective security program. However, Jideani et al. (2018) argue that enterprises using this
framework still experience excessive cybersecurity breaches. 
34
The ITIL framework V3 contains five elements that are focused on the lifecycle of a service.
This ITIL framework V3 allows an enterprise to manage the lifecycle of their IT services and
allows the IT department and business to align goals accordingly (Al-Ashmoery, Haider,
Haider, Nasser & Al-Sarem , 2021). The first element is service strategy: this element deals
with the management of services through implementation of design and development while
controlling and understanding costs. Furthermore, the service portfolio management aspect
allows there to be a process in place to identify, select and evaluate. The second element is
the service design: it provides a blueprint for assistance through the design and development
of processes (Nkurunziza, 2021). The third element is service transition: through this
element, there is the ability to make improvements to transitioning services and processes. In
addition, service transitions allow change management whereby there are controls for lifecycle
changes, and the release and deployment management dimension assist in planning,
controlling and scheduling releases. The evaluation component of service transition provides
assistance regarding the assessment of significant changes. The fourth element of the ITIL
framework are the service operations that provide guidance in achieving the best value by
delivering value and support. The component of service operations, which refers to the
management of incidents, is essential because it enables a quick turnaround time after an
incident.
Furthermore, the problem management component of service operations helps deal with ways
to prevent incidents and aids in reducing the effects of an incident. The fifth element of the
ITIL framework is continual service improvement: this element offers essential guidance
on the maintenance and creation of value for the enterprise's clients (Nkurunziza, 2021).
Through the foundations of the ITIL framework, provision has been made for the execution of
the necessary activities required to implement ITIL principles (Cook et al., 2021).
There are various reasons for making use of an ITIL; below are a few advantages that an ITIL
provides users (Cook et al., 2021):
x Customer satisfaction improves
x The process of decision-making is improved exponentially
x The structure of the enterprise is clearly established
x The management of finances is also positively affected
x Offers the enterprise strategic planning for both business and IT
x Regular improvements can be implem
35
Figure 2.3 reflects all five elements of the ITIL framework and the components of each element
of the framework.
Figure 2.3: Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL)
Source: Handayani and Aziz (2020) and Nkurunziza (2021)
3.3.5 International Standards Organization (ISO) 27000 series
ISO 27000 series is a set of standards that provides enterprises with an effective information
security management system (ISMS) (Tiainen, 2021). The main aim of the ISO 27000 series
is to align the enterprise's policies to the goals initiated by management. This improves an
enterprise's information security and enables the achievement of objectives (Leknes, 2021).
The ISO 2700 series presents methods that enable the implementation of controls related to
security, as the processing of risks related to cyberspace is an aspect of ISMS (Nikumaa,
2022). The requirements are minimum through the ISO 2700 series, yet the capabilities are
significant as they can strengthen the overall cybersecurity (Syafrizal et al., 2020). According
to Leknes (2021), ISO is generalized but enables a more focused approach through
recommendations and guidance instead of having specialized requirements. Furthermore,
there was an intentional effort from the International Organization to expand the scope of the
ISO 2700 series to incorporate IT challenges and privacy security (Nikumaa, 2022). The main
factor to consider when dealing with the ISO 2700 series is the compliance element due to its
effect on the establishment of an information security program as it allows for information
assets to be secured effectively (Leknes, 2021; Nikumaa, 2022). At its core, the ISO 27000 
36
series is used for the protection of enterprise assets; there are different standards of the ISO
27000 series (Tiainen, 2021):
x ISO 27001
x ISO 27002
The ISO 27001 is a standard that establishes and implements a model that helps the ISMS
(Nkurunziza, 2021). ISO 27001 is viewed and agreed upon universally as a standard for
information security (Dewanto, Oktavia, Sundaram, Archana, Vanithamani, Bakti, Mulyana,
Baharuddin, Sembiring, Zhabayev & Bidaibekov, 2022). The purpose of ISO 27001 is to
provide confidentiality, integrity and availability (CIA); an enterprise should not expect
technical methods from the ISO 27001 as it is more an administrative standard than a manual
that provides technical aspects of the ISMS (Dewanto et al., 2022; Nikumaa, 2022). The ISO
27001 is based upon a collection of regulations that are focused on delivering an enterprise
with administrative processes that are clearly defined; through these administrative processes,
there is assured compliance regarding security, and thus incidents can be prevented (Leknes,
2021; Nikumaa, 2022).
According to Dewanto et al. (2022), however, ISO 27001 provides controls that are not
implementable in an enterprise with low automation and a lack of IT adoption. Due to
insufficient software and hardware tools, it will lead to cost increases. Furthermore, ISO 27001
lacks sufficient cultural support regarding information security compliance among employees
(Dewanto et al., 2022). According to Nkurunziza (2021), there has been a global increase in
small enterprises looking at ISO 27001 because certification is attached to the standard; the
certification is obtained through an independent body (Tiainen, 2021). An enterprise obtaining
certification for ISO 27001 assures management that the security of assets has been taken
into account. In addition, it ensures that the standards of ISO 27001 have been appropriately
integrated into the enterprise (Tiainen, 2021). Furthermore, enterprises adopt ISO 27001 to
assure compliance with numerous regulations.
Through its guidelines, ISO 27002 is the standard that provides the framework with the
necessary controls for security (Tiainen, 2021). The ISO 27002 provides the enterprise with
best practices and assists with what is in ISO 27001. It provides extensive details on the
implementation of controls (Meriah & Rabai, 2019). ISO 27002 is used to improve, implement
and maintain information security. The frameworks mentioned above and best practices are
commonly used by various organizations worldwide; however, the implementation of these
practices by South African SMMES is still to be assesse
37
3.3.6 Center for Internet Security (CIS) Critical Security Controls
The Center for Internet Security is classified as a non-profit organisation centred on the
security of data and IT systems (Sedano & Salman, 2021). Initially, the CIS critical security
controls were only supposed to be an activity that identified those cyberattacks regarded as
standard and basic with their daily effects on enterprises and provide improvements for
defenders while publicly sharing the knowledge gained (Nikumaa, 2022). However, these CIS
critical security controls have grown and become a network that has global volunteers in the
form of institutions and people and is headed by the CIS (Center for Internet Security, 2021;
Nikumaa, 2022). The CIS critical security controls are clearly described and defined in a
published document, and those familiar with the critical security controls of CIS make use of it
as a way of expanding the practices related to the management of cyber risk that extends past
the management of vulnerabilities (Duench, 2020; Sedano & Salman, 2021). According to
Duench (2020), the development of the CIS critical security controls uses a worldwide IT
community for best practices through which controls are established that create a framework
that works off real-world threats; this, in turn, helps enterprises strengthen their security and
become more proactive.
The critical security controls of CIS version eight consist of eighteen controls that can be
viewed on the CIS website (Center for Internet Security, 2021): The eighteen controls of CIS
version eight are applicable at any of the three levels or implementation groups specified in
the CIS security control document. The first implementation group (IG1) is specifically
designed for enterprises in the small to medium category which have IT capabilities and
cybersecurity facilities through which they can secure IT assets (Center for Internet Security,
2021; Nikumaa, 2022). The focus of the enterprises in IG1 is to maintain and have
uninterrupted operation of enterprise operations. The protection required is often simple and
is available from the average computer retail store and is easily installed. This software
provides safeguards against untargeted threats (Center for Internet Security, 2021). However,
there is concern shown by enterprises at IG1 as, due to the nature of the enterprise, they have
a low downtime tolerance as operations have to be continuous.
The second implementation group (IG2) is precisely designed for those enterprises that have
employees whose job specification is to protect and manage the IT infrastructure. These
enterprises have multiple departments, each with its own unique set of IT requirements and
risk profiles. The IG1 controls are included in IG2 (Center for Internet Security, 2021; Nikumaa,
2022). The enterprises that use IG2 controls often store and process confidential information,
hence an incident would cause complications for the enterprise, requiring specialists to be
present (Center for Internet Security, 2021).
38
The third implementation group (IG3) is explicitly used for enterprises that employ
cybersecurity specialists. IG3 contains sensitive data and assets that may require compliance
and regulatory oversight (Center for Internet Security, 2021). The enterprise positioned at IG3
will need to investigate the services available while focusing on the integrity and confidentiality
of sensitive data. The safeguards used for IG3 include those from IG2 and IG1 (Center for
Internet Security, 2021). The table below summarises the above-mentioned practices.
Table 3.3: Summary table of cybersecurity practices being used
Cybersecurity Practices Summary
South African National
Cybersecurity Policy
Framework (NCPF)
NCPFs purpose is to allow for the creation of an
environment that is cyber secure, which enables the
protection of critical digital infrastructure
National Institute of
Standards and Technology
(NIST)
Using NIST, enterprises are afforded the ability to detect,
prevent and respond to a number of cyber breaches
Control Objectives for
Information and Related
Technologies (COBIT)
The COBIT framework was developed for governance and
management in IT
Information Technology
Infrastructure Library (ITIL)
The purpose of the ITIL framework is to provide a set of
processes that are best practised and defined and provide
further guidance
International Standards
Organization (ISO) 27000
series
It is a set of standards that provide enterprises with an
effective information security management system (ISMS)
Center for Internet Security
(CIS) Critical Security
Controls
The CIS Critical Security Controls development uses a
worldwide IT community for best practices through which
controls are established that create a framework that works
off real-world threat
39
3.4 SMMEs and cybersecurity
Globally enterprises are targeted regularly by cybercriminals, who try to gain access through
exploiting weaknesses in systems. In addition, according to Chandna and Tiwari (2021) and
Tam et al. (2021) there is a need for enterprises to conduct regular checks in order to assess
current systems and detect any vulnerabilities. Vulnerability analysis is critical and a constant
process requiring dedication from the enterprise. The aim of cybersecurity for SMMEs is the
protection of the HQWHUSULVHV,7EXVLQHVVLQIUDVWUXFWXUHZKLFKLQFOXGHVDVSHFWVUHODWHGWoperations (Tam et al., 2021). However, according to Nkurunziza (2021), SMMEs are not
concerned with integrating security standards. Protection of cyberspace is an element of
cybersecurity; cyberspace is an unregulated platform that enables numerous opportunities
because of internet access and communication (Jideani et al., 2018). However, due to its
XQUHJXODWHGQDWXUHFEHUVSDFHKDVULVNVDWWDFKHGV600(VUHOLDQFHRQGLJL tal
technologies increases and the need to gain or maintain a competitive advantage increases,
the more risk-oriented they become (Classen et al., 2021; Lejaka, Da Veiga & Loock, 2019).
3.5 Challenges for SMMEs regarding cybersecurity
Through the use of advancing digital technologies, SMMEs are able to become more creative
with their processes and procedures. However, the need for constant connectivity raises
concerns as it exposes SMMEs to cybersecurity threats and can lead to the enteUSULVHV&,
being compromised (Nkurunziza, 2021). Lejaka et al. (2019) concluded that cybersecurity risk
is a considerable concern in South Africa. According to Van Nieuwkerk (2022) and Kabanda
et al., (2018), enterprises in South Africa will continue to encounter cyber threats due to the
increase in mitigation strategies by larger enterprises which turns the focus to smaller
enterprises due to deficiencies in their cybersecurity practices. SMMEs face many challenges
regarding cybersecurity; a few common challenges will be discussed in the next section.
3.5.1 Insufficient funds for cybersecurity
Enterprises around the world, regardless of their size and in which sector they operate, are
gaining awareness regarding the need for protection against cyberthreats. However,
according to Alahmari and Duncan (2021), cybersecurity funding is low when it comes to the
allocation of funds to IT initiatives; in many enterprises it only accounts for an estimated three
percent of total funds. Adequate cybersecurity often gets ignored when the focus is purely on
the cost of adoption and implementation (Lloyd, 2020). Enterprises need to take a positive
approach towards cybersecurity and its components as a robust cybersecurity position will
only benefit an enterprise in its growth and steer the focus away from the costs 
40
However, Nkurunziza (2021) disagrees with the notion that a lack of finances and resources
for cybersecurity is the reason for enterprises being in an undesirable position. The
everchanging landscape of cyber threats means that investing in cybersecurity does not
equate to being protected from all threats all of the time. Investment in cybersecurity will
therefore always be a challenge (Chandna & Tiwari, 2021).
3.5.2 Inadequate training and awareness
A study conducted by Alahmari and Duncan (2021) found that undervaluing cybersecurity
awareness poses a significant risk to enterprise assets; furthermore, employee training
regarding cybersecurity needs to be a standard practice implemented throughout the
enterprise (Chandna & Tiwari, 2021). According to Alahmari and Duncan (2021), their study
established that SMME decision-makers do not have the required awareness regarding
cybersecurity threats. In addition, cybersecurity training was also found to be lacking as the
study indicated that very few employees received any training regarding cybersecurity or its
components. Numerous SMMEs lack awareness of the importance of cybersecurity.
According to Shojaifar and Järvinen (2021) there are various options for awareness training
regarding cybersecurity and its capabilities, but many SMMEs do not seek assistance. The
lack of awareness related to cybersecurity stems from a deficit of knowledge as SMME
owners, managers and staff are often unable to understand the types of cyberattacks that can
penetrate an enWHUSULVHVFEHUVHFXULWXQGX7KHUHIRUHLWLVFULWLFDOIRUHQWHUSULVHV
to have training and awareness programs; through these initiatives, knowledge can be
transferred, and cybersecurity can be successful.
Enterprises need to understand the adverse effects of not having cybersecurity, as this will
allow those in top management to be aware of the benefits of adopting and implementing
cybersecurity processes (Chandna & Tiwari, 2021). The training of employees needs to be
done regularly as it allows the enterprise to be presented with the latest trends in cybersecurity
(Chandna & Tiwari, 2021). Furthermore, those enterprises dealing with sensitive information
require training that is more intensive as this ensures that such sensitive information is kept
safe, and the cybersecurity activities are used to the best of their capacities (Chandna &
Tiwari, 2021). Owners and managers are held in high regard because their roles determine
how an enterprise approaches cybersecurity awareness and training; if decision-makers make
an effort to establish a cybersecurity culture, they will be successful (Alahmari & Duncan,
2021; Lloyd, 2020).
3.5.3 Actions by decision-makers with cybersecurity
The top-level management of enterprises plays a crucial role in the
41
managers would be either the owner or manager (Alahmari & Duncan, 2021; Nkurunziza,
2021). The top-level management is usually involved closely with the adoption and
implementation of, and the decisions related to cybersecurity (Alahmari & Duncan, 2021;
Nkurunziza, 2021). A study by Alahmari and Duncan (2021) gathered answers from numerous
respondents and concluded that many enterprises contain top-level management who are
overly confident concerning cybersecurity and the identification and evaluation of its risks.
Furthermore, certain respondents of the study did not consider cybersecurity a possible threat
to the enterprise.
According to Osborn and Simpson (2018), various enterprises depend on the internet for data,
information, and connectivity. However, when it comes to decisions regarding cybersecurity,
according to Kabanda et al. (2018), there needs to be a consideration for the whole sector as
effects from incidents may affect them and enterprises like them. SMMEs have constantly
been deficient in the importance of common approaches in dealing with threats related to
cybersecurity (Kabanda et al., 2018).
3.6 Cybersecurity resilience
According to Lloyd (2020), no enterprise is too small to be a target for cybercriminals; however,
this does not mean that a small enterprise cannot adopt and implement cybersecurity
approaches. Below are seven suggestions that enterprises can use to protect themselves.
x Investments must be made in simple yet effective ways, such as anti-malware, antivirus, and firewalls, to efficiently deal with primary threats. However, these
cybersecurity methods still require consistence updates and patches to be timeously
installed (Lloyd, 2020). The National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) recommends that
all software used for cybersecurity must be updated with the latest version or patch as
soon as the update is released; likewise, passwords should be modified or changed
on a regular basis (Lloyd, 2020).
x The enterprise that deals with sensitive data that needs to be kept safe will have to
secure all assets that contain sensitive enterprise information; therefore, back-ups
need to be conducted daily to ensure that the recovery process will be quick, and
restoration timely (Lloyd, 2020).
x The recognition of cybersecurity by the entire enterprise is a requirement that various
enterprises need to implement; hence there needs to be a clearly defined policy
concerning cybersecurity and clear flow of information that encourages a
cybersecurity-conscious culture in the workplace (Lloyd, 202
42
 The training and awareness factor is a tool enterprises should use to their advantage.
Through awareness, employees of an enterprise will be informed of the current trends
in the cybersecurity sphere, such as new tactics and scams. Training in cybersecurity
SURYLGHVWKHHQWHUSULVHVHPSORHHVZLWKLQFUHDVHGNQRZOHGJHWKDWHQKDQHPSORHHVDELOLWLHVWRFRUUHFWFEHUVHFXULWSUD ctices (Lloyd, 2020). Training and
awareness methods are essential for enterprises to combat the risks associated with
cybersecurity and create a culture of awareness among employees (Lloyd, 2020).
x An enterprise needs to frequent check its stakeholders, such as the suppliers, whose
policies, and contracts they should review to ensure that their cybersecurity standards
are accredited, and the supply chain is still protected. Therefore, cybersecurity
practices must be standardised throughout the supply chain; if there is a weak supply
chain, the enterprise is compromised (Lloyd, 2020).
x Every enterprise in the world needs to think of implementing an incident response plan
that is up to date. Employees of an enterprise need to know how to react if there is an
attempted systems breach. When an incident occurs, the employees need to know
what is expected of them, how they deal with the situation, and how to implement the
response plan (Lloyd, 2020).
x Enterprises can investigate their need to invest in cyber insurance cover in case of a
cyberattack that could affect the enterprise and its operations, which could reveal
confidential data (Lloyd, 2020). However, such insurance policies need to be read
FDUHIXOOVRWKDWHQWHUSULVHVNQRZZKDWLVFRYHUHGDQGZKDWWKHHQWHUSULUHVSRQVLELOLWLHVDUHLQWHUPVRIWKHFEHULQVXUDQFHSROLFVFRQGLWLRQV (Lloyd, 2020).
According to Hiscox (2022), there has been an increase of six percent in the number
of enterprises acquiring cyber-insurance.
&XUUHQWOWKHUHLVDVLJQLILFDQWFRQFHUQDERXW6RXWKIULFDQ600(VFEHUVHFXULWUHSRUW
generated by Verizon in 2019 indicated that roughly 43 percent of small businesses in South
Africa had experienced some form of cybersecurity breach (Ncubukezi et al., 2020). In
addition, the num
43
At the same time, they also do not have the necessary financial capabilities to assist in the
prevention of breaches (Lejaka et al., 2019). However, it is not only SMMEs that are vulnerable
to cybersecurity breaches, larger organisations across different industries are also
susceptible, but SMMEs are seen as the weakest link. South Africa has become an attractive
location for cyber incidents, as the recent cyberattack on the state-owned Transnet (Pieterse,
2021). The report created by Hiscox (2022) estimates that 48 percent of enterprises have
been subjected to a cyberattack, an increase of 43 percent from 2021. In the same period,
there has been an increase in spending on cybersecurity.
According to Bada et al. (2019), the development level of digital infrastructure in African
countries directly impacts cybersecurity. Even if SMMEs are equipped with the appropriate
knowledge and expertise, they are not entirely safe as there one critical tool missing (Jideani
et al., 2018). The missing tool is strategies, frameworks or practices that create cohesion
between processes, people and technologies. In a report, IBM (2020) stated that the
negligence of enterprise employees is responsible for cyber incidents as IBM conducted a
study throughout the world to understand the direct and indirect costs related to cybersecurity
threats. The report found that out of 4716 incidents, 2962 were attributed to the negligence of
employees who did not adhere to cybersecurity procedures (IBM, 2020).
When a cyberattack is carried out on an enterprise, the outcome of the cyberattack can have
a negative impact in terms of financial losses, intellectual property losses and damage to the
HQWHUSULVHVUHSXWDWLRQZKLFKFDQXOWLPDWHO lead to the failure of the enterprise (Motlhabi,
Pantsi, Mangoale, Netshiya and Chishiri, 2022). Those enterprises that can take the initiative
and view cybersecurity as a proactive measure will benefit as cybersecurity becomes part of
strategic planning that drives the growth of the enterprise (Lloyd, 2020; Motlhabi et al., 2022)
The benefit of introducing cybersecurity into enterprises is that the enterprise becomes trusted
due to the protection of data, which results in customer loyalty, which then enables growth in
the market (Lloyd, 2020).
Although digital technology and its advancements have been rapid and its adoption increased,
the need for protection has grown exponentially. SMMEs cannot disregard the element of
cybersecurity and need to understand that it is critical to the enterprise. The literature indicates
that many factors influence SMMEs not to implement cybersecurity practices; one of the main
factors is the lack of resources (Alahmari & Duncan, 2021; Chibanda & Kabanda, 2022;
Kabanda et al., 2018; Tam et al., 2021). The literature provides evidence that the majority of
SMMEs do not implement cybersecurity practices. There is a need to initiate cybersecurity
awareness as it allows for a culture that is aware of and understands cybersecurity 
44
3.7 Conclusion
This chapter summaries the term cybersecurity and provides an in-depth review of various
cybersecurity practices, strategies and frameworks while introducing cybersecurity adoption
by SMMEs and the challenges that they are faced with. Cyber resilience has been introduced
and discussed in the final section of this chapter.
The next chapter introduces the research methodology and integrated approaches that were
used in the study.
 
45
Chapter 4 - Research Methodology
4.1 Introduction
This study made use of a qualitative approach as it allowed the researcher to gain an in-depth
understanding of the adoption or non-adoption of cybersecurity practices by SMMEs. This
chapter provides further details on the research methodology used in this study while providing
the necessary details on all the elements of research that are aligned with the research
problem, aims and questions, which will be discussed in the first section. The second section
provides information regarding the research philosophy as a prelude to the third section, which
covers the research approach to be used in this study. The fourth section of this chapter
provides details of the research design, while the fifth section introduces the research
methods. The sixth section provides the population and sample size of the research. The last
three sections provide the procedures followed for data collection and analysis, which include
a description of the research instruments, sources and procedures that were used, and finally,
the ethical considerations involved in conducting research will be summarised.
4.2 Research
According to Pandey and Pandey (2015), the aim of research is the discovery of responses to
questions while making use of procedures that are scientific. The methodological approach
taken when doing research and the reasons provided for the methods used by the researcher
in relation to the study are based on the philosophical perspectives of the researcher (Carter
& Little, 2007). According to Myers and Avison (2002), there is a possibility that the researcher
will be affected by the series of events that are obvious throughout the study process due to
the research methodology. The intellectual part of the research can be characterised as an
activity that introduces newly discovered knowledge and enables the dispelling of
misunderstandings or misconceptions (Pandey & Pandey, 2015). Research can be defined as
the undertaking by persons in pursuit of discovery in a systematic way (Saunders et al., 2015).
This research aimed to gain an in-depth understanding of how SMMEs were adopting
cybersecurity practices. The research questions that were addressed in this research study
are as follows:
1. Do SMMEs understand cybersecurity practices?
2. What influences SMMEs to adopt cybersecurity practices?
3. What barriers do SMMEs face when adopting cybersecurity practices?
4. What level of adoption are SMMEs integrating cybersecurity practices?
5. Does the adoption of cybersecurity practices protect SMMEs from cybersecurity attacks?
46
6. What kind of support do SMME require to adopt cybersecurity practices?
4.3 Research philosophy
The main concern when it comes to research philosophy is that it entails methods that are
regulated, formed and enhanced for use in the creation of knowledge (Partington, 2002).
Fundamentally, the methodological approach selected for the research is based on the
UHVHDUFKHUVSHUVSHFWLYHVDVVXPSWLRQVDQGZRUOGYLHZUHJDUGLQJWKHHVVHQWLDOQDWXworld or reality under investigation and the kind of knowledge that can be attained regarding
that reality. Every study has specific objectives that need to be met, therefore the researcher
needs to find the correct research philosophy that is applicable and has the highest probability
of attaining success (Bryman, 2016; Partington, 2002). There is no research philosophy that
is greater than another as the choice is based on the desired result of the research. According
to Saunders et al. (2015), the research philosophy informs the choice of the correct research
strategies and methods.
A paradigm can be defined as theories that are associated with the assumptions of the
research community (Kuhn, 1996). According to Creswell (2014), a research paradigm can be
thought of as the beliefs which guide a set of actions. Furthermore, a research paradigm can
be defined as the primary philosophical perception involving groups of individuals and the
world they live in, including the research being conducted (Oates, 2006). However, Denzin
and Lincoln (2005) and Saunders et al. (2015) view the research paradigm from the
perspective of a worldview that contains research assumptions that are associated with the
theories of ontology, epistemology, and axiology.
Table 4.1: Philosophical assumptions
Philosophical
assumptions
Defined Research Assumptions
Ontology Ontology is linked to a belief
that there is only one verified
reality or the existence of
multiple realities which are
socially formed (Patton,
2002; Saunders et al., 2015).
The adoption of cybersecurity practices
by SMMEs through ontological
assumptions will be obtained from the
interaction in a social setting with the
factors influencing adoption being viewed
through a worldview. The use of
interpretivism in an ontological setting
allowed the researcher to gain an indepth understanding of SMMEs views
and insight about the adoption of
cybersecurity practices.
Epistemology Epistemology involves
natural truth and knowledge
as it allows the question of
where the source of
knowledge comes from and
The approach through an epistemological
view for this study proscribes knowledge
of SMMEs to be g
47
its reliability while
investigating its validity
(Patton, 2002; Saunders et
al., 2015).
interpretivism in an epistemological
setting allows the researcher to gain an
understanding of the way SMME owners
and managers view the world while
providing their ideas regarding the
adoption of cybersecurity practices.
Axiology The axiology aspect
incorporates ethics and
values that are aligned with
the research process;
furthermore, it deals with the
researcher's beliefs and
value system (Patton, 2002;
Saunders et al., 2015).
The researcher took the ethical
considerations needed for the study to be
a critical factor in navigating the research
process. Therefore, the researcher
referred to the ethical considerations
provided by the University of
Johannesburg (UJ). An application was
made by the researcher and an ethical
committee reviewed the application and
provided the necessary approval for the
study to be conducted.
According to Saunders et al. (2015), the research onion consists of numerous philosophies,
namely positivism, critical realism, interpretivism, post-modernism and pragmatism. However,
there are, broadly speaking, two philosophies commonly applied to research, namely
interpretivism and positivism (Junjie & Yingxin, 2022). This research study makes use of the
interpretive paradigm.
4.3.1 Positivism
Auguste Compte, a French philosopher, devised the term "positivism" to describe knowledge
rooted in experience and observation through which an understanding of behaviours can be
achieved (Bogdan & Biklen, 2003). According to Henning, Van Rensburg and Smit (2004),
positivism is linked to the discovery of the truth, which is presented in a practical way.
Positivism is commonly associated with a quantitative approach as it makes use of surveys
and experiments (Pandey & Pandey, 2015). The goal of a positivist researcher is to obtain
objective knowledge of the world, that is knowledge, which is unbiased and impartial, as the
researcher is independent and has no influence on data (Crotty, 1998; Langdridge & HaggerJohnson, 2013). In addition, positivism holds the view that science is the basis of actual
knowledge as it provides the best framework for understanding the social world (Chilisa &
Kawulich, 2012). This research did not make use of positivism as it was not suitable as the
data collected did not need to be presented in an empirical form that supported an objective
understanding of the research study.
4.3.2 Interpretivism
The mid-twentieth century emergence of interpretivism in Europe was based on symbolic
interactionism and phenomenology, based on a critique of positivism and in defence of a 
48
subjective methodological approach towards obtaining knowledge and understanding of social
phenomena (Crotty, 1998; Saunders et al., 2015). Saunders et al. (2015) claim that
interpretivism emphasizes the relevance of people's subjective emotions and individual
experiences as they play a role in generating personal meaning, and the methodological
objective of interpretivism is to gain knowledge and understanding of these meanings.
Interpretivism is concerned with the experiences of people in their environments. The
consideration of a methodological approach based on the interpretation of subjective
experiences cannot be similarly applied to a method for collecting quantitative or numerical
data within a purely objective context, as would be the case in the natural or physical sciences
(Chen, 1996; Creswell & Creswell, 2017).
According to Creswell and Creswell (2017), the use of interpretivism is commonly linked to a
qualitative methodological approach. Interpretivism takes into account the differences
between circumstances and cultures while attempting to provide richness from insights
received (Alharahsheh & Pius, 2020). This research adhered to the interpretive paradigm as
it allowed the researcher to be concerned with grounded investigative explorations aimed at
creating and constructing theories. Furthermore, the use of written responses provided
increased knowledge of the phenomenon under investigation and allowed the researcher to
get close to the participants. This research is trying to gain an in-depth understanding of the
adoption or non-adoption of cybersecurity practices by SMMEs. According to Saunders et al.
(2015), this is in contrast to the positivist method which implements laws that are universal
and apply to everyone. In contrast, an interpretive method is based on the fact that not
everybody has the same experiences. The focus of this research study was to gain an indepth understanding that would provide multiple interpretations, focus on meaning-making
and be subjective (Alharahsheh & Pius, 2020; Bryman, 2008).
4.4 Research approach
Antwi and Hamza (2015) state that the majority of researchers make use of either a deductive
or inductive approach when conducting their research. An inductive approach uses
measurement, experiment and observation while searching through data for patterns, from
which a theory is created (Bryman, 2008). The inductive approach to research involves a
bottom-up process that involves extrapolating from individual specific observations to
generalised conclusions. The inductive approach is, therefore, known as theory-building
research, as it is used in a qualitative study (Nayak & Singh, 2021). The deductive approach
uses a top-down process whereby the research extrapolates from the general to the specific.
This approach is used to test theories (Nayak & Singh, 2021). Using a deductive approach
allows the researcher to derive a logical conclusion from sets of premises; the use of a
deductive approach is linked to a quantitative study (Bryman, 2008; Saunders et al., 2015). 
49
According to Creswell (2009), the initial stage of an inductive approach consists of a research
question that is concerned with theory building through the data that is being collected
According to Saunders et al., (2015), a research theory is most notably developed by
reviewing the literature, which involves academic desktop research; this leads to a research
strategy being created that requires the testing of the theory, which involves the use of a
deductive approach. This research study made use of a deductive approach as the researcher
discovered, through reviewing the literature, that SMMEs do not implement cybersecurity
practices, as they lack the necessary resources. Based on the findings regarding cybersecurity
implementation, this research study went on to produce a framework for cybersecurity
practices and their implementation in SMMEs. The use of the data collected to create a
framework is commonly associated with a deductive approach (Saunders et al., 2015).
According to Yin (2014), a qualitative research study can begin with a deductive approach as
it allows for testing current theories. The research strategy used in this research study was
the case study strategy, as this allowed for an in-depth exploration of a phenomenon that is
situated in a real-OLIHVHWWLQJ<LQ7KHWHUPFDVHWKDWLVXVHGLQWKHUHVHDUFKVWUDWHJ
using case studies makes reference to a particular group, person or organisation, which in this
research study would be SMMEs (Saunders et al., 2015). Gaining an understanding of the
WRSLFVGQDPLFVDOORZHGWKHUHVHDUFKHUWRUHFRJQLVHWKHLQWHUDFWLRQEHWZHHQWKHFDVand the context, namely the SMMEs and their adoption of cybersecurity practices (Saunders
et al., 2015). According to Yin (2014), a case study strategy can be used for both explanatory
and descriptive approaches. Furthermore, this research study used cross-sectional studies for
its time horizon as it consisted of a specific phenomenon being studied in a specified period;
therefore, this research study conducted interviews over a limited period (Saunders et al.,
&KLEDQGDDQG.DEDQGDVUHVHDUFKRQFEHUVHFXULWSUDFWLFHVXVHGDTXDOLWDWLYH
approach.
4.5 Research design
The research design is the overall or master plan for the research. It can be framed as a series
of phases, steps, activities or actions that need to be executed or completed (Creswell &
Creswell, 2017; Denzin & Lincoln, 2011). According to Nayak and Singh (2021), a research
GHVLJQIDFLOLWDWHVWKHGLUHFWLQJDQGSODQQLQJRIWKHUHVHDUFKSURMHFWVPHWKRGRORJLFin a systemati
50
procedures to be applied to the research study (Creswell & Creswell, 2017; Denzin & Lincoln,
2011). According to Sileyew (2019), the objective of a research design is to create an
adequate plan that guides a study; therefore, the choice of research design is dependent on
the purpose of the study (Al-Ababneh, 2020). According to Sahay (2016), conducting research
entails having a research design, therefore, researchers need to make significant decisions
regarding their research design approach.
This study used a descriptive approach for the research design to allow the researcher to
obtain an accurate understanding of events (Saunders et al., 2015). When using a descriptive
DSSURDFKWKHUHVHDUFKHUGRHVQRWLQIOXHQFHZKDWLVKDSSHQLQJDVWKHUHVHDUFKHUVUROHLthat of an observer who is required to report on the observation only (Mishra & Alok, 2022).
Furthermore, if a researcher is already in possession of knowledge regarding a particular
subject and wants to gain further knowledge, they should adopt a descriptive approach to the
research study (Langdridge & Hagger-Johnson, 2013; Nayak & Singh, 2021).
To gain a subjective understanding of the reasons or motives for the adoption or non-adoption
of cybersecurity practices by SMMEs, a descriptive approach to the research study is
appropriate and involves the use of case interviews. Furthermore, there needs to be a clear
description of who, what, where and how it is being researched. Descriptive qualitative
research produces data that can be described in a subjective way as the researcher is
FRQFHUQHGZLWKXQGHUVWDQGLQJWKHLQGLYLGXDOVH[SHULHQFHLQWKHLUXQLTXHVXUURXQGLSefcik & Bradway, 2017).
4.6 Research methods
Researchers will need to make a choice regarding the type of research methods needed for
their study. They have the option of selecting from three methods of data collection, specifically
qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods (Langdridge & Hagger-Johnson, 2013; Patten &
Newhart, 2018; Saunders et al., 2015). The research approach may be qualitative or
quantitative. Ontological and epistemological assumptions/beliefs also influence the research
approach. If the approach is qualitative, it may be phenomenological, interpretivist or
constructivist; these approaches view the world or reality as a subjective construction. If the
approach is quantitative, it will be positivist, empirical and objective, and assumes that reality
is empirical and accessible and the results are objective (Langdridge & Hagger-Johnson,
2013; Patten & Newhart, 2018; Saunders et al., 2015).
There are significant differences between qualitative and quantitative research as the results
of quantitative research are concerned with collecting da
51
and words that are obtained through interviews and observation (Patten & Newhart, 2018;
Saunders et al., 2015). However, quantitative, and qualitative research can be integrated and
used as a mixed-method data collecting approach that uses both techniques simultaneously.
This combination is regarded as the best way to understand a research problem (Creswell &
Creswell, 2017; Saunders et al., 2015).
Quantitative research allows there to be a generation of information through measuring and
quantifying for specific instances (Al-Ababneh, 2020; Creswell & Creswell, 2017). According
to Al-Ababneh (2020) and Myers (2019), qualitative methods provide insight as to why specific
incidents are taking place or why entities are behaving in a certain way. Commonly, the use
of a quantitative approach is associated with the use of deductive analysis, hypothesis testing
and explanation of results, or relationships between variables in terms of cause and effect.
The qualitative method is often associated with an inductive approach to theory development
and derivation of conclusions (Saunders et al., 2015).
This research study used a deductive approach with a qualitative method, as it did not require
the measurement of variables. Furthermore, the use of a qualitative method provides factual
results which would facilitate a deductive analysis of the information collected regarding the
motives or reasons for the acceptance and non-acceptance of cybersecurity practices by
SMMEs. Quantitative research focuses on variables that can be correlated with social
behaviour, and that can be quantified for the purposes of cause and effect or hypothesis
testing, and not being concerned with the interpretation of the meaning of data as would be
the case in qualitative approaches to research studies (Langdridge & Hagger-Johnson, 2013;
Patten & Newhart, 2018; Saunders et al., 2015).
This research study was not concerned with quantities but rather was interested in
interpretation, in gaining an in-depth understanding of how many in terms of who, what, why,
when and how (Mellinger & Hanson, 2016; Rahman, 2016). The research used a qualitative
approach in order to allow the researcher to use an interpretive philosophy (Denzin & Lincoln,
2011). A qualitative research study is concerned with variety or quality; therefore, qualitative
research is usually descriptive in nature (Pandey & Pandey, 2015). The research focused on
establishing whether South African SMMEs are adopting cybersecurity practices as well as
the extent of their understanding, knowledge, and skills regarding the implementation of
common cybersecurity practices.
4.7 Justification for methodology and approaches used in the study
The use of a qualitative research approach conforms to the interpretivist paradigm as it allows
the researcher to gain a subjective understanding of a phenomenon (Mellinger & Hanson,
2016; Sahay, 2016). According to Langdridge and Hagger-Johnson (2013), researchers who 
52
use qualitative research reject the notion that there exist quantifiable social facts that are
definable. This research followed a methodological approach that was interpretivist in its
design and based on interviews conducted with participants. Responses were interpreted and
analysed to allow the researcher to establish the reasons for the adoption or non-adoption of
cybersecurity practices by SMMEs. An important element of a research study that makes use
of an interpretive qualitative approach is transcription (Chibanda & Kabanda, 2022)
The methodological approach is epistemological interpretivism because the research study is
concerned with the emphasis placed on the relevance of people's subjective emotions and
individual experiences as they play a role in generating personal meaning (Al-Ababneh, 2020;
Pandey & Pandey, 2015). Therefore, by using an interpretivist perspective of reality, this
research approach ensured that the researcher interacted with participants to gain an in-depth
understanding of their experiences regarding cybersecurity practices (Langdridge & HaggerJohnson, 2013; Sahay, 2016). The aim of this research is to gain an understanding of the
adoption or non-adoption of cybersecurity practices by SMMEs. Consequently, this research
will be carried out by way of contact between enterprises and the researcher; therefore, there
needs to be close contact between the researcher and the respondents as the requirement of
this research is to gain an in-depth understanding, which means the researcher needs to get
invested with the business enterprises and their feedback.
According to Saunders et al. (2015) and Langdridge and Hagger-Johnson (2013), by using
qualitative research, the researcher establishes relationships with the respondents and is thus
able to process information meaningfully. Each enterprise selected for the study was from a
different sector of the South African economy and it was anticipated, therefore, that they would
provide responses that would most likely differ from one another. Using a qualitative method
allows the researcher to generate knowledge by understanding the information provided and
producing interpretation and meaning (Patten & Newhart, 2018; Saunders et al., 2015).
4.8 Target population and sample size
A research study's success is determined by the accuracy of the data collected; therefore, the
need to obtain a reliable sample of an appropriate population is likely to affect the accuracy of
the data (Langdridge & Hagger-Johnson, 2013; Patten & Newhart, 2018; Saunders et al.,
2015). According to Patten & Newhart (2018), the population can be categorised as an entire
collective and the researcher needs to reflect on the implications of the size of the sample
used to represent the entire population. The target population for this research was both formal
and informal SMMEs representative of the different sectors of the South African economy. that
operate in the province of Gauteng. The target sample warrants that all enterprises have the
same probability of being selected. The participants in this research study were owners or 
53
0c5cvwG34ksUU33w7w)6wpkG406.wsUU36.c6c))4GpV5v646.wsNP3sUU
quarterly update 3rd quarter 2021 (2022), exist in Gauteng. For the sake of accessibility, the
research study made use of SMMEs based in Johannesburg. This research study used a
sample size of nine, which allowed the researcher to gain insightful information regarding the
SMMEs and their adoption or non-adoption of cybersecurity practices. The owners or
managers of the SMMEs in this research were assumed to provide the relevant accurate
information as they were the decision-makers within these enterprises.
Sampling is defined as the range of participants from a subset of the populace that will be
utilised to accomplish the objectives of a research study (Al-Ababneh, 2020; Pandey &
Pandey, 2015). The sampling procedure refers to the actual group that became part of the
research, such as non-probability sampling. Probability sampling is used for research studies
as it ensures that every member of the population has an equal chance of being selected
(Patten & Newhart, 2018). Non-probability sampling is used when participants are easily
accessible and selected in a non-random way using the subjective judgement of the
researcher and various sampling methods (Nayak & Singh, 2021; Saldanha & O'Brien, 2014).
This research used purposive sampling, a method related to non-probability sampling, as it
enabled the researcher to select participants based on the requirements of the research
objectives and research questions (Nayak & Singh, 2021; Saunders et al., 2015). According
to Neuman (2014), purposive sampling is best suited for research studies that have a small
sample size. The sample size of nine SMMEs meant that the use of purposive sampling was
appropriate for this study. Annual turnover and the number of employees were the criteria
used to identify appropriate SMMEs.
4.9 Data collection instruments, sources, and procedures
The research made use of primary data. The data was obtained from the SMMEs through a
direct interview conducted by the researcher. The use of a qualitative method ensured that
the information collected was meaningful. The SMMEs selected in Johannesburg, Gauteng
were first approached to ascertain if they were willing to participate and if they were, an
appointment was scheduled to explain the research to be conducted in more detail and to
request them to complete and sign the consent form.
Approaching various SMMEs and obtaining informed consent for the research from the owners
or managers, ensured that the data was obtained from willing participants and would thus
hopefully be more comprehensive, genuine, and accurate. According to Nayak and Singh
(2021) and Saunders et al. (2015), an interview allows the researcher to build a rapport with
participants, which allows re
54
The researcher that uses the collection method of interviewing needs to consider three
categories of interviews:
x Unstructured interviews: These types of interviews are informal and are used to for indepth exploration of a specific topic or situation (Nayak & Singh, 2021; Saunders et
al., 2015). There are no specific questions that the researcher has to ask for this type
of interview. However, the researcher has to have a clear idea of what information is
required while allowing the participants to speak freely, while still remaining on topic
(Langdridge & Hagger-Johnson, 2013; Saunders et al., 2015).
x Semi-structured interviews: The researcher has a predetermined list of questions to be
answered; however, there is an element of flexibility, allowing certain questions to be
removed, depending on the context of participants (Nayak & Singh, 2021; Langdridge
& Hagger-Johnson, 2013; Saunders et al., 2015). The order of the questions may be
altered depending on the conversation flow, while open-ended questions allow the
participants to elaborate on a topic (Nayak & Singh, 2021; Langdridge & HaggerJohnson, 2013; Saunders et al., 2015).
x Structured interviews: Through this type of interview, the format of questions is
predetermined and standardised for all participants. There is no room for flexibility and
answers are selected from predetermined responses (Nayak & Singh, 2021;
Langdridge & Hagger-Johnson, 2013; Saunders et al., 2015). Structured interviews
are commonly linked with the collection of large amounts of data and are mostly used
in a quantitative research study (Nayak & Singh, 2021; Saunders et al., 2015).
This research study made use of a semi-structured interview questionnaire as it allowed the
researcher to ask questions from a predetermined list of questions. However, there was room
for flexibility to enable genuine answers which provided valuable information. The list of
questions used provided the researcher with a guide and allowed adaptive measures to be
taken (Nayak & Singh, 2021; Saunders et al., 2015).
Process of the semi-structured interview
1. Questions were developed by the researcher to understand the reasons for the
adoption or non-adoption of cybersecurity practices by SMMEs.
2. In-person interviews with nine SMME owners or managers were scheduled.
3. The questions of the interview were sent in advance for participants to familiarise
themselves with the context of the questions and allow them to prepare. The
researcher used the same questions for all participan
55
4. During the in-person interviews, the researcher had to be unbiased and not impart
views on participants but create a neutral rapport.
5. All interviews were recorded with the approval of participants, thus ensuring the
accuracy of the information collected.
4.10 Data analysis
Data analysis from a qualitative perspective involves the need to make sense of images and
texts. This allows for the segmenting of data in order to gain a better understanding (Creswell
& Creswell, 2017). Quantitative data analysis is only conducted once all the data has been
collected; however, the analysis of qualitative data can be conducted during the data collection
process (Creswell & Creswell, 2017; Saunders et al., 2015). According to Creswell and
Creswell (2017) and Langdridge and Hagger-Johnson (2013), researchers conducting a
qualitative data analysis need to view the data analysis as a process that contains progressive
steps.
The semi-structured interview questionnaires were presented to the participants who were
asked for permission to record the interview. Recording the interview allowed the researcher
to capture all that was said during the interview. Once the semi-structured interview
questionnaires had been conducted, the recording of each interview was taken and put into
software that transcribed the recordings and provided a text file which could be used for
analysis. The transcribing software used was OTranscribe as it is open source and free.
Another advantage was that the software also provided a platform for the manual transcribing
of audio recordings (Hosseini-Nezhad, Safdar & Luu, 2021).
The data collected from the semi-structured interviews was then analysed using a qualitative
software. According to Saunders et al. (2015), various computer-aided qualitative data
analysis software (CAQDAS) are available. The CAQDAS used for this research study was
Atlas.ti which has been used by qualitative researchers for almost three decades (Adelowotan,
2021). Atlas.ti is popular with qualitative researchers for its simple coding and recoding, which
provide the formation of networks that show the intersections of themes and codes which
facilitate interpretation (Adelowotan, 2021). According to Konopásek (2008), Atlas.ti is
considered a textual laboratory as it enables there to be interconnectivity among the elements
of the research and allows a quicker and easier approach to data analysis. In addition, Atlas.ti
is a software programme that provides analysis support that is robust in its nature while being
more effective than manual analysis and coding (Paulus & Lester, 2016). Therefore, Atlas.ti is
appropriate to gain an in-depth understanding of the adoption or non-adoption of cybersecurity
practices by SMMEs.
56
The following is the process of data analysis that this research study followed:
1. The interview audio files were transcribed using OTranscribe to develop a textual
document.
2. The use of coding was undertaken whereby coding categories were created through
reviewing transcripts and gaining understanding of what was being relayed by
participants that enabled the identification of appropriate coding categories.
3. Through analysis, themes were encountered and the process of finding relationships
in the coding was observed and reported.
4. Thereafter, the interpretation of the results was discussed.
5. A report on the findings of the research study was generated.
4.11 Ethical consideration
According to Kumar (2018), there are numerous research methods and techniques that are
integrated throughout the research process, including the researcher's decision-making
regarding the collecting and evaluation of data that provide answers to research questions.
Additionally, there is a connection between survey-based research and ethical concerns since
it addresses the proper and improper ways to communicate with participants in a study (Patten
& Newhart, 2018).
The protection of participants in any research study is of utmost importance as there are rules
and processes to be adhered to that have been implemented by the ethics committee of the
university. Therefore, the following ethical imperatives need to be taken into consideration
when conducting survey-based research:
x There needs to be informed consent whereby those participating in the research are
clearly informed about the nature of the research and the role they are expected to
play in the research. Therefore, the researcher included a consent form that provided
all the information relating to the details of the research being conducted and how it
would impact the field of study, which needed to be read and agreed to by the
participant. In addition, the participants were informed of their right to withdraw from
the survey or cease filling in the questionnaire at any point if they were not comfortable
with the question. In addition, the contact details of the researcher were made available
for the participant should they have any queries regarding the questionnaire or the
overall research
57
 The data collected from participants would be dealt with in a confidential manner as
those involved in the research have the right to privacy. The questionnaire would not
ask the participant to divulge any personal information that could lead to their identity
being revealed. Only the individuals involved in the research would be allowed to view
the collected information, as this allowed for confidentiality to be upheld. In addition,
the researcher did not ask for personal information such as the name of the participant
or the enterprise's name as this was not required for the research. A participant's
privacy is a priority for a researcher collecting data as anonymity is critical when
collecting data for research purposes.
x The elements of transparency and honesty need to be maintained by the researcher
throughout the research process as the data collected needed to be presented in the
same form it was received. The data had been shown in its original form even if it was
contrary to what the researcher believed to be accurate.
x The data that was collected required clearance from the university's ethical committee,
as this is a requirement for all researchers that are conducting research at the
university.
4.12 Conclusion
This chapter provides the necessary information regarding the methodology and techniques
that were used for this research while providing an insight into how the methods and
techniques were implemented and the effect they had on the outcome of the research.
Furthermore, the aspects of sample size, population, data collection and data analysis were
discussed while also taking into account the need to comply with all the ethical imperatives
DQGUHFRPPHQGDWLRQVRIWKHXQLYHUVLWVHWKLFVFRPPLWWHHIRUFRQGXFWL ng survey-based
research.
The next chapter introduces the data analysis component of the study whereby an an
58
Chapter 5 - Data Analysis
5.1 Introduction
This chapter delivers the analysis aspect of the research whereby all interviews were
comprehensively conducted to gain an understanding of SMMEs and their adoption or nonadoption of cybersecurity practices.
All interviews were conducted by the researcher at the place of operation for all SMMEs
involved as it allowed for a more personal connection between participant and researcher, and
softened any awkwardness that may have arisen. All interviews were conducted with SMMEs
located in different areas of Johannesburg. The primary purpose of the interviews was to
understand to what extent SMMEs were using cybersecurity practices and their level of
integration LQWRWKHHQWHUSULVHVGLJLWDOWHFKQRORJLHV)XUWKHUPRUH , the interviews conducted by
the researcher established whether these South African SMMEs were adopting cybersecurity
practices and the extent of their understanding, knowledge and skills regarding the
implementation of standard cybersecurity practices. In addition, those SMMEs that
participated in the study provided responses to questions regarding the barriers faced when
adopting cybersecurity practices and the kind of support required to adopt cybersecurity
practices. The in-depth interviews conducted provided information that could be essential to
the development of a cybersecurity framework for SMMEs. Through this potential framework,
SMMEs would be introduced to a tool that could act as a guide that would provide the
necessary support when adopting cybersecurity practices.
The questions used in the interviews was divided into seven sections:
x Section A: Demographic information on the SMME owner or manager
x Section B: Enterprise information provided the necessary information for an enterprise
profile.
x Section C: Cybersecurity awareness provided information on the SMME owner or
manager and their understanding of cybersecurity.
x Section D: Cybersecurity adoption enquired about the SMME's integration of
cybersecurity practices.
x Section E: Cybersecurity threats gathered information on the cybersecurity threats
faced in relation to the use of digital technology.
x Section F: Support enquired as to the level of support being received with regard to
cybersecurity practices
x Section G: Feedback was used to gain any comments or qu
59
5.2 Process of data analysis
5.2.1 Coding
Globally the process of coding is associated with research that is qualitative as it enables the
researcher to examine the data that has been collected, which allows for the development of
new ideas (Elliott, 2018). According to Creswell and Báez (2020), coding is seen as a method
that allows textual data to be analysed with the intention of breaking down and then re-forming
the data. Meaning can thus be derived from the textual data. Moreover, coding involves each
aspect or small body within the overall data being labelled with a word or phrase that
symbolises meaning through the extraction (Chandra & Shang, 2019: Saunders et al., 2015).
Coding can be either inductive or deductive. Coding that is inductive enables the researcher
to go through the raw data and establish interpretation and develop themes and concepts
(Chandra & Shang, 2019; Fereday & Muir-Cochrane, 2006; Thomas, 2006). Coding that is
deductive in its approach is focused on testing data that had assumptions or hypotheses
attached to it prior to the collection of data and commonly uses a coding manual or scheme
(Chandra & Shang, 2019; Thomas, 2006). Through the use of inductive coding, inductive
reasoning emerges, and the identification of vital topics and themes occur frequently and used
when there is limited knowledge in a specified area (Chandra & Shang, 2019). The raw textual
data that consists of sentences and paragraphs need to be marked with a code if an inductive
approach is taken to coding (Chandra & Shang, 2019). The inductive approach was
appropriate for coding the raw textual data as no prior assumptions or hypotheses were being
tested (Saunders et al., 2015).
The steps used for coding of data are laid out below:
Step 1
Listening, reading, and
understanding the raw textual
data
Step 2
The identification of important
text and paragraphs
Step 3
Labelling of texts and
paragraphs through coding on
Atlas.ti
60
Figure 3.1: Steps of coding
5.2.2 Analysis of themes
According to Braun and Clarke (2006), the process of thematic analysis is frequently
associated with an approach that is generic and is considered the foundation for qualitative
data analysis. The main goal of using a thematic analysis is to locate patterns or themes in
the data while enabling the researcher to code the qualitative data for the identification of
patterns and themes to assist in the research questions being answered (Saunders et al.,
2015). Furthermore, the use of a thematic analysis provides a logical and adaptable approach
with regard to the analysis of the qualitative data (Braun & Clarke, 2006).
The researcher does not have to identify many themes, as having a small number of themes
is acceptable for a research study (Elliott, 2018; Saldanha & O'Brien, 2014). This study made
use of thematic analysis as the researcher coded the qualitative data collected, which allowed
for the emergence of patterns and themes. The coding, conducted with the aid of Atlas.ti, was
carried out with the aims and objectives of the research in mind.
5.3 Data analysis
5.3.1 Owner/manager profile
Table 5.1 reflects the data collected from nine SMME owners/managers regarding their current
position in the enterprise with their highest level of education and their level of IT skills,
alongside the classification of the enterprise. The responses reflect the responses received
from questions asked in Section A of the questionnaire.
Step 4
Through coding on Atlas.ti
there was the ability to
explore themes
Step 5
Themes were identified and
defined within the scope of
the research.
61
Table 5.1: Owner/manager profile
Participant
No.
Current
position
Highest level of
education
Level of IT
skills
Classification of
enterprise
Participant 1 Owner
higher
Intermediate Micro
Participant 2 Owner Diploma Intermediate Small
Participant 3 Owner Advanced Small
Participant 4 Owner Diploma Advanced Micro
Participant 5 Manager Intermediate Medium
Participant 6 Owner High School Entry Micro
Participant 7 Manager
higher
Intermediate Medium
Participant 8 Owner Entry Small
Participant 9 Owner Honours degree Intermediate Medium
In Table 5.1 the highest level of education achieved provides an essential insight into the
owners and managers of SMMEs. The nine participants had some form of education, with
WKHUHEHLQJWZRSDUWLFLSDQWVRQHDQGVHYHQZLWKPDVWHUVGHJUHHVRUKLJKHU7ZRrespondents, participants two and four, had diplomas. Three respondents, participants three,
ILYHDQGHLJKWKDGEDFKHORUVGHJUHHVDQGRQORQHUHVSRQGHQWSDUWLFLSDQWVL[LQGLFDWHGtheir highest form of education was high school. Participants were asked to give an indication
of their level of IT skills. This was necessary to gain insight into their understanding of IT and
its elements. Out of the nine participants that took part in the research study, five respondents
indicated they had an intermediate level of IT skills, these were participants one, two. five,
seven and nine. There were two participants who viewed their level of IT skills as advanced,
those were participants three and four, while two responses, six and eight, provided their level
of IT skills as entry-level.
The SMMEs that took part in this research study were situated in various sectors of the
economy and, because of their different experiences and insi
62
Definition of Small Enterprise in South Africa (2019), and they are now defined by annual
turnover and the number of employees only. However, this research study did have questions
related to the sector in which the enterprise operates but these questions were purely used as
a method of gaining additional information on the enterprises and was not used for the purpose
of extracting the classification of the enterprises. The method used to classify the enterprise
was by having the participants answer questions related to the enterprise's profile in Section
B, which contained questions related to the number of employees and annual turnover, which
were critical to classifying the enterprises. The interviews were conducted on the premises of
the enterprise to allow for a more authentic interaction between participant and researcher.
Table 5.2: Years of operation and sector
Participant No. Years of operation Sector of the economy
Participant 1 <5 years Consulting
Participant 2 <5 years Manufacturing
Participant 3 5-10 years E-commerce-Variety of products
Participant 4 <5 years Finance and business services
Participant 5 10-20 years Manufacturing
Participant 6 5-10 years Food and beverage
Participant 7 >20 years Construction and engineering
Participant 8 10-20 years Fuel station
Participant 9 >20 years Finance and business services
Table 5.2 indicates that from the nine SMMEs that participated in this research study, three
enterprises have been in existence for fewer than five years. In contrast, two enterprises have
been in existence for a period of five to ten years. On the other hand, there were also two
enterprises that have been in existence for a period of ten to twenty years and two enterprises
that have been in existence for over twenty years. As shown in Table 5.2, those enterprises
classified as medium have been in existence for ten to twenty years. However, it cannot be
assumed that those who have been in existence longer than other enterprises are the only 
63
ones to adopt cybersecurity practices, as the duration of the operation is not a critical factor in
the adoption or non-adoption of cybersecurity practices.
Table 5.2 specifies the responses provided regarding the sector of the economy the enterprise
classifies as. There were two participants that indicated their enterprise is part of the
manufacturing sector of the economy, and two participants that indicated that they are in the
finance and business services sector of the economy. One participant responded that they
owned a fuel station which falls under the retail sector of the economy. Another participant
enterprise operates as a consultancy and provides a service which is classified under the
business services sector. There was one participant that operated in the construction and
engineering sector while another operated in the food and beverage sector and the last
enterprise was an e-commerce operation and operated in the retail sector.
Table 5.3: Age range and level of skills of owners/managers
Participant No. Age range (Years) Level of IT skills
Participant 1 30-39 Intermediate
Participant 2 30-39 Intermediate
Participant 3 40-49 Advanced
Participant 4 21-29 Advanced
Participant 5 50-59 Intermediate
Participant 6 40-49 Entry
Participant 7 40-49 Intermediate
Participant 8 60 or older Entry
Participant 9 40-49 Intermediate
were in the thirty to thirty-nine year age range, these were participants one and two. Four
respondents were in the age range forty to forty-nine years, participants three, six, seven and
nine. One participant, participant five, was in the fifty to fifty-nine year age range, and one,
participant eight, was sixty years or older, while participant four was in the twenty to the twentynine year age range. As can be seen in the table above, the level of IT skills by participants
does not correlate with their age as older participants still had an intermediate or advanced 
64
level of skills in IT. However, the participant who had an entry level of IT skills was in the age
range of sixty years or older. This could possibly have been due to the rate at which digital
technology is advancing, as many members of the older generation struggle to keep up with
advancements in the technology field.
5.3.2 The understanding of cybersecurity
Those who participated in the research study were asked whether they understood the
concept of cybersecurity, as this gave the researcher the ability to assess their ability to
comprehend the concept and its elements. According to Cheng et al. (2019), cybersecurity
can be defined as a way of defending and protecting critical information infrastructure within
businesses and society and is also seen as a way of prosecuting international and national
policies, with the assistance of IT.
7KHUHVSRQVHVUHFHLYHGUHJDUGLQJWKHSDUWLFLSDQWVXQGHUVWDQGLQJRIFEHUVHFXULWSUvaried responses. Participant one mentioned, 7RSURWHFWRXUSHUVRQDOLQIRUPDWLRQRXU
FRPSDQSHUVRQDOLQIRUPDWLRQDQGFXVWRPHUVDQGFOLHQWVSHUVRQDOLQIRUPDWLRQ . Participant
three explained, &EHUVHFXULWLVZLWKXVVLQFHWKHWLPH,QWHUQHWFDPHLQWRWKHZRUOG .
Participant four added, ,WKLQNLWVDYLWDOSDUWRIDQEXVLQHVVZKHWKHULWVRQOLQHRURIIOLQH
you know, 'cause everyone uses emails in any form of online work. You know there's always
WKUHDWV . Participant six replied, Cybersecurity means we need to secure yourself digitally with
regard to your online banking or finances also with regard to our data or customer details, all
WKHLULQIRUPDWLRQ . Participant seven responded that, from a personal point of view, Cyber
security means to protect yourself when you're using Internet or whatever other applications
RQRUSKRQHHWF.
Participant nine said, "So from my understanding cyber security can be seen as how you
SURWHFWRUVHOIRQWKH,QWHUQHWRUIURPDGLJLWDODVSHFW . Several respondents indicated that
cybersecurity is a way of protecting customer and customer information from the Internet or
from a digital perspective. However, participant eight mentioned, "I do understand the concept
RIFEHUVHFULWQRWFRPSUHKHQVLYHOEW,GRKDYHDQLGHDRIZKDWLWHQWDLOV . While
participant five stated that their understanding of cybersecurity is To sec
65
participants having a clear idea of cybersecurity and what it entails. Although participant two
said they understood cybersecurity, there was no in-depth answer given as the participant
gave a vague answer to a question requiring an explanation.
5.3.3 The meaning of cybersecurity to the enterprise
When the participants were asked about cybersecurity and what it means to their enterprise,
all participants answered these questions with transparency as they provided reasons why
there was a need for cybersecurity within their enterprise. The response received from
participant one stated, ,WVLPSRUWDQWIR r my business as it will protect sensitive information
DQGFRQILGHQWLDOLQIRUPDWLRQRIFOLHQWV . Participant nine said the following: 6RLQPVSDFH
cybersecurity means about how am I going to protect myself and my business online. So how
am I going to prevent getting hacked or getting my accounts hacked or anything from online
DVSHFW 7KHUHVSRQVHSURYLGHGESDUWLFLSDQWHLJKWUHIOHFWVWKHLPSRUWDQFHWRWKHLQGLYenterprise ,WVLPSRUWDQW,WKLQNLWVRISDUDPRXQWLPSRUWDQFHWKDWZH7KDWZHDUH , that we
VDIHJDUGRUVHOYHVIURPDQFEHUDWWDFNV 3DUWLFLSDQWWKUHHPHQWLRQHG For me, I really
take pride in cybersecurity, and I like to go on the forefront of technology. So, I make sure
there's a lot of cybersecurity practices that are incorporateGLQFRUSRUDWHGLQRUEVLQHVV .
Participant four provided an insightful reason for the need for cybersecurity by stating, )RUP
business, it means protecting the servers and databases from you know any unethical hackers
or anything of that sort to keep our data and websites, emails and clients safe from these
KDFNVRUDQRWKHUPDOLFLRVDWWHPSWVRQWKHGDWDEDVHV . An interesting aspect presented by
participant five was data integrity as they said, 6RFEHUVHFXULWLVYHULPSRUWDQWLQWHUPVRI
securiQJWKHGDWDLQWHJULWFRQILGHQWLDOLQIRUPDWLRQDQGHQVULQJWKDWRWVLGHSDUWLKDFNLQWRWKHVVWHP6RLWVDQLQWHJUDOSDUWRIRU,7VHFULW&EHUVHFULW . The responses
presented by participants put the concept of cybersecurity for SMMEs into perspective, as
SMME
66
Table 5.4: Digital technology used
Participant No. Digital technology used by the enterprise
Participant 1 Computers
x Printers
x Phones
x Tablets
Participant 2 Point of sales
x E-mail
x Networking solutions
Participant 3 Servers
x Virtual private servers
x Payroll system
x Stock taking system
Participant 4 Web servers
x E-mail
Participant 5 Laptops
x Computers
x SharePoint
x Azure technology
x CES technology
x Saas solutions.
Participant 6 Computers
Participant 7 Applications
x Business tools
x Internet applications,
Participant 8 Laptops
x Back office
x CCTV
x Drop safes
Participant 9 Phones
x Laptops
x Projectors.
The concept of digital technology makes use of a variety of software and hardware tools which
represent various applications, services, tools, and technologies (Tulinayo, Ssentume &
Najjuma, 2018). The above table reflects the digital technology used by the enterprises that
participated in
67
Of the nine participants who participated in this study, two participants did not give a clear
answer on the digital technology being used by the enterprise, with only one or two digital
technologies being named, these were participants four and six. Although two responses were
limited, the remainder of the participants provided an accurate account of what the enterprise
was using in terms of digital technologies. Participant five mentioned, /DSWRSVFRPSXWHUV
they use SharePoint, Azure technology so everything is on the cloud stays secure, mostly
6DDVVROWLRQV . This indicated that the enterprise makes use of a diverse range of digital
technologies to run day-to-day operations. Participant three also stated, 6RZHKDYHVHUYHUV
running virtual private servers. Our payroll system, everything servers, stocks, stock taking,
everything is doQHRQOLQHVRLWVDIOODWRPDWHGEVLQHVV . Due to the nature of the
enterprise, participant three relies on digital technology for the enterprise to function as they
are fully automated and qualify as an e-commerce business.
Participant nine said, 6 o right now my business makes use of predominantly laptops whereby
my employees use laptops for marketing and stuff. But then when we have presentations and
VWIIRQVLWHZHKDYHDQGPDNHVHRISURMHFWRUV6RHDKRUSKRQHVODSWRSVSURMHFWRUV .
Furthermore, participant eight has an enterprise that deals with cash transactions so the digital
technology they make use of is critical to the safety of employees, as participant eight
mentioned :HKDYHODSWRSVZHKDYHDEDFNRIILFHZHKDYH&&79DQGZHKave some.
6RPHOLNHVDIHVGURSVDIHVDQGWKLQJVLQSODFH . Participant one responded with, &XUUHQWO
ZHRQOPDNHXVHRIFRPSXWHUVSULQWHUVSKRQHVWDEOHWV . Digital technology has become an
essential tool for SMMEs as it enables them to gain an advantage.
FFRUGLQJWRSDUWLFLSDQWWZR We use normal point of sales, e-mail, basic like networking
VROWLRQV . It is evident through the data collected that the SMMEs that participated in the
research study acknowledged that they use some form of digital technology within their
enterprises. Also, participant seven responded that digital technology is 9DULRXVDSSV
EXVLQHVVWRROV,QWHUQHWDSSOLFDWLRQVHWF . Participants of the study linked their laptops,
phones, computers, tablets, and phones to what they perceived as digital technology.
5.3.5 Cybersecurity practices being used by the enterprise
A study by A
68
Table 5.5: Indication of cybersecurity practices
Participant No. The use of cybersecurity practices
(Comments made by participants)
Participant 1
Participant 2
Participant 3
Participant 4
Participant 5
Participant 6
Participant 7 WKHUHVDORWRIWKHP
Participant 8
Participant 9
All nine participants indicated that they were making use of cybersecurity practices in their
enterprises. Participant seven mentioned, 7KHUHVDORWRIWKHPDVVLJQRQSDVVZRUGVDSS
YHULILFDWLRQV606YHULILFDWLRQV . The response given by participant seven indicates that
cybersecurity practices were being adopted by the enterprise, in other words, there were
processes in place which provided verifications through applications and SMS. Participant one
mentioned, %DVLFDQWLYLUXVHVILUHZDOOVSDVVZRUGSURW HFWLRQELRPHWULFILQJHUSULQWV . The
cybersecurity practices used by participant one indicates that the enterprise was using various
SUDFWLFHVWRFRPEDWDQSRWHQWLDOLQWUXVLRQVRUDWWDFNV3DUWLFLSDQWILYHVUHVSRQV6R
they do MFA encryption and then basically password confidentiality in terms of the password
VHFULWVHUDFFHVV . The p
69
Tc)18K3:48154, . The use of cybersecurity practices by participDQWIRXUVHQWHUSULVHDQH -
commerce business, demonstrates their efforts to use the best available resources to combat
any hackers or fraudsters. Participant six stated, QWL-virus software, firewalls, virtual private
network and also password protectionwas used. Participant eight responded by stating the
following: 6DIHJXDUGLQJRXUSDVVZRUGVDQGQGDKEDVLFDOOLWVSDUWRIWKHIUDQFKLVH
DJUHHPHQWWKDWZHKDYHWRVDIHJXDUGDOORXUDVVHWV . In other words, participant eight indicated
that the only reason they used password protection was due to franchise policy. However,
participant eight added, :HYHJRWRXUDQWLYLUXVDQWLYLUXVVRIWZDUHZHYHJRWILUHZDOOVZHYH
JRWWKHVHFXULWVRIWZDUHORDGHGRQWRRXUVVWHPV . In addition to the franchise policy of
password protection, participant eight makes use of standard cybersecurity practices to
protect enterprise systems.
Participant nine added, OORXUODSWRSVDUHNLWWHGRXWZLWKDQWLYLUXVVRIWZDUHILUHZDOpassword protectors and then whenever we send our confidential documents to clients with
invoices and other sensitive information. That is password protected and we also have some
GDWDORVVSUHYHQWLRQVRIWZDUH . The adoption of cybersecurity practices by participant nine is
essential for the protection and safeguarding of customer information as it is confidential and
requires restricted access. Participant two said, :HKDYHDOORXUEDVLFILUHZDOODQWLYLUXV7KH
passwords for each user on the system, on the network, things of that nDWUH. Participant
three added, 2XUVHUYHUVVWDIXOOHQFUSWHGUXQQLQJEDFNXSVEDFNXSVVWHPGDLODWOHDVW
and from the like all the computers that connect to the server they run through. Firewall
systems and to make sure that all of them have antivLUVVVWHPV. Participant three
mentioned, 7
70
Participant 2 Small Firewalls
x Anti-virus
x 3 asswords for each user on the
system
Participant 3 Small 6 ervers stay fully encrypted
x Backup system
x Firewalls
x Antivirus systems
x SSL certificates
x Two-factor authentication
Participant 4 Micro Firewalls
x Anti-virus
Participant 5 Medium MFA encryption
x Password confidentiality
x Password security user access.
Participant 6 Micro Anti-virus software
x Firewalls
x Virtual Private network (VPN)
x Password protection
Participant 7 Medium Sign on passwords
x App verifications
x SMS verifications
Participant 8 Small Safeguarding our passwords
x Anti-virus software
x Firewalls
x Security software
Participant 9 Medium Anti-virus software
x Firewalls
x Password protectors
x Data loss prevention software
According to (Mishra, Alzoubi, Gill & Anwar, 2022) there are many cybersecurity practices that
are being used by enterprises from physical security practices to network and access control
practices with data protection practices included. The above table provides both the
cybersecurity practices adopted by each enterprise that participated in this research study and
the classification of the enterprise. It is clear that those enterprises who are classified as
medium are concerned with the protectLRQRIFOLHQWVLQIRUPDWLRQDVWKHKDYHLQWHJUDWHGWKH
best practices available.
5.3.6 The need to have cybersecurity
According to Osborn and Simpson (2018), various enterprises depend on the Internet for data,
information, and connectivity. However, when it comes to decisions regarding cyb
71
security breaches may affect them and enterprises like them. SMMEs have constantly been
deficient in the importance of common approaches in dealing with cybersecurity threats
(Kabanda et al., 2018).
All responses received from participants regarding whether or not they see the need to have
cybersecurity were interesting and insightful. All participants answered the question regarding
the need for cybersecurity. Participant one said, "Of course it's very important. To protect
information. EsSHFLDOOSHUVRQDOLQIRUPDWLRQRIFVWRPHUVDQGFOLHQWV . Furthermore, 2I
course, in this day and age, with the amount of like, scams and hackings and theft of
LQIRUPDWLRQLWVDOODWPRVWLPSRUWDQWSDUDPRQWWRRRFDQWUQDEVLQHVVZLWKRW
haviQJWKHVHWKLQJVLQSODFH . Participants one and two both indicated that they saw the need
to have cybersecurity as it is essential to any enterprise. Additionally, participant four stated
that <HVLWVDYLWDOSDUWRIDQRQOLQHEXVLQHVV .
Participant seven responded that <HVLWSURWHFWVRXIURPIUDXGVWHUVKDFNHUV . There was an
overall consensus from participants regarding the need for cybersecurity. Moreover,
participant nine commented, ,IRXGRQWKDYHFEHUVHFXULWRXFDQDO ways see
yourself as being naive and you. It could be a very big liability on your side if you don't make
VHRIFEHULIRGRQWPDNHVHRIDQWLRUVDIHWPHDVUHVLQSODFH . It is reassuring to know
that SMME owners and managers have an understanding of the need to have cybersecurity
in their enterprises. Although all participants responded to the question, not all participants
elaborated on their answers; however, all participants understood the importance of
cybersecurity to SMMEs. Participants three, five, six and eight responded with a simple yes,
which held immense meaning as it provided evidence that they saw the need to have
cybersecurity in the enterprise.
5.3.7 Cyber-attack experience by the enterprise
One of the questions asked during the interviews with participants was whether they had
encountered or experienced a cyberattack; this question was asked to gain insight into the
ULVNV600(VIDFH3DUWLFLSDQWWKUHHPHQWLRQHG Not really as such maybe some DDoS
DWWDFNV . The enterprise that participant three represent
72
:48646.wkc)66.c6:48154,6.c66.c66.w3w None of the participants has experienced a fullon cyberattack of their enterprise.
The responses received from participant four stated, Ah, yes, we have. Uhm, malware
injections and ransomware on web servers Participant four added, Yes, we've had issues
of clients getting, you know, uhm attacked through phishing scams and then the web server
breaches through malware ransomware as well Ransomware is an attack on a system that
locks users out and requires a ransom to be paid for the system to be released (Caroscio,
Paul, Murray & Bhunia, 2022). A malware injection is when an intruder develops an
application to attack a specific application of an enterprise and injects this into the application
(McDole, Gupta, Abdelsalam, Mittal & Alazab, 2021). Participant five added, Nothing not that
I'm aware of The enterprise did not experience a cyberattack or any form of attack on the
systems of the enterprise. However, participant five added, 3KLVKLQJVFDPVHDKZHGRJHW
phishing scams, these phishing scams are common staff are traineG. Participant six added,
1R However, participant six then recalled, <HVWKHVFDPV3KLVKLQJVFDPVWKURXJKHPDLOV
mainlyAccording to Chibanda and Kabanda (2022), since the COVID-19 pandemic, attacks
related to phishing scams in South Africa increased by 57 percent.
Participant seven stated, ,PVXUHWKHH[SHULHQFHGLWPDQWLPHVEXWWKHYHJRWDORWRI
cybersecurity to protect the data Participant seven added, There's been phishing scams
that's on a regular basis, but they have put measures in place to combat phishing scams by
reporting it in real time. Participant one responded, Nope when asked about their
experiences of cyberattacks. Participant eight responded, No, no. And we run two systems.
You see, we have a, we have a, we have a console in front and then we have a back office.
So some of the information comes to the back office. It's not displayed in the front. Participant
eight established that the reason there were no cyberattacks was due to two systems with
limited access being used and, as a result, cyberattacks were not carried out on the sy
73
Participant 5 hishing scams yeah we do get phishing scams
Participant 6 Yes, the scams. Phishing scams through emails mainly
Paricipant 7 I'm sure they experienced it many times
There's been phishing scams that's on a regular basis
Participant 8 No, no. And we run two systems
Participant 9 1R.
Table 5.7 provides information on whether an enterprise experienced a cyberattack with six
out of the nine participants acknowledging they had experienced a cyberattack. However,
certain participants had to be asked an additional question regarding malware and phishing
scams, whereby participants then realised what a cyberattack is and that phishing scams are
a form of cyberattack and acknowledged that they had encountered cyberattacks.
5.3.8 Measures in place by the enterprise to combat attacks
The research study participants were asked about the measures put in place to combat
potential breaches, incidents or attacks. All nine participants answered the question and
explained what they use to combat breaches, incidents or attacks. Participant two mentioned,
We do correspond with our Internet service providers and the hosting of the websites and like
server like the guys that do the server networking and that they just to verify whether their
systems are up to scratch Participant two added, They have security in place where your
data would be stored so that we don't have a breach in the systemThe enterprise participant
two represents has the necessary measures in place to prevent any identified attempts on
WKHLUVVWHPVKRZHYHUDOOWKHPHDVXUHVLQSODFHGRQWJXDUDQWHHFRPSOHWHSURWHFWLn but
provide only a layer of protection. Participant five responded, Yeah, that's where they have
cybersecurity monitoring systems to try and pick these things up The fact that the enterprise
has cybersecurity monitoring systems in place is an indicator of their willingness to combat
possible threats to the enterprise.
Participant nine stated, Yes, so we have the firewalls and the antivirus software, that's our
main thing Participant nine indicated that firewalls and anti-virus software were the most
important measures to combat any threats. Participant nine said, We also make use of the
password protector to avoid any unintentional or if there is a leakage of a document, then
there's still a password protector that would safeguard our documents and confidential files
Participant one commented, 1RQRWKLQJDWDOO The comment made by participant one i
74
which the participant did not view as measures to combat threats to the enterprise. Moreover,
participant three said, <HVWKHUHDUHV,VDLGZHPDNHXVHRI&ORXGIODUHWRDYRLGVXFK
things, but sometimes even that doesn't work too well Participant three acknowledged that
even the use of Cloudflare is not invincible and breaches, incidents or attacks can still occur.
Participant six indicated, Yes, like through firewalls etc The suggestion by participant six
that they use firewalls in addition to other measures provides confirmation that the enterprise
does have measures in place to combat threats. Participant four mentioned, "Yeah, we have
firewalls, antiviruses, but you know, it can still be breached as well There is a frequent
concern expressed by participants that they know the measures they implement will not be
sufficient as they view the measures as limited to a certain extent. In addition, participant
seven added, <HVWKHUHVPDQPHDVXUHVWKHUHVWHDPVLQSODFHWRMXVWORRNDIWHU
cybersecurityParticipant sevenVH nterprise has a specific team that deals with cybersecurity
DQGLVDOVRUHVSRQVLEOHIRUPHDVXUHVWKDWFRPEDWWKUHDWVWRWKHHQWHUSULVHVVVWHPVParticipant eight indicated that at their enterprise, We have management like controls where
only the manager can access whether it's on the speed point or on the on the computers or
the laptopsThe responses from participant eight specify that access to systems is restricted,
and their management controls are in place to combat any observed threats. However,
restricted access does not mean the enterprise is immune to breaches, incidents, or attacks.
Overall, the participants did have measures in place to combat threats, but the question
remains: Are the measures in place enough, as breaches, incidents and attacks are becoming
more sophisticated than entry-level security measures, which become obsolete and making
the enterprise vulnerable?
5.3.9 Cybersecurity awareness by the enterprise
A study conducted by Alahmari and Duncan (2021) found that undervaluing cybersecurity
awareness poses a significant risk to enterprise assets; furthermore, employee training in
cybersecurity needs to be a standard practice implemented throughout the enterprise
(Chandna & Tiwari, 2021). The research study participants were asked whether their
enterprises provided cybersecurity awareness workshops to employees. All nine participants
answered the question to the best of their ability. Participant eight responded with a firm 1R.
ParticipaQWHLJKWVHQWHUSULVHGLGQRWLPSOHPHQWDQFEHUVHFXULWZRUNVKRSVDLPHGDimproving cybersecurity 
75
and stuff, so we give them some anti-phishing and those kind of workshopsParticipant one
said, 1RSHZHGRQWSURYLGHWKLVWSHRI wRUNVKRSVWRHPSORHHV One comment made by
participant one was that workshops were carried out by the enterprise; however, cybersecurity
awareness was not covered.
Participant seven responded, 2QDUHJXODUEDVLV3DUWLFLSDQWVHYHQVHQWHUSULVHSURYLGHV
critical cybersecurity workshops frequently; this indicates that the concept of cybersecurity and
its elements are of the highest priority for the enterprise as it is viewed as a key component of
operational continuity. Participant four responded, 1RZHGRQWThe need to inform and
provide awareness to employees of cybersecurity and its elements is crucial to the
sustainability and protection of the enterprise. If employees are equipped with the necessary
knowledge to keep the enterprise safe, then there is the ability to avoid a cybersecurity breach.
Participant five responded, Yes, we do training like once every quarter. 3DUWLFLSDQWILYHV
enterprise has quarterly cybersecurity awareness workshops to provide employees with the
latest information about cybersecurity threats and its elements and the procedures to follow to
avoid any issues and incidents.
The responses received from participants varied as not all enterprises conducted
cybersecurity workshops; however, participant two commented, Of course there's always
training and ongoing training with regards to this here so we try and like inform them when
they there has been issues with either clients or with people that you do consult with or like
doing business with. Participant two continued, Then you would inform them as to what
transpired and what can be done in order to like avoid having this similar issue. Participant
two commented on the activities that transpire in the workshops related to cybersecurity as
they shared information on cybersecurity and the ways to conduct themselves to avoid
cybersecurity situations. Participant three mentioned, 1RWZRUNVKRSVDVVXFKEXWZHDOZDV
PDNHWKHPDZDUHRIDQWKLQJWKDWQHHGVWREHGRQH Although participant three mentioned
there are no cybersecurity awareness workshops, there were ways that the enterprise
provided awareness to its employees. Participant six responded briefly, 1RWUHDOOQRThe
response received from participant six was vague but specified that there were no
cybersecurity awareness workshops being carried out by the enterprise. Five out of the nine
participants stated they did not make use of cybersecurity awareness workshops, these were
participants one
76
cybersecurity Participant oneVHQWHUSULVHGRHVQRWUHFHLYHDQVXSSRUWIRUFEHUVHFXULW
which is of concern as cybersecurity is an evolving field that requires assistance navigating its
elements. Participant four vaguely responded, 1R, in response to whether the enterprise
receives cybersecurity support. Once the response was negative, the additional questions
could not be asked.
3DUWLFLSDQWVUHVSRQVHVYDULHGDVQRWDOOSDUWLFLSDQWVZHUHUHFHLYLQJVXSSRUWZLWKFEin their enterprise. The reply from participant eight disclosed that KQRWUHDOO 3DUWLFLSDQW
HLJKWVHQWHUSULVHGRHVQRWUHFHLYHDQVXSSRUWIRUFEHUVHFXULWZKLFKLVRIJUHDWFRQFHUparticipants one and four were also not receiving cybersecurity support. Participant five
replied, <HVZHDUH 3DUWLFLSDQWILYHVIROORZ -up response to where and who is providing
cybersecurity support was as follows: Well, we have an outside party that we make measure
the security for us and there's a monitoring, it's outsourced, but it's outside party, a specialised
outside parties, managers outside the security3DUWLFLSDQWILYHVHQWHUSULVHVHVVSSRUWIURP
external cybersecurity experts with the required understanding. Participant two stated, ,
wouldn't say support, but there are some sort of things that are outsourced in order to just
make sure that the system is not. Like being able to be breached simply or, you know, like
certain things you do have measures in place just to avoid having cyber security issues
3DUWLFLSDQWWZRVHQW erprise receives cybersecurity support to a certain extent as the
cybersecurity function is being outsourced. Participant six mentioned, Yes, that they receive
support for cybersecurity and that it is supplemented From the IT company.
Participant nine responded, We do receive research support every now and thenParticipant
nine added, So we receive the support through external consultants The participant
acknowledged the use of outsourced cybersecurity for the enterprise, acknowledging,
Cybersecurity is not my speciality, so we get consultants from firms to help us with
cybersecurity The participant reflected on his own inability regarding cybersecurity which
therefore led to the use of another firm for such tasks. Participant seven mentioned, Yes,
there is teams that you can report any breaches 3DUWLFLSDQWVHYHQVHQWHUSULVHKDVD
specified team that provides support for cybersecurity-related issues. In addition, participant

77
is better than not receiving support. Out of the nine participants that responded, three
participants were not receiving cybersecurity support; those were participants one, four and
eight. There needs to be some level of support, whether it be from internal or external parties.
5.3.11 Challenges of cybersecurity practices adoption
According to Wiid and Cant (2021) SMMEs in South Africa encounter many challenges;
however, the aspect of cybersecurity is an additional element that needs to be reflected upon.
The participants were asked about the challenges they face when adopting cybersecurity
practices. Participant three mentioned, I guess it's mostly employees which are not always
understanding of such practices, but we try to educate them as much as we can Participant
three reflected on the fact that the challenge is employee understanding of cybersecurity
practices even when cybersecurity practices are in place. Participant one added, "I think the
cost, implications of it and limited knowledge of exactly what type of cybersecurity to install
Participant one indicated that the main challenges were the cost of cybersecurity and the lack
of knowledge related to aspects of cybersecurity and its implementation. Adequate
cybersecurity often gets lost in its intended objective when the focus is purely on the cost of
adoption and implementation (Lloyd, 2020).
Participant five mentioned, Users getting users to basically adopt cybersecurity processes
and policies. You know users still negligent The challenge of users were identified by other
participants, such as participant five, who viewed the users as negligent, and participant two,
who replied with, For some of the staff members that are not too clued up with regards to like,
you know, like technology and things of that nature, then it does become a slight challenge as
like they are not entirely sure and that does become a sort of like. You know, like a handicap
in the system because that's where you can be breached. Participant two reiterated what
participants one, three and five said: identifying employees as the challenge because they
lack the necessary understanding of cybersecurity practices. In addition, participant nine
stated, It can be seen as it's a language of its own and sometimes when you're training your
employees, they don't really understand the language of cybersecurity, so it can be something
that's difficult to adopt as well as the costs of adopting cybersecurity can be very costly
initially Participant nine reflected on the training of employees and the initial costs attached
to the adoption of cybersecurity practices. Participant four said, <HDKVRPHSURJUDPVKDYH
complicated setups as well to install them into the servers. Sometimes there's also high costs
involved Participant four referred to the implementation of cybersecurity practices as a
challenge in addition to the cost being recognised as a further challenge. Owners and
managers are held in high regard because their roles determine how an enterprise approaches
cybersecurity awareness and training; if decision-makers make an effort to establish a
cybersecurity cultur
78
Participant eight replied, We on our own, basically we have to actually we don't have a
company or somebody like that that will do workshops or teach us or enhance our systems.
We have to actually fathom all this on our own The main challenge for participant eight is
that there is no external assistance for cybersecurity, and they have to understand
cybersecurity practices on their own, which is of great concern. Participant six briefly
mentioned, The costs involved Participant six focused on the cost associated with the
adoption of cybersecurity practices as a major challenge. Participant seven mentioned, ,WV
people education 'cause. People sometimes give out the information, even though it might
look legitimate, but they give it out to fraudsters through phishing Participant seven referred
to the education in cybersecurity practices; the understanding of cybersecurity practices was
a challenge common to all participants of this research study. The adoption of cybersecurity
practices presents challenges to SMMEs as the nine participants bore out. The two dominant
challenges identified by all participants were the perceived costs involved with the adoption of
cybersecurity and the understanding of cybersecurity by employees of the enterprises. The
challenges of costs, training and awareness were identified in chapter three. The responses
received supported the evidence found by other researchers of the challenges faced when
adopting cybersecurity practices. According to Chandna and Tiwari (2021), investing in
cybersecurity does not equate to being protected from all threats and the investment in
cybersecurity will always be a challenge.
5.3.12 Types of support needed for the adoption of cybersecurity practices
Participants were asked to describe the types of support they needed when adopting
cybersecurity. All nine participants answered the question to the best of their ability. Participant
one commented, Yes, basic support and basically interaction more like furthermore. With
which cybersecurity is necessary for the type of businesses that we are running Participant
one stated that support when adopting cybersecurity practices is fundamental and what they
require for the set-up of their enterprise. However, participant five commented, No, I think the
company has enough processes, policies and support in place to manage it3DUWLFLSDQWILYHV
enterprise does not require support with the adoption of cybersecurity practices. Participant
three mentioned, Ah, not really like always, it can be a big factor in a small business. So, we
have to consider that and, but I do understand the advantagesParticipant three claimed they
GRQWUHTXLUHVXSSRUWEXWDUHDZDUHRIWKHEHQHILWVRIKDYLQJVXSSRUW
Participant eight provided a response to them requiring support with the adoption of
cybersecurity practices, Yes, yes, we doParticipant eight added, "If we can have workshops,
if we can have somebody that can from time to time brief us, upgrade us. We will appreciate
that 
79
practices. Participant two also said, For basic aspects, no I would say it can be done. In
house. But when it comes to like networking and things of that sort like in in your storage of
the data and that there, I would assume that it would be better to have. So like a third party
that would be able to give you that Peace of Mind that your data is secure Participant two
believed that there was no need for support at a basic level for the adoption of cybersecurity
practices. However, there is a need for support in the more advanced cybersecurity practices
IRUWKHHQWHUSULVHWKHUHIRUHH[WHUQDODVVLVWDQFHFDQEHYLWDOIRUSDUWLFLSDQWWZRVParticipant six mentioned, Yes, more knowledge and skills development on itParticipant six
indicated that the enterprise required support with the adoption of cybersecurity practices.
In addition, participant four stated, <HDKIURPWLPHWRWLPHLWZRXOGKHOS Participant four felt
that they would require support with the adoption of cybersecurity practices and the type of
support mentioned by participant four was Implementation a lot of the time and installation of
uhm security measuresParticipant four identified implementation as an area where support
would be required, with installation being another factor requiring support. Participant seven
ZDVVDWLVILHGZLWKWKHLUHQWHUSULVHVVHFXULW 1R,WKLQNZHUHIDLUOZHOOVHFXUHGDQGHGXFDWHG
DVPXFKDVZHFDQThe responses received from participant seven indicate that the adoption
of cybersecurity in the enterprise did not UHTXLUHDQVXSSRUW3DUWLFLSDQWQLQHVUHVSRQVHZDV
<HVLQWKHDVSHFWWKDWWKDWLVQRWPVSHFLDOWILHOGDQGQRLQWKHVHQVHWKDWZHKDYHLQLWwe put up the measures in place. So now we just on the basis that we just need to update our
systems annually 3DUWLFLSDQWQLQHVUHVSRQVHVLQGLFDWHGWKDWWKHHQWHUSULVHKDGWKHin place and that external support measures were in place to assist the enterprise with
adoSWLQJFEHUVHFXULWSUDFWLFHV2XWRIQLQHSDUWLFLSDQWVILYHSDUWLFLSDQWVLQGLFDWHGWrequire support with the adoption of cybe
80
 Participant two: 1RQRWWRRVXUHRQWKDWDVSHFWRILW<HVLWVLPSRUWDQWIRURXWRILQG
out, but I'm not, I'm not too sUHRQWKLV
x Participant three: ,JXHVVLWLVOLNHLIRXUHUHVHDUFKGRHVVKRZDIWHUZDUGVWKDW8KD
lot of businesses are skimping on cyber security practices, especially those that do
keep a lot of customer data and information. Because like just for example, like a small
business and online business, we do keep a lot of private information such as their
addresses and their contact details that could be used against our customers. So yes,
LIVRPHRQHLIDEVLQHVVGRHVVHDVPGHWDLOV,ZDQWWKHPWREHVHFUH
x Participant four: HVLWLVHVSHFLDOOWRJLYHWKHPEHWWHUQGHUVWDQGLQJRIWKHFEHU
security LQJHQHUDO
x Participant five: <HDK,WKLQNEXWVPDOOEXVLQHVVDUHDWULVNEHFDXVHWKHQRWWKH
don't have the resources to combat cyber security. Also, they don't are not aware, they
GRQWKDYHVSHFLDOLHGILUPVDQGWRROVWKDWEDVLFDOOPRQLWRUDWWDFNVVRWKHQHHGWx Participant seven: <HVEHFDXVHPDQRIWKHVHVPDOOHUEXVLQHVVHVGRQWIRFXVWRR
much of their time on that and they can then get hacked and their customers accounts
can be used for illegal activities
x Participant eight: <HVHVYHU y important
x Participant nine: Y
81
 Participant one: ,WKLQNWKHQHHGWRKDYHOLNHDVPDOOWSHRIDVHWXSIRUVPDOO
businesses or small package for small businesses, small affordable packDJH
x Participant two: ,QRUGHUWRVDIHJXDUGRXULQIRUPDWLRQRXQHHGWRKDYHOLNHWKHVH
things in place, security measures and whatever else you can put in place just so that
you don't have a breach because, I mean, there's quiWHDELWRI
x Participant three: Not really
x Participant four: ,WVDYHULPSRUWDQWWKLQJWRRXNQRZEHZDURI'LIIHUHQWVFDPV
and you know, newer hacks that prevalent in the online space is they always, you
know, come up with new things that you're unaware of and it's very easy for people
to become vulnerable to these attacks. So, you know, making people more aware is
DJRRGWKLQJ
x Participant five: &EHUVHFXULWKDVWKHLPSDFWLQWHUPVRI7KLUGSDUWLHVZDQWWRXVH
your system because not everybody will adopt your processes so what you've got in
place there on the dock, for example, you insist that they enrol into your system. You
must give complete basically. You got to follow your processes and many companies
don't do that. It means they have to adopt the same technology on their side, which
means additional expenses on their side
x Participant seven; &EHUVHFXULWLVLPSRUWDQW,MXVWQHHGWRPDNHVXUHZHDUH
YLJLODQWDWDOOWLPHV
x Participant eight: ,ZROGVDZHPVWEHDJDLQYLJLODQWZHPVWEHZDUEHFDVHLQ
these times now or the economic meltdown and things that this new hacking and

82
Overall, the participantscomments reflected that there is a need for the adoption of
cybersecurity that caters for smaller businesses, in other words, firms need a package for
smaller enterprises which provides support. Furthermore, the aspect of implementing security
measures and being vigilant were crucial comments made by participants. A critical comment
by participant eight reflects on the need to equip start-ups with the necessary cybersecurity
practices. As the enterprise grows, new ways tailored to the enterprise can be implemented.
5.5 Discussion of the data analysis
The overall data analysis process was insightful as participants provided various responses,
allowing the researcher to achieve the objectives and goals set out at the beginning of this
research study. Furthermore, participants provided responses that added value to the
research as their responses reflected different avenues of thought and provided the
researcher with a better understanding of the research being conducted.
1. Do SMMEs understand cybersecurity practices?
SMMEs who were participants in this research study indicated that they all understood the
concept of cybersecurity to a certain extent: a typical response being that it is protection from
outside threats. Furthermore, the concept of cybersecurity practices was comprehended by
all respondents as they provided the cybersecurity practices being used in their enterprises,
which were in line with standard practices used by enterprises. Participants were also aware
that SMMEs, although equipped with the appropriate knowledge and expertise, could not
assume complete safety from cyberattacks and that they need to be aware and keep up to
date with trends in cybercrime and security (Jideani et al., 2018).
2. What influences SMMEs to adopt cybersecurity practices?
The common factor evident during the data analysis was the emphasis on the protection of
enterprise information but, more importantly, the protection of customer data, which led to
many participants taking measures to safeguard data obtained through their various
processes. Furthermore, a factor influencing the adoption of cybersecurity practices was
phishing scams occurring through emails. SMMEs aim for cybersecurity is the protection of
the enterprise's IT business infrastructure, which includes aspects related to daily operations
(Tam et al., 2021).
3. What barriers do SMMEs face when adopting cybersecurity practices?
SMMEs already face many challenges without the addition of cybersecurity which has led
many participants to respond that a significant challenge is the understanding of cybersecurity
practices and its components by employees of the enterprise. Employee training regardin
83
cybersecurity is a prerequisite and needs to be a standard procedure implemented throughout
the enterprise (Chandna & Tiwari, 2021). In addition, a second challenge found through the
data analysis was the perceived costs attached to the adoption of cybersecurity practices.
According to Alahmari and Duncan (2021), cybersecurity funding is low when it comes to the
allocation of funds to IT initiatives, in many enterprises it only accounts for an estimated three
percent of total funds. In addition, Lloyd (2020) indicates that adequate cybersecurity often
gets lost in its intended objective when the focus is purely on the cost of adoption and
implementation
4. What level of adoption are SMMEs integrating cybersecurity practices?
All nine participants in this research study indicated that they had implemented cybersecurity
practices in their enterprises. However, participants were not asked to what level their
cybersecurity practices had been applied. Through the responses, there was an
understanding that there had been a fundamental adoption by some participants. However,
there were some participants with an intermediate level of adoption of cybersecurity practices.
The level was developed by the cybersecurity practices being used and their implementation
of the cybersecurity practices.
5. Does the adoption of cybersecurity practices protect SMMEs from cybersecurity attacks?
The current level of adoption of cybersecurity practices by participants in this research study
was proven to be enough, as most participants indicated that they had not been a victim of a
cyberattack. However, participants did indicate that they had been subjected to phishing
scams which is a form of a cyberattack. However, participants were adamant that they had
not experienced a cyberattack. According to Motlhabi et al. (2022), when a cyberattack is
conducted, the outcome of the cyberattack can have a negative impact in terms of financial
losses, intellectual property losses and damage to the enterprise's reputation.
6. What kind of support do SMME require to adopt cybersecurity practices?
All participants of the research study responded to the question; however, not all participants
indicated the need for support. Nevertheless, the participants who indicated the need for
support required a cybersecurity package centred around SMMEs. Additionally, the need for
assistance with implementation, knowledge development and skills development through
workshops of some sort can possibly be done by external firms who help SMMEs in such
matters. According to Shojaifar and Järvinen (2021) many SMMEs do not always seek
assistance with training regarding cybersecurity and its capabilities.
84
5.6 Cybersecurity framework for SMMEs
Figure 5.2 introduces the cybersecurity framework for SMMEs and was developed through
gaining an understanding of the responses received from participants and their requirements
regarding cybersecurity and its practices.
85
Figure 5.2: Cybersecurity framework for SMMEs
Protection and
Response
Tools
Cybersecurity
Framework for
SMMEs
Identification of
Enterprise
Cybersecurity
Requirements
Implementation
of Cybersecurity
Practices
Cybersecurity
Practices
Training and
Awareness
Cybersecurity
Support
Tools For
Discovery of
Vulnerabilities
 Cybersecurity Solution
 Cybersecurity risks
86
This framework consists of six elements that are:
x Identification of enterprise cybersecurity requirements
x Implementation of cybersecurity practices
x Cybersecurity practices training and awareness
x Tools for discovery of vulnerabilities
x Protection and response tools
x Cybersecurity support
5.6.1 Identification of enterprise cybersecurity requirements
The first element in the identification of enterprise cybersecurity requirements of the framework
helps with the recognition of the cybersecurity that is required for the enterprise. This aspect
RIWKHIUDPHZRUNHQDEOHVWKHUHWREHDQDVVHVVPHQWRIWKHHQWHUSULVHV level of protection
against cyber threats and what is needed for it to be digitally secure. After that, cybersecurity
solutions can be developed as a specified cybersecurity solution package for the enterprise.
Responsibilities and roles are established in this aspect as it provides a clear pathway for the
achievement of outcomes. The technology and infrastructure architecture provides the
hardware and software elements that are required and, for the enterprises to integrate their
cybersecurity tools, it is essential not to disregard the infrastructure aspect because the
infrastructure affects not only the agility of the enterprise but its capability to expand. At an
SMME level, there should be an assessment of current technology to ascertain if the
technology supports the required tools and applications.
5.6.2 Implementation of cybersecurity practices
This aspect of the framework involves implementing infrastructure that enable the necessary
cybersecurity practices to be implemented. Hardware and software infrastructure are a critical
component of the implementation of cybersecurity practices as it provides the foundation on
which the enterprise can secure its systems. The implementation of cybersecurity is a crucial
component of the framework as its appropriate implementation is critical to the framework
being effective, as only through proper implementation can other aspects of the framework be
beneficial.
5.6.3 Cybersecurity practices training and awareness
The aspect of cybersecurity practices training, and awareness is essential as it allows the
employees of an enterprise to gain an in-depth understanding of the concept of cybersecurity
and its practices. The use of cybersecurity awareness workshops will allow for an interactive
session with employees during which a gradual process of learning can occur. Furthermor
87
conducted during the training. An important component of cybersecurity strategy is the buy-in
of all members of the enterprise so that everyone is aware of what the enterprise cybersecurity
strategy is and what it involves.
5.6.4 Tools for discovery of vulnerabilities
The element of tools for the discovery of vulnerabilities in this framework allows the enterprise
to have measures in place for threat detection. Furthermore, this aspect of the framework is
focused on protecting the enterprise as risks are identified through tools that indicate if there
are weaknesses in the enterprise systems. The discovery of weaknesses can be achieved by
vulnerability assessments; through this process, the SMME can deter intruders or attackers.
5.6.5 Protection and response tools
The penultimate aspect of the framework centres around SMMEs is the protection and
response tools. Protection and response tools enable there to be continuous safeguards in
place to combat any potential cyberthreats. Moreover, there is a need for SMMEs to have a
response tool for potential cyberthreats, such as a document that puts in place procedures for
employees to follow in response to incidents. Implementing safeguards through the framework
can reduce cyberthreats and allow the enterprise to receive live accounts of any potential
cyberthreats. The protection of the digital systems of the enterprise is essential for the survival
of the enterprise, as all data collected by the enterprise is important.
5.6.6 Cybersecurity support
The final aspect of the framework reflects cybersecurity support which refers to whether the
support being received for the adoption of the framework is implemented using internal or
external resources. The need for support is critical to this framework as there needs to be an
entity or department that deals with the cybersecurity framework and its various components.
Therefore, there needs to be control measures in place through cybersecurity support as the
effectiveness and efficiency of this framework is dependent on the support received. SMMEs
who implement this framework will be able to have an integrated view of the various initiatives
that focus on cybersecurity. Enterprises can adapt effectively to any emerging cybersecurity
challenges when this framework is implemented and therefore allows for enhanced
operational agility while reducing IT costs.
5.7 Conclusion
This chapter was focused on the analysis of the data collected from in-depth interviews with
participants from SMMEs. The participants were from SMMEs based in Johannesburg and
are positioned in a variety of sectors of the economy. The data collected was discussed in this 
88
chapter; the findings of the analysis indicated that there are cybersecurity practices being
adopted by SMMEs. Furthermore, the focus of the findings produced the following outputs:
x The understanding of cybersecurity
x The meaning of cybersecurity to the enterprise
x Digital technology used by the enterprise
x Cybersecurity practices being used by the enterprise
x The need to have cybersecurity
x Cyberattack experience by the enterprise
x Measures in place by the enterprise to combat attacks
x Cybersecurity awareness by the enterprise
x The cybersecurity support being utilised
x Challenges of cybersecurity practices adoption
x Types of support needed for the adoption of cybersecurity practices
The participants of the research study indicated the need to have cybersecurity in the
enterprise while expanding on the digital technologies used by the enterprise. Participants
added what cybersecurity practices, such as firewalls and antivirus software, were being used
in the enterprise and they explained why they needed to have these cybersecurity practices
in place for their enterprise. In addition, participants indicated that if they experienced a
cyberattack with the measures they have in place, they were able to combat incidents.
Participants mentioned the need to have support in the form of external help through packages
and workshops centred on SMMEs with the implementation of cybersecurity practices also
mentioned. Participants indicated understanding of cybersecurity practices by employees and
also the perceived costs as challenges regarding adoption of cybersecurity practices.
The next chapter will look at the research conclusions regarding the overall content, which
has been discussed in great detail in previou
89
Chapter 6 - Conclusions and recommendations
6.1 Introduction
The final chapter of this research dissertation will look at the research conclusions regarding
the overall content, which has been discussed in great detail in previous chapters. Previous
research has been done on SMMEs and cybersecurity, and those studies have indicated that
SMMEs are seen as the weakest among all businesses, which has led to an increase in
cyberattacks on smaller businesses. The significance of SMMEs cannot be understated, as
they are vital in providing growth through job creation and enabling innovation (Afolayan & De
la Harpe, 2020). Wiid and Cant (2021) state that SMMEs in developing and developed
FRXQWULHVDUHWKHGULYHUVRIWKHZRUOGVHFRQRPLHV7KHUHIRUHWKHVXVWDLQDELOLWRI600(Vcrucial due to their ability to alleviate a country's economic problems, such as reducing poverty
and providing inclusivity through job creation (Wiid & Cant, 2021). The main aim of this
research study was to gain an in-depth understanding of the adoption or non-adoption of
cybersecurity practices by SMMEs. The review of literature indicates that many factors
influence the decisions of SMMEs not to adopt or implement cybersecurity practices; one of
the main factors is the lack of resources. Previous studies addressing the general aspects of
cybersecurity in SMMEs provided evidence that a majority of SMMEs have not adopted
cybersecurity practices; furthermore, there is a need to initiate cybersecurity awareness as it
allows for a culture that is aware of cybersecurity and understands what it entails. There is a
gap in the body of knowledge around the current status of cybersecurity practices in South
Africa, and it was this gap that motivated this study.
In alignment with the above consideration, this concluding chapter will provide a summary of
the significance and relevance of the research findings, especially with regard to the
development of a framework for the adoption and practice of cybersecurity by SMMEs in South
Africa. The chapter will close with a summary of the limitations of this research study and the
direction that future research should take.
6.2 Research objectives
1. Establishing whether South African SMMEs are adopting cybersecurity practices as well as
the extent of their understanding, knowledge, and skills regarding the implementation of
common cybersecurity practices.
Through a literature review in chapter two, the following was identified:
According to Lejaka et al. (2019), SMMEs are becoming targets of cyberattack because of
their inadequate integration of standard practices and lack of
90
capabilities to assist in the prevention of cyber breaches. However, the number of SMMEs
exposed to cyberattacks has increased due to the pandemic, which gave perpetrators the
opportunity for exploitation. The adoption of digital technologies by SMMEs was expected to
counter the pandemic's challenging effects (Pieterse, 2021).
The paragraph above indicates that SMMEs are not making use of cybersecurity practices,
but this was not the case when the interviews were conducted, as participants were aware of
cybersecurity practices and had practices in place to protect the enterprise. However, SMMEs
face challenges with adopting cybersecurity practices, with cost of adoption being a common
factor and awareness and understanding of cybersecurity practices by employees being
another. Additionally, some participants indicated the need for external assistance in the form
of support that caters for SMMEs. A number of participants indicate they frequently
experienced phishing scams but have measures in place to combat such threats.
2. Understanding to what extent SMMEs are making use of cybersecurity practices and the
level of integration with their digital technologies.
The research findings provided evidence that due to the advancements in digital technologies
there was a need for SMMEs to be protected from threats. Many of the responses provided
indicated that, from their inception, the enterprises had implemented some cybersecurity
practices, which demonstrates that these enterprises have a level of understanding of
cybersecurity. Understanding of cybersecurity and its components was evident and
cybersecurity was integrated into the digital technologies used by the enterprise.
6.3 Research findings summary
In the previous chapters, an in-depth review of SMMEs was provided from a global and South
African perspective, highlighting the importance of SMMEs with regard to employment and
GDP growth in all countries. The role of digital technologies in the functioning of business in
general, and the consequent vulnerabilities to cyberattack, especially in the case of SMMES,
is the focus of this study. In addition, the general concept of cybersecurity, with its various
components, was discussed and defined, along with its adoption and practice. The
cybersecurity of SMMEs was also more thoroughly explored, with the status of the link
between the two elements of adoption and practice being established and the extent of its
continuous implementation or upgrading. In addition, the challenges of cybersecurity were
discussed, and the various aspects of cyber resilience were explored and explained to some
degree.
Globally, SMMEs are acknowledged as catalysts for economic growth because they create
jobs and contribute to expanding DFRXQWUVHFRQRP
91
Kabanda et al. (2018), SMMEs have consistently underestimated the importance of
implementing common approaches to deal with cybersecurity threats. Cybersecurity has
become a major global concern and affects all forms of the Internet or online connectivity.
Cybersecurity threats pose a risk to many businesses because the perpetrators are persistent
and highly innovative in exploiting vulnerabilities, and size and sector are irrelevant to those
seeking unauthorized access (Ajmi et al., 2019). Every enterprise, irrespective of whether it is
aware of it or not, is by its nature a steward of digital data, PDNLQJLWWKHHQWHUSULVHV
responsibility to protect itself from intrusion (Crotty & Daniel, 2021).
The data collected provided the necessary information for the research study to fulfil the
objectives established at the beginning of the study. The discovery that all participants had
adopted cybersecurity practices was a welcome surprise as the literature had indicated a lack
of adoption of cybersecurity practices among SMMEs. Although the level of adoption by
participants was not advanced, there were still signs of the practices being effective, as many
participants conveyed that they had not succumbed to cyberattacks. This was reassuring, as
the literature also highlighted the vulnerabilities of SMMEs to cyberattacks, as they are
considered prime targets due to their lack of resources. Furthermore, the participants in the
research study understood the concept of cybersecurity to a certain extent. However, in
general, the participants in this study identified the need for support regarding the adoption of
cybersecurity, and they also indicated the need for further assistance since they were not
comfortable with the current status of their cybersecurity practices.
The research examined the implementation of cybersecurity awareness workshops. It
established that some enterprises provide cybersecurity workshops to employees. However,
there were some who do not provide cybersecurity workshops to employees. The provision of
workshops, or lack thereof, is an important factor when reflecting on employees'
understanding of cybersecurity practices. The element of cybersecurity training and
awareness is essential as it is seen as a way for employees to gain a better understanding
through knowledge of and skills development in cybersecurity and its practices.
The support required by SMMEs regarding their adoption of cybersecurity practices was
established by a few participants who indicated that they required support in the form of
external assistance with installation and implementation. In addition, they felt that a specialised
cybersecurity package, specifically focused on SMMEs would be better suited to their needs.
SMMEs also have a need for cost-effective cybersecurity practices; many participants
mentioned the financial implications of maintaining ongoing cybersecurity practices as an
obstacle to achieving strong cybersecurity. The SMMEs that participated in this research study
provided data that was used to develop a framework that
92
assist them in their adoption of cybersecurity practices. The framework makes use of six
components that will allow SMMEs to focus on critical aspects related to cybersecurity
practices adoption.
6.4 Research contribution
This study aimed to obtain an in-depth understanding of the adoption or non-adoption of
cybersecurity practices by SMMEs. The data collected allowed innovative knowledge to be
added to the topic of SMME adoption of cybersecurity practices which SMMEs and the South
African government can use to understand the current state of SMMEs and their adoption of
cybersecurity practices. In addition, the information the research study produced can be used
by businesses that specialise in cybersecurity implementation, by increasing their
understanding of the cybersecurity needs of SMMEs. Through this research study, SMMEs
can become aware of cybersecurity practices and their adoption within the enterprise and the
elements that protect the enterprise's systems.
The development of a cybersecurity adoption framework allows for a robust understanding of
the components that apply to the adoption of cybersecurity practices. Previous research
studies focused on SMMEs and their awareness of cybersecurity; however, this study focused
on the adoption of cybersecurity practices. This research study fills a significant information
gap since previous research studies on cybersecurity did not focus specifically on the adoption
of cybersecurity practices by SMMEs in South Africa. The results of this research study can
be used by those who are involved in developing South African cybersecurity policies for
SMMEs as it provides new information regarding SMMEs cybersecurity requirements to be
included. Furthermore, the cybersecurity framework developed for SMMEs can contribute to
the current available knowledge and can be enhanced and upgraded to be tailored to the
needs of any SMME. The contribution of this research study can assist those in management
positions in SMMEs to understand the concept of cybersecurity and its practices to protect the
enterprise from threats.
6.5 Limitations
Although intuitive, the research study still leaves gaps regarding the adoption of cybersecurity
practices by South African SMMEs. The research study was focused on the province of
Gauteng, South Africa, more specifically Johannesburg, and the participants were limited to
nine. In future research, in order to add more value to the research, a broader range of
participants should be included. Regarding the cybersecurity of enterprises, this research
study focused only on SMMEs and did not canvas responses from larger enterprises. The
framework developed for cybersecurity adoption was based on the data received from the 
93
perspective of SMME owners and managers. Future research may obtain valuable information
from SMME employees.
6.6 Future research
Future research will need to expand the study of cybersecurity adoption practices to all the
provinces in South Africa as this will provide an overall view of the adoption of cybersecurity
practices for SMMEs. Moreover, the research did not focus on all potential aspects; therefore,
this study can be extended by focusing on specific cybersecurity practices being implemented
and their effects on SMMEs. Through further research, the research study can be extended
to large enterprises as the current focus was only on SMMEs, as a large enterprise perspective
can provide further insights into adoption and practices of cybersecurity. Additionally, future
research can implement this study on SMMEs based in rural areas to gain an understanding
of their adoption or non-adoption of cybersecurity practices.
6.7 Conclusion
SMMEs in South Africa are critical for the country's growth as their success directly affects the
economy. Although SMMEs face numerous digital technology adoption challenges, they need
to find ways to overcome technology obstacles in order to progress in an increasingly
digitalised world. In the current era of the fourth industrial revolution, digital technology
adoption is an absolute necessity for any SMME to remain competitive and also provides new
opportunities for growth. However, within the world of digital technology, cybersecurity is an
aspect of business that SMMEs need to focus their efforts on. There needs to be measures in
place in the form of cybersecurity practices to protect the information in the possession of the
enterprise. This research study was conducted with the intention of understanding
cybersecurity practices and their adoption or non-adoption by SMMEs. The objectives set out
at the beginning of this research were achieved as the relevant data was collected and, when
analysed, provided sufficient answers to the problems relating to the adoption of cybersecurity
practices by SMMEs in South Africa. This research study indicated the range of use of
cybersecurity practices by SMMEs; however, there is a need for assistance regarding
continued cybersecurity practices and implementation, with an additional need for continued
upgrading of skills and knowledge development. SMME owners and managers need to
understand the need for training and awareness of cybersecurity practices so that employees
can be prepared when faced with cyberattacks. In conclusion, cybersecurity practices help
SMMEs combat any potential threats but if cybersecurity practices are not implemented
correctly and paired with the appropriate training the outcome will be regrettable.
94
References
Adam, N.A. & Alarifi, G. (2021). Innovation practices for survival of small and medium
enterprises (SMEs) in the COVID-19 times: The role of external support. Journal of
innovation and entrepreneurship, 10(1):1-22. doi: 10.1186/s13731-021-00156-6
Adelowotan, M. (2021). Software, method, and analysis: Reflections on the use of
ATLAS.ti in a doctoral research study. Eurasian journal of economics and finance,
9(3):189-204. doi: 10.15604/ejef.2021.09.03.004
IRODDQ2'HODDUSH&7KHUROHRIHYDOXDWLRQLQ600(VVWUDWHJLF
decision-making on new technology adoption. Technology analysis & strategic
management, 32(6):697-710. doi: 10.1080/09537325.2019.1702637
Ajmi, L., Aldhubaiban, H., Alqahtani, N., Ur Rahman, A. and Mahmud, M. (2019). A
QRYHOFEHUVHFXULWIUDPHZRUNIRUFRXQWHUPHDVXUHRI60(VLQ6DXGLUDELD,Q 2nd
International Conference on Computer Applications & Information Security (ICCAIS).
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 1-3 May 2019. New York: IEEE. doi:
10.1109/CAIS.2019.8769470
Akpan, I.J., Udoh, E.A.P. & Adebisi, B. (2022). Small business awareness and
adoption of state-of-the-art technologies in emerging and developing markets, and
lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of small business & entrepreneurship,
34(2):123-140. doi: 10.1080/08276331.2020.1820185
Akpo, M.N.A., Ogunlela, G.O., Tengeh, R.K. and Tengeh, L.N. (2021). Challenges to
the sustainability of small, medium, and micro-enterprises (SMMEs) in the Cape
metropolis. In Reshaping sustainable development goals implementation in the world:
Proceeding of 7th international conference on business and management dynamics:
157-168. [n.p.]: BP International. doi: 10.9734/bpi/mono/978-93-5547-236-6/CH12
Al-Ababneh, M.M. (2020). Linking ontology, epistemology, and research methodology.
Science & philosophy, 8(1):75-91.
Alahmari, A.A., Duncan, R.A., (2021). Investigating potential barriers to cybersecurity
risk management investment in smes. In 2021 13th International Conference on
Electronics, Computers and Artificial Intelligence (ECAI). IEEE,16. doi:
10.1109/ECAI52376.2021.9515166.
Al-Ashmoery, Y., Haider, H., Haider, A., Nasser, N. and Al-Sarem, M. (2021). Impact
of IT service management and ITIL framework on the businesses. 2021 International
conference of modern trends in information and communication technology industry
(MTICTI). Yemen, 4-6 December 2021. New York: IEEE. doi:
10.1109/MTICTI53925.2021.9664763
Alharahsheh, H.H. & Pius, A. (2020). A review of key paradigms: Positivism vs
interpretivism. Global academic journal of humanities and social sciences, 2(3):39-43
95
Antwi, S.K. & Hamza, K. (2015). Qualitative and quantitative research paradigms in
business research: A philosophical reflection. European journal of business and
management, 7(3):217-225.
Bada, M. & Nurse, J.R.C. (2019). Developing cybersecurity education and awareness
programmes for small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Information and
computer security, 27(3):393-410. doi: 10.1108/ICS-07-2018-0080
Bada, M., Von Solms, B. & Agrafiotis, I. (2019). Reviewing national cybersecurity
awareness in Africa: An empirical study. In The third international conference on
cyber-technologies and cyber-systems, CYBER 2018. Athens, Greece, 18-22
November 2018. [n.p.]: IARIA Conferences. Available from:
https://www.repository.cam.ac.uk/handle/1810/293742
Barker, W.C., Scarfone, K., Fisher, W. & Souppaya, M. (2021). Cybersecurity
framework profile for ransomware risk management. (Preliminary draft NISTIR, 8374).
Available from: https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8374/archive/2021-06-09
Beall, J., Crankshaw, O. and Parnell, S. (2000). The causes of unemployment in postapartheid Johannesburg and the livelihood strategies of the poor. Journal of economic
and social geography, 91(4):379-396.
Bhorat, H., Asmal, Z., Lilenstein, K. and Van der Zee, K. (2018). SMMEs in South
Africa: Understanding the constraints on growth and performance. Cape Town:
University of Cape Town (Development Policy Research Unit Working Paper 201802)
Bogdan, R.C. and Biklen, S.K. (2003). Qualitative research for education: An
introduction to theories and methods. 4th edition. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Bongomin, G.O.C., Munene, J.C., Ntayi, J.M., & Malinga, C.A., (2018). Determinants
of SMMEs growth in post-war communities in developing countries: Testing the
interaction effect of government support. World journal of entrepreneurship,
Management and sustainable development. doi: 10.1108/WJEMSD-06-2017-0026
Bote, D. (2019). The South African national cyber security policy framework: A critical
analysis 0DVWHUVGLVVHUWDWLRQ3RWFKHIVWURRP1RUWK -West University. Available from:
https://repository.nwu.ac.za/handle/10394/33810
Botha, A., Smulders, S.A., Combrink, H.A. and Meiring, J. (2021). Challenges, barriers
and policy development for South African SMMEs does size matter? Development
southern Africa, 38(2):153-174. doi: 10.1080/0376835X.2020.1732872
Braun, V. & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative
research in psychology, 3(2):77-101. doi: 10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
Bromhall, M. (2022). Formal and informal business in South Africa, SME South Africa.
Available from: https://smesouthafrica.co.za/formal-and-informal-business-in-southafrica/
Bryman, A. (2008). Social research m
96
Bryman, A. (2016). Social research methods. 5th edition. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Bvuma, S. and Marnewick, C. (2020). Sustainable livelihoods of township small,
medium and micro enterprises towards growth and development. Sustainability,
12(8):3149. doi: 10.3390/su12083149
Caroscio E, Paul J, Murray J, Bhunia S (2022). Analyzing the Ransomware Attack on
DC Metropolitan Police Department by Babuk. In 2022 IEEE International Systems
Conference (SysCon). IEEE. doi: 10.1109/SysCon53536.2022.9773935
Carter, S.M. & Little, M. (2007). Justifying knowledge, justifying method, taking action:
Epistemologies, methodologies, and methods in qualitative research. Qualitative
health research, 17(10):1316-1328. doi:10.1177/1049732307306927
Center for Internet Security. (2021). CIS Critical Security Controls Version 8.
Chandna, V. and Tiwari, P. (2021). Cybersecurity and the new firm: Surviving online
threats. Journal of business strategy, doi: 10.1108/jbs-08-2021-0146
Chandra, Y. & Shang, L. (2019). Qualitative research using R: A systematic approach.
Singapore: Springer.
Chen, X.M. (1996). Dingxing yanjiu fangfa pingjie. [A review of qualitative research
methods]. Educational research and experiment, 3:62-68.
Cheng, L., Pei, J. and Danesi, M. (2019). A sociosemiotic interpretation of
cybersecurity in US legislative discourse. Social semiotics, 29(3):286-302. doi:
10.1080/10350330.2019.1587843
Chibanda, R. & Kabanda, S. (2022). Towards an African cybersecurity community of
practice. Proceedings of the 43rd conference of the South African Institute of
Computer Scientists and Information Technologists: 1-14. (EPiC Series in Computing;
vol. 85) Available from: https://easychair.org/publications/volume/SAICSIT_2022
Chilisa, B. & Kawulich, B. (2012). Selecting a research approach: Paradigm,
methodology and methods. In Doing social research: A global context. Edited by
Wagner, C., Kawulich, B. & Garner, M. New York: McGraw Hill Higher Education.
Chiukira, L. (2021). Internationalization of SMEs through MNCs social capital in
African countries. Diverse journal of multidisciplinary research, 3(1):1-11.
Classen, R.-P., Garbutt, M. & Njenga, J. (2021). Factors influencing the adoption of
digital technologies in South African SMMEs. In International conference on
information resources management (CONF-IRM). Available from:
https://aisel.aisnet.org/confirm2021/17
Cook, A.E., Gann, A.S., Ray, D.A. and Zhang, X. (2021). Advantages, challenges, and
success factors in implementing information technology infrastructure library. Issues
in information systems, 22(2):187-198.
Creswell, J.W. & Báez, J.C. (2020). 30 essential skills for the qualitative researcher.
2nd edition. Los Angeles: Sage.
97
Creswell, J.W. (2009). Research designs: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed
methods approaches. 3rd edition. Callifornia: Sage.
Creswell, J.W. (2014). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches. 4th edition. Los Angeles: Sage.
Creswell, J.W. and Creswell, J.D. (2017). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative,
and mixed methods approaches. 5th edition. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Crotty, J and Daniel, E. (2021). Lessons from practice: Insights on cybersecurity
strategy for business leaders, from SMEs to global enterprises. Available from:
https://gbsn.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/CyberSecurity_Report_FINAL-1.pdf
Crotty, M. (1998). The foundations of social research. London: Sage.
Dalal, R.S., Howard, D.J., Bennett, R.J., Posey, C., Zaccaro, S.J. and Brummel, B.J.
(2022). Organizational science and cybersecurity: Abundant opportunities for research
at the interface. Journal of business and psychology, 37(1):1-29.
De Haes, S., Van Grembergen, W., Joshi, A. & Huygh, T. (2020). COBIT as a
framework for enterprise governance of IT. In Enterprise governance of information
technology. 3rd edition. [n.p.]: Springer.
Denzin, N.K. & Lincoln, Y.S. (2005). Paradigms and perspectives in contention. In The
Sage handbook of qualitative research. 3rd edition. Edited by Denzin, N.K. & Lincoln,
Y.S. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Denzin, N.K. & Lincoln, Y.S. (Eds.). (2011). The Sage handbook of qualitative
research. 4th edition. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Dewanto, M.R.P., Oktavia, T., Sundaram, D., Archana, K., Vanithamani, D., Bakti,
D.W., Mulyana, D., Baharuddin, A.R., Sembiring, M.A.R., Zhabayev, Y. and
Bidaibekov, Y. (2022). Comparative study of information security evaluation models
for Indonesia government. Journal of theoretical and applied information technology,
100(4):895-914.
Duench, M. (2020). Cybersecurity controls as the workforce returns. Risk
management, 67(10):18-19.
Elliott, V. (2018). Thinking about the coding process in qualitative data analysis. The
qualitative report, 23(11):2850-2861. doi: 10.46743/2160-3715/2018.3560
Erasmus, L., Reynolds, A. & Fourie, H. (2019). A generic balanced scorecard for small
and medium manufacturing enterprises in South Africa. The southern African journal
of entrepreneurship and small business management, 11(1):1-15.
Fereday, J. & Muir-Cochrane, E. (2006). Demonstrating rigor using thematic analysis:
A hybrid approach of inductive and deductive coding and theme development.
International journal of qualitative methods, 5(1):80-92.
Fubah, C.N. & Moos, M. (2022). Exploring COVID-19 challenges and coping
mechanisms for SMEs in the South African entrepreneurial ecosystem. Sustainability,
14(4):1944. doi: 10.3390/su14041944
98
Gaurav A, Gupta BB, Hsu CH, Yamaguchi S & Chui KT (2021). Fog layer-based ddos
attack detection approach for internet-of-things (iots) devices. In 2021 IEEE
international conference on consumer electronics (ICCE). Conference proceedings of
the conference. IEEE, 1-5. doi: 10.1109/ICCE50685.2021.9427648
Gerald, E., Obianuju, A. & Chukwunonso, N. (2020). Strategic agility and performance
of small and medium enterprises in the phase of COVID-19 pandemic. International
journal of financial, accounting, and management, 2(1):41-50. doi:
10.35912/ijfam.v2i1.163
Gerl, A., Von der Heyde, M., Groß, R., Seck, R. and Watkowski, L. (2020). Applying
COBIT 2019 to IT governance in higher education: Establishing IT governance for the
collaboration of all universities and universities of applied sciences in Bavaria. GIJahrestagung, 517-530.
UHJXUHF,7RPLL)XUMDQ07RPLL -Pupek, K. (2021). The impact of COVID19 on sustainable business models in SMEs. Sustainability, 13(3):1098.
doi:10.3390/su13031098
Gumbi, L. & Twinomurinzi, H. (2020). SMME readiness for smart manufacturing (4IR)
adoption: A systematic review. In Responsible design, implementation and use of
information and communication technology: 19th IFIP WG 6.11 conference on ebusiness, e-services, and e-society, I3E 2020: 41-54. Skukuza, South Africa, 6-8 April,
2020. [n.p.]: Springer.
Gundu, T. (2019). Acknowledging and reducing the knowing and doing gap in
employee cybersecurity compliance. In Proceedings for the 14th international
conference on cyber warfare and security: 94-102. Stellenbosch, South Africa, 28
February-1 March 2019. Reading, UK: Academic Conferences and Publishing.
Guo, H., Yang, Z., Huang, R. & Guo, A. (2020). The digitalization and public crisis
responses of small and medium enterprises: Implications from a COVID-19 survey.
Frontiers of business research in China, 14(1): 1-25. doi: 10.1186/s11782-020-00087-
1
Handayani, R.D. & Aziz, R.A. (2020). Framework information technology infrastructure
library (itil V3): Audit teknologi informasi sistem informasi akademik (siakad) perguruan
tinggi. Jurnal sistem informasi dan telematika (telekomunikasi, multimedia dan
informatika), 11(1):29-35. doi:10.36448/jsit.v11i1.1456
Harisaiprasad, K. (2020). COBIT 2019 and COBIT 5 comparison, ISACA. ISACA.
Available from: https://www.isaca.org/resources/news-and-trends/industrynews/2020/cobit-2019-and-cobit-5-comparison
Hasanat, M.W., Hoque, A., Shikha, F.A., Anwar, M., Hamid, A.B.A. & Tat, H.H. (2020).
The impact of coronavirus (COVID-19) on e-business in Malaysia. Asian journal of
multidisciplinary studies, 3(1):85-90.
Henning, E., Van Rensburg, W. & Smit, B. (2004). Theoretical frameworks: Findin
99
Herrington, M. & Coduras, A. (2019). The national entrepreneurship framework
conditions in sub-Saharan Africa: A comparative study of GEM data/national expert
surveys for South Africa, Angola, Mozambique and Madagascar. Journal of global
entrepreneurship research, 9(60):1-24. doi: 10.1186/s40497-019-0183-1
Hiscox. (2022). The Hiscox Cyber Readiness Report 2022.
Hlebela, N. (2020). Government and manufacturing SMME partnerships to create jobs
in South Africa 0DVWHUVGLVVHUWDWLRQ3RWFKHIVWURRP1RUWK -West University.
Available from: https://repository.nwu.ac.za/handle/10394/35880
Hosseini-1H]KDG66DIGDU6/XX/1:HEHJLQPHWHUVEHKLQG
WKHVWDUWLQJOLQHGDSWDWLRQRI,UDQLDQVWXGHQWVLQXQJDULQWKHSRVW -sanctions era.
Journal of international students, 11(2):341-360. doi: 10.32674/jis.v11i2.1779
IBM. (2020). Cost of insider threats: Global report,11, Michigan, USA.
Jideani, P.C., Leenen, L., Alexander, B. & Barnes, J. (2018). Towards a cybersecurity
framework for South African e-retail organisations. In International conference on
advances in big data, computing and data communication systems. 6-7 August 2018,
Durban, South Africa.
Junjie, M. & Yingxin, M. (2022). The discussions of positivism and interpretivism.
Global academic journal of humanities and social sciences, 4(1):10-14. doi:
10.36348/gajhss.2022.v04i01.002
Kabanda, S., Tanner, M. and Kent, C. (2018). Exploring SME cybersecurity practices
in developing countries. Journal of organizational computing and electronic
commerce, 28(3):269-282. doi: 10.1080/10919392.2018.1484598
Kanafi, F.S., Arnarson, H. and Bremdal, B.A. (2022). A new inexpensive approach for
securing cyber-physical systems. 2022 IEEE/SICE international symposium on
system integration, (SII): 790-796. Narvik, Norway, 9-12 January 2022. New York:
IEEE. doi: 10.1109/SII52469.2022.9708861
Khalil, A., Abdelli, M.E.A. & Mogaji, E. (2022). Do digital technologies influence the
relationship between the COVID-FULVLVDQG60(VUHVLOLHQFHLQGHYHORSLQJ
countries? Journal of open innovation: Technology, market, and complexity, 8(2):100.
doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/joitmc8020100
Kim, H., Sefcik, J.S. & Bradway, C. (2017). Characteristics of qualitative descriptive
studies: A systematic review. Research in nursing & health, 40(1):23-42.
Konopásek, Z. (2008). Making thinking visible with Atlas.ti: Computer assisted
qualitative analysis as textual practices. Historical social research/Historische
sozialforschung, 9(2):276-298.
Kritzinger, E., Da V
100
Lejaka, T.K., Da Veiga, A. & Loock, M. (2019). Cyber security awareness for small,
medium and micro enterprises (SMMEs) in South Africa. In 2019 Conference on
information communications technology and society (ICTAS): 1-6. Durban, South
Africa, 6-8 March 2019. New York: IEEE. Available from: doi:
10.1109/ICTAS.2019.8703609
Leknes, N.B. (2021). Norwegian cybersecurity guidelines: A case study of Norwegian
security agencies (Master's thesis). Kristiansand: University of Agder. Available from:
https://uia.brage.unit.no/uia-xmlui/handle/11250/2823187
Leszczyna, R. (2018). Standards on cyber security assessment of smart grid.
International journal of critical infrastructure protection, 22:7089. doi:
10.1016/j.ijcip.2018.05.006
Lloyd, G. (2020). The business benefits of cyber security for SMEs. Computer fraud &
security, 2020(2):14-17. doi: 10.1016/S1361-3723(20)30019-1
Lopes, S. (2021). The importance of the ITIL framework in managing information and
communication technology services. Int.J.adv.eng.res.sci, 8(5):292-296.
doi:10.22161/ijaers.85.35
Lukhele, N. and Soumonni, O. (2021). Modes of innovation used by SMMEs to tackle
social challenges in South Africa. African journal of science, technology, innovation
and development, 13(7):829-837. doi: 10.1080/20421338.2020.1834960
Mabotja, L.L. (2019). Is South African manufacturing SMMEs ready for the fourth
industrial revolution" Journal of education and vocational research, 9(2):20-26.
doi:10.22610/jevr.v9i2(V).2798
Mabunda, S. (2021). Cybersecurity in South Africa: Towards best practices. In
CyberBRICS. Edited by Belli, L. Springer, Cham. Available from:
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-56405-6_6#citeas
Maduku, H. & Kaseeram, I. (2021). Success indicators among black owned informal
VPDOOPLFURDQGPHGLXPHQWHUSULVHV600(VLQ South Africa. Development Southern
Africa, 38(4):664-682. doi:10.1080/0376835X.2021.1913997
Mahn, A., Topper, D., Quinn, S. and Marron, J. (2021). Getting started with the NIST
Cybersecurity Framework: A quick start guide. doi: 10.6028/NIST.SP.1271
Mantas, E., Papadopoulos, D., Fernández, C., Ortiz, N., Compastié, M., Martínez,
A.L., Pérez, M.G., Kourtis, A., Xylouris, G., Mlakar, I. and Tsarsitalidis, S. (2021).
Practical autonomous cyberhealth for resilient micro, small and medium-sized
enterprises. In 2021 IEEE international Mediterranean conference on communications
and networking (MeditCom): 500-505. New York: IEEE.
Marnewick, C. (2014). Information and communications technology adoption amongst
township micro and small business: The case of Soweto. South African journal of

101
Masama, B. & Bruwer, J.-P. (2018). Revisiting the economic factors which influence
fast food South African small, medium and micro enterprise sustainability. Expert
journal of business and management, 6(1):19-28.
Matekenya, W. and Moyo, C.Z. (2022). Innovation as a driver of SMME performance
in South Africa: A quantile regression approach. African journal of economic and
management studies, 13(3):452-467. doi: 10.1108/AJEMS-06-2021-0306
McDole, A., Gupta, M., Abdelsalam, M., Mittal, S. & Alazab, M. (2021). Deep learning
techniques for behavioral malware analysis in cloud IaaS In Malware analysis using
artificial intelligence and deep learning: 269-285. Edited by Stamp, M., Alazab, M. &
Shalaginov, A. Springer.
Mellinger, C.D. & Hanson, T.A. (2016). Quantitative research methods in translation
and interpreting studies. Milton Park: Routledge.
Meriah, I. & Rabai, L.B.A. (2019). Comparative study of ontologies based ISO 27000
series security standards. Procedia computer science, 160:85-92.
Mishra, A., Alzoubi, Y.I., Gill, A.Q. & Anwar, M.J. (2022). Cybersecurity enterprises
policies: A comparative study. Sensors, 22(2):538. doi: 10.3390/s22020538
Mishra, S.B. & Alok, S. (2022). Handbook of research methodology.
Modisane, P. & Jokonya, O. (2021). Evaluating the benefits of cloud computing in
small, medium and micro-sized enterprises (SMMEs). Procedia computer science,
181(1):784-792. doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2021.01.231
Moise, L.L., Khoase, R. and Ndayizigamiye, P. (2020). The influence of government
support interventions on the growth of African foreign-owned SMMEs in South Africa.
In Analyzing the relationship between innovation, value creation, and
entrepreneurship. Edited by Martín, M.A.G., Picazo, M.-T.M. and Martínez, M.S.C.
Hershey, USA: IGI Global.
Molo, S. (2019). Government finance institute provision: Impact of enterprise
development on SMMEs growth and local economic development in Gauteng
0DVWHUVGLVVHUWDWLRQ-RKDQQHVEXUJ8QLYHUVLWRIWKH:LWZDWHUVUDQGYDLODEfrom: https://wiredspace.wits.ac.za/handle/10539/26063
0RQ]RQ/0D7KHVHDUHWKHFEHUGDQJHUVVWLOOIDFHGE6V60(V IT
News Africa. Available from: https://www.itnewsafrica.com/2022/05/these-are-the-cyberdangers-still-faced-by-sas-smes
Morgan, S. (2020). Cybercrime to cost the world $10.5 trillion annually by 2025.
Available from: https://cybersecurityventures.com/cybercrime-damages-6-trillion-by2021/.
Motlhabi, M., Pantsi, P., Mangoale, B., Netshiya, R. and Chishiri, S. (2022). Contextaware cyber threat intelligence exchange platform.
102
Moyo, M. and Loock, M. (2021). Conceptualising a cloud business intelligence security
evaluation framework for small and medium enterprises in small towns of the Limpopo
Province, South Africa. [Special issue: Cyber resilience]. Information (Switzerland),
2(3):128. doi: 10.3390/info12030128
Munnik, D. (2021). Outcomes of SMMEs participation in incubator programmes in
South Africa (Master's thesis). Cape Town: University of Cape Town. Available from:
https://open.uct.ac.za/handle/11427/35522
Mutobvu, M.R. (2020). Impact of digital technologies on small and medium enterprises
in emerging towns: A case study of Vhembe District Municipality 0DVWHUV
dissertation). Thohoyandou: University of Venda. Available from:
https://univendspace.univen.ac.za/bitstream/handle/11602/1567/Dissertation%20-
%20Mutobvu%2C%20m.%20r.-.pdf
Myers, M.D. & Avison, D.E. (2002). Qualitative research in information systems: A
reader. London: SAGE
Myers, M.D. (2019). Qualitative research in business and management. 3rd edition.
Los Angeles: SAGE.
National Cybersecurity Policy Framework for South Africa. (2015). Government
Gazette (No. 39475). Available from: https://www.gov.za/documents/nationalcybersecurity-policy-framework-4-dec-2015-0000
National Small Business Act. (1996). Government Gazette. (No. 17612). Available
from: https://www.gov.za/documents/national-small-business-act
National Small Business Amendment Act. (2003). Government Gazette. (No. 25763).
Available from: https://www.gov.za/documents/national-small-business-amendmentact-0
National Small Business Amendment Act. (2004). Government Gazette. (No. 27101).
Available from: https://www.gov.za/documents/national-small-business-amendmentact
Nayak, J.K. and Singh, P. (2021). Fundamentals of research methodology problems
and prospects. New Delhi: SSDN.
Ncubukezi,T.Mwansa,L. & Rocaries,F. (2020). A review of the current cyber hygiene
in small and medium-sized businesses. In 2020 15th International Conference for
Internet Technology and Secured Transactions (ICITST). IEEE, 16. doi:
10.23919/ICITST51030.2020.9351339.
Neuman, W.L. (2014). Social research methods. 7th edition. Harlow: Pearson.
Nieuwenhuizen, C. (2019). The effect of regulations and legislation on small, micro
and medium enterprises in South Africa. Development Southern Africa, 36(5):666-
677. doi:10.1080/0376835X.2019.1581053
Nikumaa, T. (2022). Vulnerability management process 0DVWHUVWKHVLV)LQODQG
JAM
103
https://www.theseus.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/750130/Nikumaa_Tiina.pdf?sequence
=2&isAllowed=y
Nkurunziza, A.S. (2021). A framework for cybersecurity risk management: A case of
ICT SMEs in Nairobi, Kenya 0DVWHUVWKHVLV1DLUREL8QLWHG6WDWHV,QWHUQDWLRQDOUniversity-Africa. Available from: http://erepo.usiu.ac.ke/11732/6764
Oates, B.J. (2006). Researching information systems and computing. London: SAGE.
Osborn, E. & Simpson, A. (2018). Risk and the small-scale cyber security decision
making dialogue - a UK case study. The computer journal, 61(4):472495. doi:
10.1093/comjnl/bxx093
Pandey, P. and Pandey, M.M. (2015). Research methodology: Tools and techniques.
Available from: https://www.studocu.com/ph/document/ateneo-de-davaouniversity/introduction-to-psychology/research-methodology-tools-and-techniquespandey/21553694
Partington, D. (2002). Essential skills for management research. London: SAGE.
Patten, M.L. & Newhart, M. (2018). Understanding research methods: An overview of
the essentials. 10th edition. New York: Routledge.
Patton, M.Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation methods. 3rd edition.
Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Paulus, T.M. & Lester, J.N. (2016). ATLAS. ti for conversation and discourse analysis
studies. International journal of social research methodology, 19(4):405-428.
doi:10.1080/13645579.2015.1021949
Pieterse, H. (2021). The cyber threat landscape in South Africa: A 10-year review. The
African journal of information and communication, 28(28):1-21. doi:
10.23962/10539/32213
Ponsard, C. & Deprez, J.-C. (2018). Helping SMEs to better develop software:
Experience report and challenges ahead. 2018 IEEE/ACM 40th international
conference on software engineering: Software engineering in Practice Track (ICSESEIP): 213-214. Gothenburg, Sweden, 30 May-1 June 2018. New York: IEEE.
Available from: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8449253
Priyadarsini, A. & Kumar, A. (2022). A literature review on IT governance using
systematicity and transparency framework. Digital policy, regulation and governance,
24(3):309-328. doi: 10.1108/DPRG-09-2021-0114
Protection of Personal Information Act. (2013). Government Gazette (No. 37067).
Available from: https://www.gov.za/documents/protection-personal-information-act.
Rahman, M.S. (2016). The advantages and disadvantages of using qualitative and
quantitative approaches and methods in language "testing and assessment" research:
A literature review. Jou
104
Ramraj, S. (2018). Exploring the role of South African business incubators in creating
sustainable SMMEs through technology transfer 0DVWHUV GLVVHUWDWLRQ
Potchefstroom: North-West University. Available from:
https://repository.nwu.ac.za/handle/10394/31045
Revised Schedule 1 of the National Definition of Small Enterprise in South Africa.
(2019). Government Gazette (No. 42304). Available from:
https://www.gov.za/documents/national-small-enterprise-act-schedule-1-
amendment-15-mar-2019-0000
Rogerson, C.M. (2008). Tracking SMME development in South Africa: Issues of
finance, training and the regulatory environment. Urban forum, 19(1):61-81. doi:
10.1007/s12132-008-9025-x
Rogerson, C.M. (2013). Improving market access opportunities for urban small,
medium and micro-enterprises in South Africa. Urbani izziv, 24(2):133-143. doi:
10.5379/urbani-izziv-en-2013-24-02-005
Rogerson, C.M. and Rogerson, J.M. (2020). Inclusive tourism and municipal assets:
Evidence from Overstrand local municipality, South Africa. Development southern
Africa, 37(5):840-854. doi: 10.1080/0376835X.2020.1796597
Rotar, L.J., PDPL5.%RMQHF6&RQWULEXWLRQVRIVPDOODQGPHGLXP
enterprises to employment in the European Union countries. Economic Research-
(NRQRPVND,VWUDLYDQMD , 32(1):3302-3314. doi: 10.1080/1331677X.2019.1658532
Saah, P. (2021). The impact of small and medium-sized enterprises on the economic
development of South Africa. Technium soc.sci.J, 24(1): 549-561.
doi:10.20527/jee.v3i2.5766
Sahay, A. (2016). Peeling Saunder's research onion. Available from:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/309488459_Peeling_Saunder's_Research_
Onion
Saldanha, G. & O'Brien, S. (2014). Research methodologies in translation studies.
Manchester: Routledge.
Samtani, S., Abate, M., Benjamin, V. and Li, W. (2020). Cybersecurity as an industry:
A cyber threat intelligence perspective. In The Palgrave handbook of international
cybercrime and cyberdeviance. Edited by Holt, T.J. & Bossler, A.M. Palgrave
Macmillan, Cham. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-78440-3_8
Saunders, M.N.K., Lewis, P. & Thornhill, A. (2015). Research methods for business
students. 7th edition. Harlow: Pearson Education.
Sedano, W.K. and Salman, M. (2021). Auditing Linux operating system with Center
for Internet Security (CIS) standard. In 2021 Internati
105
Shojaifar, A. and Järvinen, H. (2021). Classifying SMEs for approaching cybersecurity
competence and awareness. In The 16th International Conference on Availability,
Reliability and Security: 1-7. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2110.05370
Shojaifar, A., Fricker, S.A. and Gwerder, M. (2020). Elicitation of SME requirements
for cybersecurity solutions by studying adherence to recommendations. Available
from: https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.08177
Sileyew, K.J. (2019). Research design and methodology. In Cyberspace. Edited by
Abu-Taieh, E., Mouatasim, A. & Hadid, I.H. London: IntechOpen. doi:
10.5772/intechopen.85731
Small Enterprise Development Agency. (2018). SMME quarterly update 1st quarter
2018. Available from:
Small Enterprise Development Agency. (2019a). SMME quarterly update 3rd quarter
2018. Available from: http://www.seda.org.za/Publications/Pages/AnnualReports.aspx
Small Enterprise Development Agency. (2019b). SMME quarterly update 1st quarter
2019. Available from: http://www.seda.org.za/Publications/Pages/AnnualReports.aspx
Small Enterprise Development Agency. (2020). SMME quarterly update 1st quarter
2020. Available from: http://www.seda.org.za/Publications/Pages/AnnualReports.aspx
Small Enterprise Development Agency. (2021). SMME quarterly update 1st quarter
2021. Available from: http://www.seda.org.za/Publications/Pages/AnnualReports.aspx
Small Enterprise Development Agency. (2022). SMME quarterly update 3rd quarter
2021. Available from: http://www.seda.org.za/Publications/Pages/AnnualReports.aspx
South Africa. Department of Trade and Industry. (1995). National strategy for the
development and promotion of small business in South Africa: White paper (G16317).
Available from: https://www.gov.za/documents/national-strategy-development-andpromotion-small-business-white-paper
Stevens, T. (2018). Global cybersecurity: New directions in theory and methods.
Politics and governance, 6(2):1-4.
Sulistyowati, D., Handayani, F. & Suryanto, Y. (2020). Comparative analysis and
design of cybersecurity maturity assessment methodology using nist csf, cobit, iso/iec
27002 and pci dss. JOIV: International journal on informatics visualization, 4(4):225-
230. doi:10.30630/joiv.4.4.482
Syafrizal, M., Selamat, S.R. and Zakaria, N.A. (2020). Analysis of cybersecurity
standard and framework components. International journal of communication
networks and information security, 12(3):417-432. doi: 10.17762/ijcnis.v12i3.4817
106
Tam, T., Rao, A. and Hall, J. (2021). The good, the bad and the missing: A narrative
review of cyber-security implications for Australian small businesses. Computers &
security, 109:102385. doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2021.102385
Telukdarie, A., Philbin, S., Mwanza, B.G. and Munsamy, M. (2022). Digital platforms
for SMME enablement. Procedia computer science, 200:811-819. doi:
10.1016/j.procs.2022.01.278
Tendai, C., Nicole, D. and Tafadzwa, C.W. (2018). The effect of the use of technology
on the performance of immigrant-owned SMMEs in the Eastern Cape Province, South
Africa. International journal of entrepreneurship, 22(3):1-12. doi:10.1108/ET-10-2021-
0387
Thomas, D.R. (2006). A general inductive approach for analyzing qualitative
evaluation data. American journal of evaluation, 27(2):237-246. doi:
10.1177/1098214005283748
Tiainen, T. (2021). Cyber security services reporting framework 0DVWHUVWKHVLV
Helsinki: Helsinki Metropolia University of Applied Sciences. Available from:
https://www.theseus.fi/handle/10024/497369
Tladi, L. & Kekwaletswe, R. (2020). Towards multi-level framework for analysing
organisational innovation use. In 50th International Scientific Conference on Economic
and Social Development: 465-477. Chelyabinsk, Russia, 13-14 February 2020. [n.p.]:
Varazdin Development and Entrepreneurship Agency.
Tulinayo, F.P., Ssentume, P. & Najjuma, R. (2018). Digital technologies in resource
constrained higher institutions of learning: A study on studHQWVDFFHSWDQFHDQG
usability. International journal of educational technology in higher education, 15(1):1-
19. doi: 10.1186/s41239-018-0117-y
Van Nieuwkerk, A. (2022). The impact of digital-driven warfare on Africa. The thinker,
90(1):20-27. doi: 10.36615/thethinker.v90i1.1170
Van Staden, L.J. (2022). The influence of certain factors on South African small and
medium-sized enterprises towards export propensity. Development southern Africa,
39(3):457-469. doi: 10.1080/0376835X.2021.2019573
Von Solms, B. (2015). Improving South Africa's cyber security by cyber securing its
small companies. In 2015 IST-Africa Conference: 1-8. Lilongwe, Malawi, 6-8 May
2015. New York: IEEE. doi: 10.1109/ISTAFRICA.2015.7190538
Von Solms, B. and Von Solms, R. (2018). Cybersecurity and information security
what goes where? Information & computer security, 26(1):2-9. doi: 10.1108/ICS-04-
2017-0025
Wiid, J.A. and Cant, M.C. (2021). The future growth potential of township SMMEs: An
African perspective. Journal of contemporary man
107
World Bank (2020). 6PDOODQGPHGLXPHQWHUSULVHV60(VILQDQFH,PSURYLQJ60(V
access to finance and finding innovative solutions to unlock sources of capital.
Available from: https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/smefinance
Yasin, M., Arman, A.A., Edward, I.J.M. and Shalannanda, W. (2020). Designing
information security governance recommendations and roadmap using COBIT 2019
Framework and ISO 27001:2013 (Case Study Ditreskrimsus Polda). In 2020 14th
International Conference on Telecommunication Systems, Services, and Applications
(TSSA): 209-213. Bandung, Indonesia, 4-5-November 2020. New York: IEEE. doi:
10.1109/TSSA51342.2020.9310875
Yin, R.K. (2014). Case study research: Design and method. 5th edition. London: Sage.
Yudhiyati, R., Putritama, A. and Rahmawati, D. (2021). What small businesses in
developing country think of cybersecurity risks in the digital age: Indonesian case.
Journal of information, communicatio
108
Appendix A
Questionnaire
The aim of this research is to gain an understanding of the adoption or non-adoption of
cybersecurity practices by SMMEs.
A. Demographical
1. What is your current position in the enterprise?
o Owner
o Manager
o Other (Please specify):
____________________________________________________________
2. What is your age?
o 18-20
o 21-29
o 30-39
o 40-49
o 50-59
o 60 or older
3. How long have you been in this position:
 __
4. What is your highest level of education?
o Primary school
o Secondary/High school
o Certificate/Diploma
o %DFKHORUVGHJUHH
o RQRXUVGHJUHH
o 0DVWHUVGHJUHHRUKLJKHU
5. What le
109
B. Enterprise Information
1. Sector of the economy:
o Food and beverage
o Textile and clothing
o Tourism
o Arts and Culture
o Construction and engineering
o Finance and business services
o Forestry
o Manufacturing
o Marine resources
o Minerals and mining
o Safety and Security
o Sports
o Transportation
o Telecommunications
o Education and Training
o Other, please
specify_____________________________________________________________
2. How many years has your business been in operation?
o Less than 5 years
o 5 10 years
o 10 20 years
o Over 20 years
3. Indicate the number of employees in the enterprise.
 __
4.1 How many are full-time employees?
 __
4.2 How many are part-time employees?
 __
5. What is your annual turnover (within the last 5 years)?
 ______________
110
C. Cybersecurity Awareness
1. Do you know understand the of concept cybersecurity? Please elaborate
____________________________________________________________
1.1 Where or how did you learn about cybersecurity?
____________________________________________________________
1.2. What does cybersecurity mean for your business?
____________________________________________________________
D. Cybersecurity Adoption
1. What kind of digital technology does the business make use of?
____________________________________________________________
2. Does your enterprise make use of any cybersecurity practices?
____________________________________________________________
3. When did the adoption of cybersecurity practices occur for your enterprise?
____________________________________________________________
3.1. Which of the following cybersecurity practices is being used by your enterprise?
 Information security policy
 Anti-virus software
 Firewalls
 Security software
 virtual private network (VPN)
 Two-factor authentication
 Password generator
 Intrusion detection system
 Encryption of confidential information
 Data loss prevention software
 Password protection
 Advise employees about the latest techniques used for breaches and cyberattacks
 Connection to a secured Wi-Fi
 Biometric security controls
 Frequent back-up of data
 Enable Privacy Se
111
 Avoidance of opening suspicious links, emails, and attachments
 Updating application regularly
 Monitoring of third-party controls
 Others (please specify)
4. How is the management of cybersecurity practices conducted within the enterprise?
____________________________________________________________
5. What types of measures have you taken on a personal level to protect the enterprise
systems?
____________________________________________________________
6. Has your enterprise encountered any of the following listed below: Please indicate (X)
 Access to systems which was unauthorised
 The intentional or unintentional leakage of sensitive enterprise information
 Attacks through malware
 Phishing scams
7. How often are updates conducted on the applications used by the enterprise?
____________________________________________________________
8. Do you see the need to have cybersecurity?
____________________________________________________________
E. Cybersecurity Threats
1. Has your enterprise experienced a cyberattack?
____________________________________________________________
If YES was provided in 1 proceed with question 2
If NO was provided in 1 proceed to question 3
2. What type of attack?
____________________________________________________________
3. Are there any measures in place by the enterprise to combat any breaches, incidents or
attacks?
____________________________________________________________
4. Does your enterprise provide cybersecurity awareness workshops to employees?
_____________________________________________
112
5. Is there a need for a specialised cybersecurity framework that is centred around SMMEs?
____________________________________________________________
F. Support
1. Are you receiving support for cybersecurity?
____________________________________________________________
If yes was selected in 1 answer 1.1 and 1.2
1.1 Where are you receiving support for cybersecurity?
____________________________________________________________
1.2 What kind of support is being received and who is providing such support?
____________________________________________________________
2. What are the challenges you face when adopting cybersecurity practices?
____________________________________________________________
3. Do you require support with the adoption of cybersecurity practices?
____________________________________________________________
If yes was selected in 3 answer 3.1
3.1 What type of support do you require?
____________________________________________________________
G. Feedback
1. Are there any other comments you would like to add or questions?
___________________________________________________________
2. Do you think this study is necessary for SMMEs with regards to their adoption of
cybersecurity practices?
___________________________________________________________
113
Appendix B
List of generated codes
Code
Anti-phishing
Anti-virus
App verifications
Azure
Back office
Backups
Biometrics
Breach
Business tools
CCTV
Challenges of cybersecurity adoption
Cloud
Cloudflare
Company rules
Complex passwords
Complicated
Computers
Confidential information
Cost
Courses
Customer data
Cyber hacking
Cyber-attack experience
Cybersecuirty adoption
Cybersecurity awareness workshops
Cybersecurity Education
Cybersecurity for the enterprise
Cybersecurity issues
Cybersecurity monitoring systems
114
Cybersecurity teams
Cybersecurity understanding
Data integrity
Data loss prevention software
Databases
DDoS attack
Digital Practices
Digital technology
Digitally secure
Digitally stored
Drop safes E-mails
Employees
Encryption
Enhance the business
External consultant
Financial loss
Firewall
Fraudsters
Growth of cybersecurity
Hacked
Implementation
Importance
Inception
Installation
Insurance
Internet
Internet applications
IS teams
IT solutions
Knowledge development
Knowledge source of cybersecurity
115
Lack of awareness
Lack resources
Laptops
Leakage of sensitive information
Limited access
Malicious attempts
Malware attack
Malware injections
Management controls
Management of cybersecurity
Measures taken on a personal level
Measures to combat attacks
Need for a specialised SMME cybersecurity
framework
Need to have cybersecurity
Networking solutions
New releases
No cybersecurity focus
Online networks
Online space
Outsourced
Password protection
Payroll System
Phishing scams
Phones
Point of sales
Precautions
Prevent significant losses
Printers
Projector
Protection
Ransomware
116
Regulating
Renewal
Require support with cybersecurity adoption
Risk
Safeguard
Secure
Security software
Seminars
Servers
SharePoint
Skills development
SMS verifications
Spam emails
SSL certificates
Stock taking
Support for cybersecurity
Supported by IS teams
System adoption
Tablets
Third party
Threats
Training
Two factor authentication
Type of support required
Unauthorised access
Unethical hackers
Updates conducted on applications
Use of cybersecurity practices
Users negligent
Vigilant
Viruses
VPN
117
Vulnerable
Appendix C
Themes identified
Classifications Development of themes
The understanding of cybersecurity Protection
Confidential information
Online space
Vigilance
Internet
Digitally stored
The meaning of cybersecurity to the
enterprise
Data integrity
Digital practices
Insurance
Cyber hacking
Malicious attempts
Networking solutions
Digital technology used by the enterprise Computers
Laptops
Point of sales
Phones
Printers
Cloud
Hard drive
Payroll system
E-mails
Servers
Azure
Business tools
CCTV
Projector
Drop safes
118
Tablets
Cybersecurity practices being used by the
enterprise
Firewall
Anti-virus software
Password protection
Biometrics
Data loss prevention software
Encryption
SMS verification
VPN
App verification
The need to have cybersecurity Hacked
Safeguard
Paramount
Digital practices
Safety measures
Cyber-attack experience by the enterprise DDoS attacks
Phishing scams
Malicious attacks
Vulnerable
Breach
Financial loss
Measures in place by the enterprise to
combat attacks
Internet service provider
Cloudflare
Limited access
Management controls
Anti-phishing
Cybersecurity awareness by the enterprise Cybersecurity workshops
Training
Cybersecurity education
Regulating
Seminars
Courses 
119
The cybersecurity support being utilised Outsourced
Third party
Cybersecurity teams
IS teams
Consultant
Challenges of cybersecurity practices
adoption
Employee understanding
Cost
Complicated
User negligence
Not cybersecurity focused
Require support with cybersecurity
practices
Types of support needed for the adoption of
cybersecurity practices
Implementation
Skills development
Installation
Knowledge development
Specialized framework for SMMEs
Appendix D
Section A: Participant Demographics
What is your
current
position in the
enterprise?
What is your
age?
How long have
you been in
this position:
What is your
highest level
of education?
What level of
IT skills do
you have?
Owner 30-39 2.5 years
or higher
Intermediate
Owner 30-39 4 years Diploma Intermediate
Owner 40-49 6 years
Degree
Advanced
Owner 21-29 2 years Diploma Advanced
Manager 50-59 12 years
Degree
Intermediate
120
Owner 40-49 7 years High School Entry
Manager 40-49 16 years degree
or higher
Intermediate
Owner 60 or older 20 years
Degree
Entry
Owner 40-49 21 years
Degree
Intermediate
Appendix E
Section B: Enterprise Information
Sector of
the
economy
How
many
years
has your
business
been in
operatio
n?
Indicate
the
number
of
employe
es in the
enterpris
e.
How many
are fulltime
employee
s?
How many
are parttime
employee
s?
What is
your
annual
turnove
r
(within
the last
5
years)?
Classificati
on of
enterprise
Consulting Less than
five years
2 2 0 700 000
thousan
d
Micro
Manufacturi
ng
Less than
five years
31 20 11 4 million Small
EcommerceVariety of
products
5 10
years
52 32 20 2.5
million
Small
Finance and
business
services
Less than
five years
5 5 0 800 000
Thousa
nd
Micro
Manufacturi
ng
10 20
years
205 190 15 25
million
Medium
Food and
beverage
5 10
years
13 10 3 No
answer
Micro
Constructio
n and
engineering
Over 20
years
260 146 114 17
million

121
Fuel Station 10 20
years
20 17 3 10
million
Small
Finance and
business
services
Over 20
years
95 80 15 5 million Medi
122
Appendix F
Editor declaration
29 December 2022
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN
SGn,/aG,S,/,x
Received 7 July 2022, accepted 26 July 2022, date of publication 10 August 2022, date of current version 19 August 2022.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3197899
A Survey on the Cyber Security of
Small-to-Medium Businesses: Challenges,
Research Focus and Recommendations
ALLADEAN CHIDUKWANI , SEBASTIAN ZANDER , AND
POLYCHRONIS KOUTSAKIS , (Senior Member, IEEE)
Discipline of Information Technology, Media and Communications, Murdoch University, Murdoch, WA 6150, Australia
Corresponding author: Alladean Chidukwani (alladeanc@outlook.com)
This work was supported by the Australian Government Research Training Program (RTP) Scholarship.
ABSTRACT Small-to-medium sized businesses (SMBs) constitute a large fraction of many countries’
economies but according to the literature SMBs are not adequately implementing cyber security which
leaves them susceptible to cyber-attacks. Furthermore, research in cyber security is rarely focused on SMBs,
despite them representing a large proportion of businesses. In this paper we review recent research on the
cyber security of SMBs, with a focus on the alignment of this research to the popular NIST Cyber Security
Framework (CSF). From the literature we also summarise the key challenges SMBs face in implementing
good cyber security and conclude with key recommendations on how to implement good cyber security.
We find that research in SMB cyber security is mainly qualitative analysis and narrowly focused on the
Identify and Protect functions of the NIST CSF with very little work on the other existing functions. SMBs
should have the ability to detect, respond and recover from cyber-attacks, and if research lacks in those areas,
then SMBs may have little guidance on how to act. Future research in SMB cyber security should be more
balanced and researchers should adopt well-established powerful quantitative research approaches to refine
and test research whilst governments and academia are urged to invest in incentivising researchers to expand
their research focus.
INDEX TERMS Cyber security, small-to-medium business, security posture, cyber security threats, cyber
security frameworks, security and privacy.
I. INTRODUCTION
On the global level, SMBs are responsible for more than
90 percent of the worldwide business economy [1]. In
Australia in particular, SMBs make up 98% of all Australian
businesses, producing one-third of the total GDP and employing 4.7 million people [2] whilst in the UK, SMBs make
up 99.9% of all businesses [3]. Since there are varying definitions of SMBs or small-to-medium enterprises (SMEs)
[4], [5], we are using the definition of the Australian
Bureau of Statistics defining SMBs as businesses employing
between 5 – 199 staff [6].
Based on the major role that SMBs play in the economy,
it would be expected that they would adequately implement
cyber security strategies. However this is not the case as
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and
approving it for publication was Jiafeng Xie.
explained in [7], and this makes them susceptible to financial,
productivity and legal costs that can even lead to bankruptcy.
Attackers have now turned to the easy target of SMBs
many of which are either unaware [8] or not well resourced to
fortify their networks and information resources [9]. Despite
there being well known measures to protect businesses from
cyber-attacks, SMBs continue to be victims [10]. Statistics
show that 62% of Australian SMBs reported to have been a
victim of cyber-attacks [11]. This statistic is closely aligned
with the 2017 global statistic where 66% of SMBs reported
their organization experiencing a cyberattack in the previous
12 months. These statistics are not only a concern for SMBs
but also a concern for suppliers and customers who do business with them [12].
Cyber security is defined as ‘‘the art of protecting networks, devices, and data from unauthorised access or criminal
use and the practice of ensuring confidentiality, integrity, and
VOLUME 10, 2022 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 85701
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
availability of information’’ [13]. Cyber security research is
a growing field with numerous topics which authors such
as Suryotrisongko and Musashi have tried to develop taxonomies for [14]. Our study was necessitated by the realisation that there was very limited literature available regarding
the cyber security of SMBs – both in Australia and globally
[15]. To the best of our knowledge, only two surveys of a
similar nature have been done [15], [16] which we discuss
in more detail in Section IV. None of the existing surveys
aligned their surveyed research to a well-known security
framework or analysed the geographic spread of the surveyed
research.
This motivated our study on the available literature and its
focus as well as areas of SMB research that are underrepresented. From our experience and assertions from others [17],
the practical and cohesive application of cyber security
practices in industry is accomplished through the adoption
of cyber security frameworks which provide structure and
methodology [18]. Many frameworks exist, among which
the National Institute of Standards and Technology Cyber
Security Framework (NIST CSF) is popular amongst SMBs.
Using the NIST CSF as a benchmark, the aim of our research
is to understand the focus of previous SMB cyber security
research and identify areas that may be lacking. The secondary aim is to establish in which countries or regions SMB
cyber security research is being conducted, what research
methodologies are being used and which data gathering techniques are being employed. Another aim was to analyse what
researchers identified as the challenges faced by SMBs and
what the recommended cyber security practices are.
Our study asked the following questions:
1. What has been the focus of SMB cyber security
research?
2. How does past and current SMB cyber security
research align with the widely used NIST CSF?
3. What areas of SMB cyber security research need more
focus?
4. What is the most common SMB cyber security research
methodology?
5. What data gathering techniques are SMB cyber security
researchers using?
6. What is the geographic spread of SMB cyber security
research?
7. What are the common challenges affecting SMB implementation of good cyber security?
8. What are the recommended cyber security practices for
SMBs?
Compared to [15], [16] our work discusses a much larger
body of relevant literature and categorizes the literature using
a taxonomy based on NIST CSF. Hence, our survey covers
more depth and breadth than existing work.
We anticipate that the results of this study will be useful to SMB cyber security researchers, academic institutions, research institutions, governments, and policy makers.
Researchers can adopt a more targeted approach to their
SMB cyber security research by focussing more on the underrepresented research areas. Academic/research institutions
and governments could also incentivise researchers to carry
out research in the lacking areas to ensure a well-balanced
approach and ultimately help secure SMBs and subsequently
the economies.
In section II to set the scene we discuss the difference between SMBs and larger organisations, current cyberattacks and their cost to SMBs. In section III we briefly
discuss cyber security frameworks and standards applicable
to SMBs with a focus on the NIST framework which we use
to classify the existing literature. In section IV we discuss
the few existing surveys in this area. In section V we explain
the paper selection criteria for the survey. In section VI we
present our survey in two parts. Firstly, we discuss the challenges identified in previous literature and secondly, we discuss the literature through the lens of the NIST framework.
In section VII we discuss the findings and summarize the
recommendations for a good cyber security posture of SMBs.
Section VIII presents the conclusions of this work.
II. CYBER SECURITY SITUATION FOR SMBS
In this section we discuss the differences between SMBs and
large organisations when it comes the cyber security situation.
We continue to discuss current cyber-attacks against SMBs
and their cost implications.
A. SMBS VS. LARGE ENTERPRISES
Cyber threats do not discriminate by organisation size,
which means SMBs are susceptible to the same threats as
large organisations [19]. Although larger enterprises have
a larger attack surface with more employees and devices,
larger organisations also, in most cases, have the human and
financial resources to put in place controls [9], [20]. Larger
organisations tend to have dedicated cyber security staff with
appropriate levels of education [21]. SMBs invest less in
cyber security [20], however when it comes to the financial
impact of successful cyber-attacks, they suffer higher costs
proportionately than large businesses [10], [22]. SMBs however have the potential advantage of being small and agile
with more flexible IT arrangements [23].
Industry research revealed that although cyber risk became
more firmly entrenched in larger organisations’ priorities in
the past few years, the confidence of many organisations in
their ability to manage cyber risk had declined as they were
found to still struggle to articulate, approach and act upon
cyber risk despite having the relevant human and financial
resources [24]. They were also found struggling to educate
and train their employees on cyber security [25], a challenge
also common in SMBs.
Williams and Manheke [26] argued that cyber security
threats to small business should be treated as a matter of
national security. They argued that in a country like Australia
where much of the business and economy lies in the hands
of small businesses, the financial well-being of large groups
of society could be affected by cyber-attacks on the business
85702 VOLUME 10, 2022
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
sector impinging on the confidence on e-commerce and the
economy as a whole.
B. SMBS UNDER ATTACK
Hayes and Bodhani [27] found that SMBs are being increasingly targeted by online threats because they are perceived as
being inherently more vulnerable. New and less experienced
cyber criminals often attack easy targets among which SMBs
are featured [28]. The authors attribute this lax security to
SMBs planning their IT security under the misconception that
their networks and data are already safe.
A 2020 report from Verizon indicated that the attacks
are far reaching with every organisation no matter the size,
industry or sector, falling victim [19]. It is noted however
that globally, health care service providers and finance related
businesses are the most targeted [29], [30]. Academia and
industry reports reveal that the most common cyber-attack
types experienced by SMBs included: social engineering
(e.g., phishing), hacking (e.g., stolen credentials, data theft),
malware (e.g., ransomware), misuse (e.g., malicious insider),
web-based attacks and ecommerce supply chain attacks [19],
[31], [32], [33], [34]. Fig. 1 below shows the results from the
Ponemon Institute’s 2018 study showing phishing or social
engineering attacks as the most prominent types of attack
experienced by SMB respondents [31].
FIGURE 1. Types of attack experienced by SMBs from [31]. Social
engineering is the most prominent attack and increasing from previous
years.
Globally and across all organisations, web application
servers appear to be the most targeted IT assets in data
breaches largely due to the shift towards web-based applications due to an increasing consumption of services offering cloud-based software-as-a-service platforms. Other assets
under attack are users’ desktops and laptops, email servers,
database servers and the end-users themselves [19]. Some
researchers believe that mobile devices [35] and other IoT
devices are the most vulnerable devices in the SMB environment which are most likely to be compromised and allow
attackers entry into the network [8], [36], [37].
Unsecured online devices can also be weaponised to carry
out sophisticated attacks on other organisations. For example,
devices can be coerced into Botnets, awaiting instructions to
join online distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks [38].
As reported in [22], 70% of recent global breaches were
perpetrated mainly by external actors, i.e., attackers from
outside the company. Almost half of these attacks involved
intrusion or gaining unauthorised access. The vast majority
(86%) of these breaches were financially motivated, however
cyber incidents and data breaches have several other motivators which include fun, ideology, grudges, espionage, state
sponsored and human error [19].
Although most cyber-attacks were from external actors,
in 2018, 16% of SMBs reported suffering an insider
attack [31]. Williams and Manheke argued that human error
both intentional and unintentional has a great impact on
SMBs given that it affects many areas of protecting computer systems [26]. For example, in 2011 the Maricopa
County Community College District (MCCCD) suffered a
data breach with some of the college’s databases being posted
for sale on the dark web. Investigations revealed the issue was
caused by an employee but did not reveal whether the data
was intentionally or accidentally leaked [39]. In Australia,
11% of data breaches reported to the Office of The Australian
Information Commissioner (OAIC) were the result of a rogue
employee or insider attack [29].
C. COST OF POOR CYBER SECURITY FOR SMBS
Cyber-attacks are becoming more severe in terms of negative
consequences such as financial impacts [40]. According to
the Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission (ACIC),
cybercrime is costing the Australian economy up to $1 billion
annually in direct costs alone. The impact of cybercrime can
be far reaching with other indirect costs coming in the form
of damage to personal identity, loss of business or employment opportunities and significant impact on emotional and
psychological wellbeing [41]. It is reported that about 60% of
small businesses that were victims of a cyberattacks went out
of business within six months [42]. This demonstrates that
small businesses have a lot to lose if cyber threats materialise
and it is in their best interest to have cyber defences in place.
Lost business was one of the largest costs for small business, along with financial loss, lawsuits, victim compensation, fines and internal investigations [30]. Once a data
breach has occurred, the cost of compliance activities, training, research and upgrades to infrastructure could be signifinact [43]. In addition, businesses are susceptible to repeat
attacks given hackers are likely to return. Research highlights
that 28% of non-compliant victims are likely to suffer another
breach within two years after the initial attack [44].
In the case of the payment and card industry, noncompliance with the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) could lead to be the business not
being able to accept credit card payments for the goods
sold or services rendered [45]. Other risks of fallout from
not being compliant can be reputational. SMBs suffer a
VOLUME 10, 2022 85703
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
disproportionately higher financial impact from cyber-attacks
when their losses are adjusted to organizational size and
revenue [22]. As of 2019, smaller organisations were found
to have higher costs relative to their size than larger organisations, incurring an average cost of USD $3533 per
employee, compared to USD $204 per employee for larger
organisations [10]. The average cost of a data breach in
Australia is $2.13 million while companies spend an average
of $1.2 million due to damage or theft of IT assets and infrastructure. Additionally, disruption to normal operations cost an
average of $1.9 million and these figures continue to increase
from previous years [10], [31], [46].
Lloyd [47] claims that effective cyber security allows a
business to demonstrate a high level of corporate social
responsibility, showing customers commitment to security
and privacy which leads to customer retention. Conversely
it can be argued that ineffective cyber security demonstrates
a lack of corporate social responsibility and disregard for
customer security and privacy, leading to loss of customers.
Given many damaging data breaches are not reported, large
organisations are now scrutinising the security practices of
potential SMB third parties or suppliers to ensure a secure
end-to-end supply chain can be achieved [12]. The US retailer
Target suffered a large data breach in 2013 after hackers
exploited the network access of a small heating, ventilation,
and air-conditioning system supplier [48].
The existence of good cyber security practices in an SMB
creates a competitive advantage for them in the market. It creates opportunities for lucrative supply chain contracts for
which SMBs would not otherwise be a contender without
good cyber security. A good example is the stringent cyber
security compliance requirement that the US Department of
Defence now imposes on defence contractors which is likely
to preclude a lot of SMBs from bidding for defence contracts
[49]. Effectively, SMBs who fail to invest in data security and
governance miss out on market opportunities. When cyber
security is not a priority it can become a growth inhibitor for
an SMB.
III. CYBER SECURITY FRAMEWORKS
Cyber security frameworks define best practices that SMBs
can follow to manage cyber security risk, establish a common
language internally and externally, standardise service delivery and improve efficiency [50]. As pointed out by previous
researchers, SMBs should adopt these frameworks to guide
their cyber security implementations [15], [28].
A. NIST CYBER SECURITY FRAMEWORK
The taxonomy we use to classify the literature is based on the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Cyber
Security Framework (CSF) which was developed to help
improve the security of critical infrastructure organisations
in the USA [51]. It is a voluntary framework developed from
existing standards, guidelines, and practices as well as with
input from industry and government [52]. The framework
provides a policy framework for organisations to assess and
improve their ability to prevent, detect, and respond to cyberattacks [53].
Although initially developed for critical infrastructure
organisations, the framework has proven to be flexible and
useful to other organisations [54]. By implementing the
framework, organisations are better able to cost-effectively
manage their cyber security risks, maximising their return on
security investment [55]. Another notable benefit of NIST is
that it provides a common language reducing confusion on
the meaning of terms used in contracts and other agreements.
The components of the NIST CSF [116], [119] are summarised in TABLE 1 below.
TABLE 1. [53], [57] Nist CSF functions and categories.
NIST recognised that SMBs often do not have security experts at their disposal to interpret the cyber security framework and developed a simplified version of the
NIST Cyber Security Framework specifically for SMBs
which is published as the NIST Interagency Report 7621
(NISTIR 7621) [56].
NISTIR 7621 provides guidance to SMBs on how they can
improve the security of information, including systems and
networks, physical security, personnel security, contingency
planning disaster recovery and operational security [56].
It prescribes actions that small businesses should take
(Essential Practices) and adds ten highly recommended
practices [58].
B. OTHER FRAMEWORKS
The Australian Signals Directorate (ASD) Essential Eight,
International Standards Organisation (ISO) 27001/2 and the
Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) are
among other popular frameworks relevant for SMBs [28].
The ASD Essential Eight is an Australian framework
which provides a baseline for organisations in order to protect
themselves [59].
85704 VOLUME 10, 2022
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
ISO 27001 is an international standard, providing specifications for a best-practice Information Security Management
System (ISMS) [60]. ISO 27001 was developed to help organizations protect their information in a systematic and costeffective way through the adoption of an ISMS [61]. The
ISO 27001 standard groups the controls that organisations
can select to tackle information security risks into 14 sets
or domains [62]. ISO 27002 compliments ISO 27001 by
providing more detailed guidance and a reference for selecting security controls within the process of implementing an
ISMS [60].
The PCI DSS is the standard for the protection of cardholder data [45]. The PCI DSS controls framework helps
SMBs to layer their defences around payment card data operations, improving their ability to maintain the confidentiality
and integrity of customers’ payment card details, in turn safeguarding the company’s reputation. However, meeting PCI
DSS compliance has been difficult for SMBs with only one
in five managing to maintain their annual compliance obligations. Boese found that unlike larger corporations, small businesses lack the resources to become PCI DSS-compliant [45].
FIGURE 2. Relationship between cyber security frameworks. Note. This
figure was adopted from Compliance forge [64] and enhanced to show
the relationship with other frameworks such as PCI/DSS and ASD
Essential 8.
SMBs may struggle to meet their business objectives as
well as compliance requirements when adopting a single
framework, thus some researchers recommend to adopt a
hybrid framework [55]. The Secure Controls Framework
(SCF) was developed as a hybrid framework to cover NIST
CSF, NIST 800-53 and ISO 27002 [63]. Fig. 2 shows the
SCF and how some of the frameworks and standards overlap.
Essentially the SCF can be seen as a superset covering NIST
CSF, ISO 27001/2, PCI DSS and ASD Essential Eight.
IV. RELATED SURVEYS
To the best of our knowledge, there exist only two surveys
of a similar nature – one focussed on the UK [16] and one
focussed on Australia [15].
Tam et al. discussed the research data challenges plaguing SMB cyber security researchers where the lack of publicly available data leads to little data being obtained largely
from convenience sampling [15]. Self-reporting is also highlighted as an issue in SMB cyber research which causes
awareness biases. They discuss challenges faced by SMBs
as well as advantages or opportunities for SMBs. They also
highlight the need for research data in businesses with less
than 20 employees.
Alahmari and Duncan’s review of SMB cyber security
research was aimed at revealing the role played by SMB
management in addressing cybersecurity risks [16]. They
analysed 15 articles and identified threats, behaviours, practices, awareness, and decision making as the perspectives that
play a role in SMB cyber security risk management.
Our survey differentiates itself by analysing a much larger
body of literature and aligning the surveyed literature to a
well-known cyber security framework which previous surveys have not done. Our survey categorizes the literature
using a taxonomy based on NIST CSF. Unlike the previous
studies, we also investigate the geographic spread of the
surveyed research.
V. PAPER SELECTION CRITERIA
The literature analysed in this study consists of 40 scholarly academic and peer-reviewed publications, dating back to
2005 (see TABLE 5, Appendix A). For the search we used
the Murdoch University Online library which indexes and
searches popular academic databases and repositories such
as Scopus, Web of Science and many other original research
databases such as IEEE Explore. Outside the Murdoch University online library, Google Scholar was also used to widen
the search. We set the inclusion and search criteria are as
follows:
• Published: 2005 onwards
• Title Contains the terms: cyber security or cyber security
or IT security or cyber risk AND small or medium AND
business or enterprise
• Peer-reviewed journal paper, conference paper, doctoral
dissertation or master’s thesis
• Clearly articulated methodology
Each publication was categorised as journal paper, conference paper, doctoral dissertation or Master’s thesis.
A qualitative systematic review of literature was carried
out, paying attention to the focus of the research questions
and themes of the research. We adopted the qualitative systematic review approach due to the difficulty of performing
meta-analysis of studies within a particular topic. Qualitative
approaches have been developed to review and assess the
quality of research findings, as well as identify patterns and
relationships amongst studies on a particular topic [65], [66].
Publications were shortlisted for analysis and reviewed to
determine the SMB cyber security topic or theme, the country
where the research was conducted, the research methods used
as well as the data collection methods. The resulting process
followed is depicted in Fig. 3.
VOLUME 10, 2022 85705
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
FIGURE 3. Methodology visualised. This figure visually depicts the
process followed in this research.
We developed the NIST CSF Research Classification
Tool (NCRCT) shown in Fig. 4 to help us align each publication with the functions of NIST CSF. For each included
publication, the research aims, objectives and questions were
parsed through the tool to help determine the NIST CSF category (Table 1) it aligned with. Using this tool, we determined
the corresponding NIST Category or categories.
Furthermore, the research methodology and research
design of each publication were reviewed to establish whether
it was a qualitative, quantitative or mixed method approach
and also to establish what data collection technique was used.
The data collection methods are categorised as shown in
Table 2.
Additionally, as each paper was analysed, the challenges
faced by SMBs were noted and are discussed in Section VI.A
Furthermore, we also identified recommended practices for
SMBs suggested by the literature and discuss these in
Section VII.
It should be noted that our literature search results are
by no means exhaustive. Search results were limited to the
repositories described above. Non-English research repositories could not be accessed and publications in other languages
such as French, German, Chinese would have been precluded.
VI. SMB CYBER SECURITY RESEARCH
Our work investigated the alignment of SMB research to the
popular NIST CSF framework. It also investigated the methods, data gathering techniques and the geographic spread
of past SMB cyber security research. In the process we
also examined the common challenges faced by SMBs in
implementing good cyber security. This section discusses the
findings related to the research questions.
FIGURE 4. NIST CSF research classification tool (NCRCT). This figure shows
the tool which was used to determine the focus of surveyed literature.
TABLE 2. Categorisation of data collection methods.
A. CYBER SECURITY CHALLENGES
Previous research identified several challenges that SMBs
face in implementing sound cyber security. In a recent study,
85706 VOLUME 10, 2022
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
top challenges were found to be the lack of finances to pay for
talent, issues with regulatory compliance as well as a shortage
of professionally available talent [67]. Some researchers have
categorised challenges faced by SMBs into technical, human,
organisational, financial and legal challenges [15]. In the
2018 State of Cyber Security in SMBs study, the three main
challenges faced by small businesses identified were: (i) not
having the in-house expertise to mitigate cyber risk; (ii) IT
budget constraints; and (iii) a general lack of understanding
of how to protect against cyber-attacks [31].
Several other factors are suspected to also influence the
poor cyber security posture of SMBs. Research by Deloitte
[68] suggested that the age of the business owner or manager
played a part in the security posture of their business, as well
as their attitude and use of technology. The major factors
influencing poor SMB cyber security posture are presented
below.
1) UNDERESTIMATING THE RISK
Cyber risk transcends data breaches and privacy concerns.
As Borenstein [69] alluded, the threats have evolved into
more sophisticated schemes that prove very costly, disrupting
entire businesses, industries, supply chains and even nations.
Research has however shown that small business owners
often have the tendency to underestimate cyber security risk
[70], [71].
In Australia, almost half of the SMBs surveyed believed
that they could protect their business from cybercrime by
limiting their online presence. SMBs reported limiting their
online presence to a business website, contact details and
social media, with only 15% of survey respondents offering a business website with product viewing or purchasing
functionality [43]. Notwithstanding the significant economic
benefits of a greater presence online, the SMBs perception
of cyber risk appears to be misguided. Cyber risks transcend
websites and social media to include internet connected desktops, laptops, tablets, phones and nowadays internet connected devices and sensors (IoT) [19]. Any of these could
expose the SMB to a cyberattack. Besides social media use,
55% of SMB owner-operators surveyed alluded to also using
email to communicate, unknowingly exposing themselves to
threats such as phishing and ransomware attacks [43]. They
wrongly assumed limiting their online presence to be a safety
measure preventing cybercrime, simultaneously unaware that
email is the main vehicle for two thirds of malware related
cyber security incidents globally [32].
A survey on small businesses in the US revealed the sector
is more at risk than they think and is not taking necessary steps
or investing in defending against cyberattacks [72]. Over
half the businesses studied had not invested any measures
to mitigate risks as they did not believe that they stored any
valuable data, yet in fact they stored email addresses, phone
numbers, postal addresses, home addresses, social security
numbers and credit card details. This information which the
SMBs perceived not to be of any value, is actually Personally Identifiable Information (PII), which forms the basis for
most privacy regulation in Australia [73] and other countries.
These findings demonstrate that there is an element of naivety
in the operation of small businesses.
Another example from the US is that only one in five
businesses are reported to be able to meet their annual obligations under the PCI DSS standard. Some do not believe that
they have any valuable data assets or business impacting IT
systems; some do not see the business benefits or return on
investment in complying and ignore their obligations [12].
Digital supply chains also introduce new cyber risks for
business [33], [74], [75]. Although many businesses were
found to perceive the risk other supply chain partners introduce to them, they do not perceive the risk they pose to their
supply chain [47].
Bhattacharya [76] asserted that small businesses are always
going to be primarily focused on sales and revenues in order
to survive and stay in business. With this being their core
focus, cyber security issues are likely neglected as they are
not seen as valuable contributions to the core business.
2) LACK OF SKILLS AND KNOWLEDGE
Academia and industry researchers have suggested that small
businesses remain exposed and susceptible to attacks because
they do not know what to protect [25], [58], [77], [78], [79].
The work in [77] and [79] found that SMBs are struggling
with the complex demands of carrying out risk assessments
and the manner in which to adopt cyber security best practices
into their organizations.
The Australian Small Business and Family Enterprise
Ombudsman alluded that the lack of awareness regarding
cyber security is one of the biggest threats facing small business operators [80]. The lack of cyber security awareness is
evident not only among employees but also among managers
who are the decision makers but found to be unaware of the
technical solutions available to address their cyber security
challenges [16]. SMBs were also found to lack knowledge
in assessing the capabilities of their IT service providers
[28]. A common challenge with SMBs in the financial card
payment industry is a lack of awareness and knowledge on
how to become compliant even with mandatory regulations
such as PCI-DSS [45], [81]. Thus SMBs require help with
creating policies and complying with regulations [15]. SMBs
also struggle to implement crucial monitoring and security
systems (such as a SIEM) due to their complexity and the
requisite skills and knowledge not available to SMBs. This
is not surprising given that research found a lack of appropriate education amongst the IT professionals working in
SMBs [21].
These assertions were confirmed in a 2019 survey of
small businesses, citing insufficient personnel, insufficient
budget and a lack of understanding around how to protect against cyber-attacks, as the biggest challenges for
SMBs when trying to improve their cyber security posture [46]. This situation does not seem to have changed
as recent studies consistently rated these as the main
challenges [10], [31], [46].
VOLUME 10, 2022 85707
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
3) LACK OF RESOURCES
SMBs are less likely to employ dedicated IT staff, let alone
cyber security specialists [74]. A medium or large company may have sustainable resources for dealing with cyberattacks, whereas the relatively low income of a small business
generally equates to fewer resources allocated toward cyber
defence strategies. Fewer human and financial [36], [71], [82]
resources [36], [71], [82] make it difficult for most SMBs
to comply [83] even with regulations such as PCI-DSS [45].
SMBs also fail to adopt more advanced cyber security technologies such as effective technical controls using machine
learning due to the high costs [84]. Some researchers found
that achieving a good level of cyber security awareness was
one of the biggest challenges for organisations today [25],
[79]. The problem is only compounded for SMBs because
they face the same challenge but with much fewer resources
[25]. As a consequence, some SMBs trust their IT service
providers to take care of their cyber security, but without
the necessary contractual arrangements in place or clear definition of the responsibilities [85]. McLaurin recommended
SMBs should align the little resources they have to the threats
that they face [28]. Thus, SMBs require cyber security solutions that are affordable, easy to implement and use [86], [87].
Onwubiko and Lenaghan recommend that SMBs adopt security models that combine multiple security facets together
thereby reducing costs of implementation and management
[9]. The Centria Cyber Security Manager concept is an example of this approach where SMBs can share cyber security
expert costs [8] thus making it affordable.
4) RAPID PACE OF TECHNOLOGY ADVANCEMENT
Berry and Berry [88] found that small business owners struggle with risk management approaches for mitigating cyber
threats due to the rapid pace of advancement in technologies.
Some authors even argue that cyber security risks are evolving
faster than the rate of digital technologies evolutions [24].
Thus, the inexperience with security technologies contributes
to SMBs challenges [23]. In a recent study of cyber security
incidents and data breaches, the Ponemon Institute found that
SMBs are ill prepared to deal with risks created by third
parties and the Internet of Things (IoT) which is growing at
an increasingly rapid pace [10].
5) CONFLICTING / EXCESSIVE CYBER SECURITY
INFORMATION
An Australian study in 2017 indicated that general awareness
of cybercrime as a business risk was increasing amongst
Australian SMBs, however many do not know where to get
help from when responding to cybercrime events. They were
found to be looking to multiple sources for help, ranging
from Google searches to government and police [7]. Notably,
38% of respondents reported reaching out to an IT forensic
consultant for help [43].
In a bid to improve the cyber awareness of SMBs, industry, government and other bodies make resources available,
however as Renaud and Wier [7] found, the wealth of online
information is at times conflicting, causing confusion and
uncertainty amongst SMBs. It is possible the overwhelming
availability of cyber security information hinders rather than
helps SMEs. For example, in 2016 financial industry groups
complained to NIST that banks are being burdened with a
growing number of competing cyber security guidelines [89].
Another challenge with cyber security information or messaging is the negative connotations associated with the narrative of data breaches, regulatory fines and business disruption.
Lloyd [47] suggests that business leaders need to reframe
how they think about cyber security, with a focus on the
opportunities that good cyber security presents rather than
the consequences of its absence. For instance, effective cyber
security allows companies to innovate, which drives revenue,
profit and growth [15]. Good cyber security assists businesses
to gain its customers’ trust. Additionally, it gives businesses
credibility in the supply chain, hence creating more opportunities [33], [74], [75].
6) LACK OF PERSEVERANCE
SMBs do care about cyber security despite the limited
implementation of known security precautions [4], however
businesses that start off implementing a number of security
measures may, over time, become lax, especially since there
is no visible benefit that accrues from the extra effort and
expense. They can also inhabit a sense of false security,
having not kept up with the emerging risks.
Renaud [90] found small businesses are inconsistent in
their implementation of security measures based on their
appraisal of threats and the ability to implement risk controls.
Key findings from a 2019 cyber security benchmark report
also showed small businesses are challenged with cyber security initiatives to ensure a quick response to emerging cyber
threats [91].
FIGURE 5. NIST CSF functions - focus of SMB cyber security research. This
figure shows that the Identify and Protect functions of NIST CSF have
been the focus of most previous and current research.
B. FOCUS OF CYBER SECURITY RESEARCH
Our results in Fig. 5 show that SMB cyber security research
has largely been focussed on the Identify (27 out of 40) and
Protect (23 out of 40) functions of the NIST CSF framework, with little work on the Detect (9), Respond (6) and
85708 VOLUME 10, 2022
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
Recover (5) functions. In the Identify function, governance,
risk management strategy and risk assessment were the most
popular topics which researchers (see Table 5, Appendix a).
In the Protect function, most publications researched the
cyber security awareness and training of SMBs with Information protection processes and procedures being the second
most popular category. Overall, across all of the NIST CSF
categories, awareness and training has been the most popular
topic.
The following sub sections will discuss the literature in
relation to its respective NIST function and categories.
1) IDENTIFY
The identify function of the NIST CSF is meant to ensure
that businesses understand the business context, the resources
that support critical functions, and the related cyber security
risks so that they can prioritize efforts, consistent with its
risk management strategy and business needs. Four of the
six categories of the Identify function [55] were represented
in the literature reviewed. The functions Asset Management and Business Environment were not represented in the
literature.
Early SMB cyber security research explored the cyber
threats to SMBs, vulnerabilities, risks and practices [9], [26],
[34], [79], [92], [93], [94]. Whilst other authors were industry
agnostic in their studies, Heikkila et al. targeted their study
to SMBs in the manufacturing industry [8] which had unique
challenges due to digitisation and the adoption of the Internet
of Things (IoT). Valli [95] targeted lawyers who require
education on how to use encryption and were failing to report
cyberattacks to the government’s online reporting tool.
While most researchers focused on the challenges [25]
faced by SMBs, others have found opportunities for SMBs
when it comes to cyber security. Unlike large organisations,
SMBs were found to have the advantage of being small, agile,
and having flexible IT arrangements [15].
Some researchers studied risk management practices in
SMBs whilst some explored strategies SMB use to prevent
breaches, for example [96] and [97]. Several SMB cyber
security researchers focused on the Governance category in
the past decade. Aljumaili [98] explored information security
policies and practices required by SMBs while Patterson [82]
studied policy decisions in small businesses.
Researchers such as Burton-Howard [83] and others
[45], [82], [87] focussed their research on governance and
compliance including policies, legislation and compliance.
Others concentrated on decision making related to cyber
security amongst management in SMBs [82], [96]. Decision
making approaches were found to depend on five perspectives which are cyber security threats, behaviours, practices,
awareness and decision making in order to apply the correct
remedies [16].
Additionally, the deficiency of existing laws was discussed
with better laws to help protect SMBs being called for [83].
Tam et al. added that legal and policy work is needed to
help SMBs become more cyber resilient [15]. Management
is encouraged to ensure a good cyber security culture in their
organisations [87].
Three studies [33], [74], [75] touched on cyber security
supply chain risks – an emerging topic in SMB cyber security. Sangani et al. [74] developed a security and privacy
architecture to help SMBs adopting cloud services. Cloud
providers are part of the supply chain for SMBs adopting
cloud, however their security responsibilities have limitations
with some responsibilities falling in the hands of the cloud
customers. Thus, in addition to understanding cloud benefits,
SMBs are also urged to be aware of their responsibilities
under these arrangements.
Some researchers based their research on cyber security
frameworks such as the NIST CSF [28], [99]. Some designed
new frameworks [74] whilst some identified shortcomings
[94], [100], [101] with existing frameworks and suggested
modifications or enhancements to existing frameworks that
SMBs could adopt. Examples include the SME Cyber Risk
Assessment suggested by Armenia et al. [99] and another by
Emer et al. [102]. Benz and Chatterjee proposed an SME
Cyber Security Evaluation Tool (CET) based on the NIST
CSF targeting SMBs. Beachboard et al. [79] proposed an
open development approach to develop a decision heuristic
based risk assessment which allows SMBs to quantify costs
and estimate probabilities for specific threats in their risk
assessments. Considering the difficulty of practically implementing cyber security in SMBs, Borges and Carias proposed
a more holistic framework which provides an implementation
order for SMBs to follow [18]. Bada and Nurse proposed
a framework for education and awareness to support SMBs
[25]. Coertze et al. [101] proposed enhancements to the
Information Security Management Toolbox to help SMBs
with creating automated security policies and monitoring
compliance. There is however very little evidence on the
practical implementation of most of the proposed toolsets and
frameworks.
2) PROTECT
According to NIST [103], the Protect function ‘‘supports the
ability to limit or contain the impact of a potential cyber
security event’’. Examples categories within this Function
include Access Control (validating identities and access to
different systems, facilities, etc.), Awareness and Training
(giving employees and others the ability to be part of the cyber
plan with education and training), Data Security (manage
data according to company standards in order to mitigate
cyber security risks, and protect its Availability, Integrity
and Confidentiality proactively), Information Protection Processes & Procedures (putting in place the policies, processes, and procedures that are needed to manage protection
of assets), Maintenance (continuously repairing information
system components) and Protective Technology (deploying
security solutions needed to protect assets in line with company policies).
Cyber security awareness has been a key focus
of SMB cyber security research in early and recent
VOLUME 10, 2022 85709
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
years [35], [81], [92]. Several works analysed by us had
training and awareness as their key focus with authors like
Valli et al. specifically focusing on the cyber awareness of
lawyers [95] and Milos studying the awareness levels of
IT professionals in SMBs [21]. According to Fehér [75],
it is most important to improve the user’s awareness. The
argument is that SMBs should have a proper understanding
of the threats their businesses face and how to mitigate them
[74]. Cook [85] found that awareness in SMBs studied was
broken into three themes which are: knowledge of third-party
vendors, knowledge of protection and knowledge of strategic
plans.
In general, training was found to raise the awareness and
self-efficacy [81], [95]. Barosy identified making people
aware of their responsibilities and roles in information technology as the critical factor in a cyber security awareness
program for SMBs [97] and should be an ongoing exercise
given the rapidly evolving threat landscape. Carnell [80]
found that loss of sensitive data had a direct correlation with
security awareness and knowledge of cyber security damage.
Like large enterprises, SMBs struggle to educate and train
their workforce except for SMBs the problem is worse due
to a lack of resources [25]. However, cyber awareness and
training is essential to keeping businesses cyber secure and
Carias [18] suggested that every domain of a cyber security
framework should be supported by training and awareness.
Bada and Nurse [25] proposed a cyber awareness programme
for SMBs with key areas of the programme being the initial
engagement with SMEs, improving security practices and
culture, programme and trusted third-party resources / services – all underpinned by a communication strategy.
Cyber security awareness levels of IT professionals in
SMBs was found to be low due to a lack of appropriate education and conflicting priorities since they are not dedicated to
cyber security tasks [21]. Lawyers in Western Australia were
found to need education particularly on the use of encryption
to help protect data in transit or at rest given their professional
privilege and access to sensitive client data. [95].
Policies and procedures are seen as one of the ways SMBs
can solve the challenge aligning their information systems
and resources with requirements of security standards [98].
Several publications in our study were devoted to policies
that SMBs could implement to ensure good cyber security
behaviours in their organisation [96], [98]. McLaurin identified that SMB owners required assistance with writing cyber
security policies [28] as research has shown that a lack of
human and financial resources was a barrier to drafting,
implementing, and complying with sound information security policies [101].
Most recently researchers have studied protective cyber
security technologies in SMBs such as machine learning
[84], [100] which are seen to be effective in protecting
against cyber-attacks. Mercl and Horalek [104] examined
the practical implementation of a Security Incident Event
Monitoring (SIEM) in an SMB environment [104] with
their results showing that SIEM implementation in SMB
environments was both costly and complicated especially
considering SMBs may not have the requisite knowledge and
skills.
The challenges SMBs face when implementing cyber security is another popular theme [36], [71]. Deficiencies in SMB
cyber security was a focal point of several studies. Examples
such as the failure to implement firewalls on devices despite
them being built into operating systems were attributed to
the lack of knowledge and awareness [35]. The majority of
SMBs were also found to not install anti-malware on mobile
devices. SMBs were also found to be deficient in performing
risk assessments in their environments [79].
3) DETECT
According to NIST [103] the Detect function helps ensure
organisations develop and implement appropriate activities to
identify the occurrence of a cyber security event.
The Detect function enables timely discovery of cyber
security events. Examples of categories within this function include: Anomalies and Events (ensuring anomalies and
events are detected, and their potential impact is understood),
Security Continuous Monitoring (implementing security continuous monitoring capabilities to monitor cyber security
events and verify the effectiveness of protective measures
including network and physical activities), and Detection Processes (maintaining detection processes to provide awareness
of anomalous events) [103].
Only six of the papers in our review had the Detect function
as their focus [8], [18], [84], [86], [94], [104]. As shown
in Table 5, four of them fell into the Security Continuous
Monitoring category whilst the remaining two fell into the
Detection Process category. The Anomalies and Events category was not represented.
Whilst virus and malware protection were found to create
net benefits and encourage a positive user experience in
SMBs [86], Heikkila et al. [8] argued that successful security
management hinges on continuous monitoring and SMBs
require easy to deploy security services offering such. They
explored the Centria security laboratory as a low-cost solution
for SMBs in the manufacturing industry to manage their cyber
security including continuous security monitoring. Continuous monitoring of an IT environment is achieved using a
SIEM which researchers Mercl and Horalek focused their
study on [104]. They studied two SMBs implementing the
IBM Security QRadar SIEM and found that such implementations required guidance and assistance from knowledgeable
professionals due to the complexity of the implementation.
The implementation of a SIEM in the SMBs was found
to hinge on the following factors: the number of company
employees; geological division of IT infrastructure; financial
aspects and limitations of the company; the number and type
of devices that are managed by the system and the audit
reporting requirements.
Rawindaran et al. [84] investigated the challenges
SMBs face in adopting Machine Learning Cyber Security
(MLCS). Their study revealed that although MLCS has been
85710 VOLUME 10, 2022
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
successfully applied in many monitoring applications, for
example in network intrusion detection systems (NIDS),
there was still poor adoption of MLCS techniques among UK
SMBs.
Kaila and Nyman [94] stressed the importance of monitoring as it not only allows SMBs to uncover what happened
in the event of a breach, but also helps them make informed
responses to incidents. Carias et al. [18] focussed their study
on the best implementation order for a cyber resilience framework in SMBs. They found that different experts have differing priorities, however a general consensus reached indicated
that detection processes and continuous monitoring should be
implemented together with information security techniques
after implementing governance, risk management, asset management, vulnerability management and business continuity.
4) RESPOND
The Respond function involves activities that ensure organisations develop and implement appropriate activities to take
action regarding a detected cyber security incident [103].
According to NIST, ‘‘the Respond function supports the
ability to contain the impact of a potential cyber security incident’’. Examples of categories within this function
include Response Planning (ensuring response planning process are executed during and after an incident), Communications (managing communications during and after an event
with stakeholders, law enforcement, external stakeholders
as appropriate), Analysis (analysis is conducted to ensure
effective response and support recovery activities including
forensic analysis, and determining the impact of incidents),
Mitigation (mitigation activities are performed to prevent
expansion of an event and to resolve the incident) and
Improvements (the organization implements improvements
by incorporating lessons learned from current and previous
detection / response activities). The Respond function activities such as response planning, impact analysis and improvement from lessons learnt go a long way in ensuring cyber
resilience in SMBs however in their study, Powell et al. [34]
found that almost half of SMBs either did not have an
emergency action plan or did not have it written and fully
implemented. Given the threat landscape is ever evolving,
traditional methods of protecting against known threats we
seen not to be effective enough, thus Carias et al. [18] claimed
that cyber resilience is a more holistic approach to cyber
security which assists SMBs to anticipate, detect, withstand,
recover and evolve after cyber incidents.
Seven out of 40 publications in our review were focused
on the Respond function of the NIST CSF. The Mitigation
category was the most popular category in this function
accounting for over half of the papers. Analysis and Improvements were also represented; however, Response Planning
and Communications were not.
Regarding Mitigation, Kaila and Nyman [94] identified
logs as crucial in the event of a compromised system as they
help uncover what happened and help inform SMBs on deciding on how to respond to incidents. Having good mitigation
strategies also brings a business benefit where the organisation can demonstrate compliance and reasonable effort to
protect the business, customer or staff data should a cyber
incident occur [18]. Alharbi et al. [105] measured how certain
cyber security practices can affect the level of harm caused by
cyber-attacks and found that having a cyber security inspection team and recovery plan reduced the financial damage
caused by cyberattacks in SMBs. For incidents that eventuate,
SMBs were disinterested in reporting the incident or conducting forensic analysis due to the costs of the activities; SMBs
simply wanted to move on rather than spend time determining
the source or cause of attack [106]. Machine learning (ML)
techniques and artificial intelligence (AI) were found to be
very effective in the detection of anomalies and enhancing the
functionality of modern network/host intrusion detection and
prevention systems, however Rawindaran et al. [84] found
that some SMBs were not aware or had disregarded that AI
and ML were built into the cyber security solutions they
invested in. Rawindaran recommended that awareness of AI
and ML in cyber security should be improved amongst SMBs.
5) RECOVER
The recover function of the NIST CSF guides SMBs to put in
place measures to ensure that they can recover normal operations after a cyber security incident [103]. Recommended
activities under this function are designed to enable any business functions and capabilities affected by a cyber-attack to be
able to be restored after the incident. This ability to recover
from or adjust easily to misfortune or change part of cyber
resilience [107]. For SMBs, not only should they be able to
defend against cyberattacks, but they need to be able to return
to normal operations after an incident. Categories under this
function include Recovery Planning (recovery processes and
procedures are executed and maintained to ensure restoration
of systems or assets affected by cyber security incidents),
Improvements (continuous improvements from lessons learnt
and communications to ensure the organisation is well coordinated during cyber incidents [103]) and Communications
(restoration activities are coordinated with internal and external parties) [103].
Only five [15], [18], [85], [94], [105] of the papers
reviewed focussed on the Recover function with the Recovery Planning category being the most popular category. The
Improvements category was not represented in the literature.
Tam et al. highlighted the lack of research in cyber resilience
which our study also validates. They noted that cyber security
insurance was a challenge for SMBs given it is a new concept
[15]. They added that highly expensive remediation costs of
cyber incidents make it particularly difficult for SMBs to
recover, hence cyber insurance would be the best approach;
however, it is not well understood amongst SMBs. SMBs
were also found to have a reliance on third party vendors for
their infrastructure and security preventative measures [85],
however this does not necessarily mean the third party takes
ownership of the SMB’s recovery planning. Cook’s study
[85] also revealed that SMBs were adopting preventative
VOLUME 10, 2022 85711
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
and protective strategies, however our analysis of Cook’s
results revealed that planning for the worst was not quite
evident amongst the SMBs studied. Planning for the worst
is crucial for recovery in the event that a cyber-attack occurs
and this can be achieved by having a business continuity
plan in place [94]. In their research Alharbi et al. [105]
found that having an inspection team and a recovery plan
reduced the financial damage a cyber-attack had on SMBs
in Saudi Arabia. Additionally, their research revealed having
contact with cyber security authorities statistically reduced
the restoration time following a cyber-attack. They recommended that SMBs should focus more on certain cyber security practices that can decrease the impacts of cyber security
attacks. Carias et al. [18] claimed that cyber resilience was
a more holistic approach which SMBs should adopt and
they proposed a framework to make it easier for SMBs to
implement cyber resilience practices. However, there is no
data on the practical application of this framework.
C. RESEARCH AREAS REQUIRING MORE WORK
Several categories from the Detect, Respond and Recover
functions were underrepresented whilst some categories were
not represented at all. Underrepresented categories include
Detection Process, Security Continuous Monitoring, Analysis, Improvements, Mitigation, Communications and Recovery Planning. Categories with no representation at all include
Maintenance, Anomalies and Events, Response Planning,
Communications, and Improvements.
It is quite evident from the results above that there is limited
research on cyber resilience. Previous researchers have also
found that in practice many organisations narrowly focus on
technology defences and prevention of cyber risk but neglect
other cyber resilience building activities like risk transfer and
response planning aspects which are covered by the Respond
and Recover functions of the NIST CSF [24]. Our results indicate that, overall, little research attention has been given to
the Detect, Respond and Recover functions of the NIST CSF
all of which are part of developing cyber resilience. In 2020,
IBM Security reported that incident response preparedness
was the highest cost saver for businesses when it came to data
breaches, saving businesses on average of USD$2 million in
the event of a data breach [30]. This highlights the importance
of the Respond and Recover functions to businesses.
We believe that the narrow focus of SMB cyber security research is largely attributed to the limited quantity of
research in the area, since most of the research to date has
focused on large enterprises. Our study highlights the need
for additional research in more categories.
D. GEOGRAPHIC SPREAD AND PUBLICATION TYPES
When considering the countries in which SMB-related cyber
security research is conducted/published, the USA had the
highest number of papers overall, accounting for 43% of
publications analysed (Fig. 6). Together with other countries,
Australia was found to be underrepresented in the SMB
cyber security research literature, particularly in the academic
literature of master’s theses and doctoral dissertations. Outside the USA and Australia, the majority of the relevant
research is conducted in Europe. Africa, Asia, the Middle
East and South America are underrepresented with little to
no publications on SMB cyber security. We suspect the lack
of literature from Asia and South America may be due to nonEnglish publications not accessible to us.
FIGURE 6. Total publications by country. This figure shows the geographic
spread of literature surveyed in this study.
Table 3 shows that journal papers were the most popular
type of publication accounting for 47.5% of the literature
reviewed. They were followed in popularity by conference
papers (20%) and doctoral dissertations (17.5%) and lastly
master’s thesis at 15%. Between 2005 and 2013, there were
few publications examining SMB cyber security with an
average of one publication each year. Between 2013 and
2014 there was an increase in the number of doctoral dissertations and master theses focused on the topic.
FIGURE 7. SMB cyber security research - Publications over time. This
figure shows a gradual increase in SMB cyber security research since
2013.
It is encouraging that the number of publications on the
topic has increased in recent years. Fig. 7 shows a general
upward trend indicating a growing interest in the topic among
researchers.
E. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY USED
As shown in Fig. 8, we found that SMB cyber security
researchers have been predominantly using qualitative methods (70%) as opposed to quantitative (25%) and mixed
methods (5%). These findings are consistent with previous
research which found that a large proportion of cyber security
research is focussed on risk with most researchers using
85712 VOLUME 10, 2022
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
TABLE 3. Percentages of publication types.
FIGURE 8. Research methodology used by SMB cyber security
researchers. Most researchers are using qualitative methods to research
cyber security in SMBs.
qualitative methods to assess cyber risk [108]. Information
security is viewed as being too complex to model with quantitative methods but authors like Douglas and Seiersen [109]
strongly advocate for evidence-based research methods in
cyber security, as opposed to testimonial-based methods of
identifying cyber security best practices and effectiveness
of controls. They emphasise the role of cyber experts in
computing cyber security metrics to ensure a factual and
unbiased outcome. In 2019, 30% of organisations reported
using quantitative methods to express cyber risk exposures,
up from 17% in the previous two years. Marsh recommends
that organisations should quantify cyber security risks to drive
better informed investment, and performance measurements
thus treating cyber security risks in the same economic terms
as other enterprise risks [24].
Very few SMB cyber security researchers seem to use
mixed methods [25], [84]. Rawindaran et al. researched cyber
security technology using mixed methods to study the adoption of machine learning cyber security in SMBs. Although
most researchers adopted qualitative approaches in their studies [8], [9], [15], [16], [18], [21], [26], [33], [45], [74], [79],
[83], [93], [94], [97], [98], [101], [102], [104], [106], some
adopted quantitative approaches [28], [34], [35], [71], [81],
[82], [86], [95], [99], [100]. For example McLauren adopted
a quantitative approach to study to which extent SMBs should
implement a security framework to offer the most return on
investment [28]. Alharbi et al. [105] also adopted quantitative
methods to measure the impact that SMB cyber security practices have on cyber-attack damage. Their research indicated
that having an inspection team and a recovery plan reduced
the financial damage that a cyber-attack had on SMBs in
Saudi Arabia.
FIGURE 9. Data collection methods used by researchers. The figure shows
the findings that literature reviews are the leading method for data
collection by SMB cyber security researchers.
F. DATA COLLECTION METHODS USED
The data collection methods (Table 2 ) used by researchers
were analysed and our results in Fig. 9 show that literature
reviews were the most common method for data collection
used by researchers (43%), followed by surveys (25%) and
interviews (17%). A combination of methods was used for
7% of the research analysed with the methods least used being
questionnaires (5%) and experiments (3%). It is interesting to
note that none of the publications analysed used observation
as a data gathering method. We believe this is due to the complexity of observing user interactions with computer systems
and user behaviour profiling which requires capturing large
amounts of data, in a process that can be intrusive [110]. With
emergence of automated tools, this may however be more
feasible in the future [111].
VII. DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Many researchers of SMB cyber security use literature
reviews for data collection whilst using largely qualitative
methods. This indicates that there is limited original research
in the field, such as case studies, surveys and experiments
(all which can employ different data collection techniques
including questionnaires, interviews, content analysis, observations [112]). While original field research is difficult in
this highly sensitive area, it would be highly desirable to
better understand the issues and provide better solutions.
A literature-review-based approach also presents a challenge
VOLUME 10, 2022 85713
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
to researchers when there is limited literature particularly in
localised contexts such as in Australia.
Whilst qualitative methods are quick and cost-effective in
prioritising cyber risks, Alahmari noted the need for empirical
research on topics like cyber security risk management in
SMBs [16]. Well-established and powerful quantitative methods can be used [113], however authors such as Edgar and
Manz argue that the unavailability of objective data limits
their applicability and credibility [114], [115]. Apart from a
lack of data, the limited use of quantitative methods may also
indicate a lack of maturity of research as quantitative methods
are typically used to answer clear, predefined questions in the
advanced stages of a study [116].
Despite the increase in SMB cyber security-related publications over recent years, several authors have suggested
that more research is needed to understand the approaches to
risk management SMBs undertake alongside their responses
to cyber security threats. Such research will help highlight
SMB cyber security activities for preparedness, the decision
makers’ perceptions of risk and approaches to improve their
cyber security postures [70], [88].
Cyber-attacks are now moving beyond data breaches and
privacy concerns to more sophisticated schemes, such as ransomware, that prove very costly, disrupting entire businesses,
industries, supply chains and even nations. Some researchers
such as Baskerville et al. have recommended strategies to
ensure a balanced approach to the prevention and response
paradigms of security [117]. However, many organisations
narrowly focus on technology defences and prevention of
cyber risk but neglect other cyber resilience building activities
like assessments, risk transfer, response planning and training [24].
Very few papers analysed in this study touched on aspects
of SMB cyber security related to the security incident management and business continuity management categories of
the NIST CSF. Since the threats will always be there, whether
external or internal, cyber security risks cannot be eliminated, but a business can mitigate, manage, and recover from
cyber-attacks [69]. SMBs should not only be able to defend
against cyber-attacks in the first instance but also to return
to normal operations after an incident. Eilts [118] found
that small businesses that were able to improve their cyber
security posture were those that had committed to incorporating cyber security preparedness activities into their routine
business.
Although suggested priorities may differ, there is consensus in the literature on what is good cyber security. Bryan
[61] points out that a reliable and affordable starting point to
good cyber security for SMBs is a comprehensive information security system which contains a computer-use policy,
information security training and business virus and malware
protection [86]. Kaila and Urpo [94] suggest the useful first
steps for start-ups and SMBs should be: identifying assets and
risks; protecting accounts, systems, clouds, and data; implementing a continuity plan; and monitoring and reviewing.
Other researchers suggested SMBs should put more focus on
practices that can decrease the impact of cyber-attacks such
as investing in an inspection team and a documented recovery
plan [105]. It is not only the SMB’s responsibility, but also
technology vendors who have been challenged to incorporate
security into computing technologies to assist the likes of
SMBs with limited knowledge and access to expertise [26].
There are security responsibilities for both vendor and SMB
customer, for example for cloud-based Software-as-a-Service
(SaaS).
Table 4 below sums up the practices that are recommended
by researchers [15], [21], [24], [25], [28], [30], [33], [34],
[35], [36], [47], [59], [75], [81], [86], [94], [96], [119], [120],
[121], [122]. Practical implementation of these practices is
somewhat difficult for SMBs, which is why authors like
Carias and Borges proposed a framework for the implementation order of these practices [18].
TABLE 4. Good cyber security practices.
85714 VOLUME 10, 2022
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
TABLE 5. Publications included in our study.
VOLUME 10, 2022 85715
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
TABLE 5. (Continued.) Publications included in our study.
VIII. CONCLUSION
Continuous on-going research is required to support the
development of cyber security solutions for SMBs [15],
[102]. Research in cyber security is however rarely focussed
on SMBs, despite them representing a large proportion of
business. SMBs contribute immensely to the global economy, and in particular in Australia they make up 98% of
all businesses contributing one third of the GDP. Despite
their large number and importance, our study shows that
research in SMB cyber security is rather limited and narrowly
focussed. This is consistent with previous findings of other
researchers [15].
We also found SMB cyber security research to be concentrated in the USA despite other nations having similar
high proportions of SMBs and facing similar threats but in
different environments. This is in part due to our study only
including English publications, but it may also indicate that
not enough attention is being paid to SMB cyber security in
many countries, despite SMBs representing the backbone of
the nations and the global economy.
Our results show that significant attention and effort has
been made towards research around security strategies and
policies for SMBs, however there appears to be only limited
work in the areas of practical implementation, detection,
response and recovery.
Researchers have recommended that a deeper analysis of
how SMBs implement security controls is required [28]. Our
study found a lack of quantitative data in SMB cyber security research. In future work researchers should adopt more
powerful well-established quantitative research approaches to
investigate SMB cyber security.
When considering the popular NIST CSF, our study found
that research related to the cyber security of SMBs is focussed
on aspects of information security policies and operational
security. Topics relating to cyber security incident detection,
response and recovery are hardly accounted for in past and
current research. In Australia, 62% of small businesses have
been a victim of a cyber-attack [11]. Given that past research
has been mainly directed towards the prevention paradigms,
researchers need to focus their work more on cyber resilience
in order to ensure a more balanced approach to cyber prevention, response and recovery. Globally, governments should
invest in incentivising research and initiatives to promote the
resilience of SMBs. Cyber-attacks are inevitable, but when
they do happen, SMBs should be able to respond and recover.
There is a need for governments and academic institutions
to incentivise researchers to conduct more studies into SMB
cyber security. The findings of our work can be used as
guidance for researchers, academic and research institutions,
governments and policy makers when selecting the focus of
SMB cyber security research.
APPENDIX A
Table 5 lists the papers included in our study sorted by
year of publication. It also shows the country of publication,
methodology, data collection method used, as well as the
NIST category that it fell under when analysed with our
NCRCT tool.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Vives, ‘‘Social and environmental responsibility in small and
medium enterprises in Latin America,’’ (in English) J. Corporate
Citizenship, vol. 2006, no. 21, pp. 39–50, Mar. 2006, doi:
10.9774/GLEAF.4700.2006.sp.00006.
[2] G. Gilfillan. Small Business Sector Contribution to the Australian Economy. Parliament of Australia. Accessed: Apr. 8, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/
Parliamentary_Library/pubs/rp/rp1819/SmallBusinessSector
[3] Small Business. What is an SME? Here’s an SME Definition. Accessed:
Apr. 8, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.simplybusiness.co.
uk/knowledge/articles/2021/05/what-is-an-sme/
[4] Organisation-for-Economic-Co-operation-and-Development.
OECD Glossary of Statistical Terms-Small and Medium-Sized
Enterprises (SMEs). Accessed: Apr. 8, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://stats.oecd.org/glossary/detail.asp?ID=3123
[5] S. Ward. What Are SMEs?. Accessed: Apr. 8, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.thebalancesmb.com/sme-small-to-medium-enterprisedefinition-2947962
[6] Australian-Bureau-of-Statistics. Small Business in Australia, 2001. Australian Bureau of Statistics. Accessed: May 13, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs.nsf/mf/1321.0
[7] K. Renaud and G. R. S. Weir, ‘‘Cybersecurity and the unbearability of
uncertainty,’’ in Proc. Cybersecurity Cyberforensics Conf. (CCC), Amman,
Jordan, Aug. 2016, pp. 137–143, doi: 10.1109/CCC.2016.29.
85716 VOLUME 10, 2022
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
[8] M. Heikkila, A. Rattya, S. Pieska, and J. Jamsa, ‘‘Security challenges
in small- and medium-sized manufacturing enterprises,’’ in Proc. Int.
Symp. Small-Scale Intell. Manuf. Syst. (SIMS), Narvik, Norway, Jun. 2016,
pp. 25–30, doi: 10.1109/SIMS.2016.7802895.
[9] C. Onwubiko and A. P. Lenaghan, ‘‘Managing security threats and vulnerabilities for small to medium enterprises,’’ in Proc. IEEE Intell. Secur.
Informat., New Brunswick, NJ, USA, May 2007, pp. 244–249, doi:
10.1109/ISI.2007.379479.
[10] L. Ponemon. What’s New in the 2019 Cost of a Data Breach
Report. Security Intelligence. Accessed: Jul. 12 2021. [Online]. Available: https://securityintelligence.com/posts/whats-new-in-the-2019-costof-a-data-breach-report/
[11] ACSC. Small & Medium Businesses. Australian Cyber Security Centre. Accessed: Aug. 12, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.cyber.
gov.au/acsc/small-and-medium-businesses
[12] Better-Business-Bureau. State of Cybersecurity Among Small Businesses in North America. Accessed: May 10, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.bbb.org/stateofcybersecurity
[13] CISA. Security Tip (ST04-001). Cybersecurity & Infrastructure
Security Agency. [Online]. Accessed: Mar. 10, 2022. Available:
https://www.cisa.gov/uscert/ncas/tips/ST04-001
[14] H. Suryotrisongko and Y. Musashi, ‘‘Review of cybersecurity research
topics, taxonomy and challenges: Interdisciplinary perspective,’’ in
Proc. IEEE 12th Conf. Service-Oriented Comput. Appl. (SOCA), Kaohsiung, Taiwan, Nov. 2019, pp. 162–167, doi: 10.1109/SOCA.2019.
00031.
[15] T. Tam, A. Rao, and J. Hall, ‘‘The good, the bad and the missing: A narrative review of cyber-security implications for Australian small businesses,’’
(in English) Comput. Secur., vol. 109, Oct. 2021, Art. no. 102385, doi:
10.1016/j.cose.2021.102385.
[16] A. Alahmari and B. Duncan, ‘‘Cybersecurity risk management in
small and medium-sized enterprises: A systematic review of recent
evidence,’’ in Proc. Int. Conf. Cyber Situational Awareness, Data
Anal. Assessment (CyberSA), Dublin, Ireland, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–5, doi:
10.1109/CyberSA49311.2020.9139638.
[17] M. Syafrizal, S. R. Selamat, and N. A. Zakaria, ‘‘Analysis of cybersecurity
standard and framework components,’’ (in English) Int. J. Commun. Netw.
Inf. Secur., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 417–432, 2020.
[18] J. F. Carias, M. R. S. Borges, L. Labaka, S. Arrizabalaga, and J. Hernantes,
‘‘Systematic approach to cyber resilience operationalization in SMEs,’’
(in English) IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 174200–174221, 2020, doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3026063.
[19] S. Widup, D. Hylender, G. Bassett, P. Langlois, and A. Pinto, ‘‘Verizon:
Data breach investigations report 2020,’’ (in English) Comput. Fraud
Secur., vol. 2020, no. 6, p. 4, 2020, doi: 10.1016/S1361-3723(20)30059-
2.
[20] M. Heidt, J. P. Gerlach, and P. Buxmann, ‘‘Investigating the security divide
between SME and large companies: How SME characteristics influence
organizational IT security investments,’’ (in English) Inf. Syst. Frontiers,
vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 1285–1305, Dec. 2019, doi: 10.1007/s10796-019-09959-
1.
[21] M. Zec, ‘‘Cyber security measures in SMEs: A study of IT professionals
organisational cyber security awareness,’’ M.S. thesis, Dept. Technol.,
Linnaeus Univ., Växjö, Sweden, 2015.
[22] Y. Itai and E. Onwubiko, ‘‘Impact of ransomware on cybersecurity,’’ Int. J.
Comput. Technol., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 7077–7080, Jan. 2018.
[23] T. Tam, A. Rao, and J. Hall, ‘‘The invisible COVID-19 small business
risks: Dealing with the cyber-security aftermath,’’ Digit. Government, Res.
Pract., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 1–8, Apr. 2021, doi: 10.1145/3436807.
[24] Marsh. Global Cyber Risk Perception Survey Report 2019.
Accessed: Jun. 16 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.marsh.com/
uk/risks/global-risk/insights/global-risks-report-2021.html
[25] M. Bada and J. R. C. Nurse, ‘‘Developing cybersecurity education and
awareness programmes for small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs),’’
(in English) Inf. Comput. Secur., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 393–410, Jul. 2019, doi:
10.1108/ICS-07-2018-0080.
[26] P. A. H. Williams and R. J. Manheke, ‘‘Small business—A cyber resilience
vulnerability,’’ Presented at the 1st Int. Cyber Resilience Conf., Perth, AU,
USA, Aug. 2010, pp. 1–9.
[27] J. Hayes and A. Bodhani, ‘‘Cyber security: Small firms under fire,’’ Eng.
Technol., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 80–83, Jul. 2013, doi: 10.1049/et.2013.0614.
[28] T. McLaurin, ‘‘A study on the efficacy of small business cybersecurity
controls,’’ Ph.D. dissertation, College Bus., Innov., Leadership, Technol.,
Marymount Univ., ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 2021.
[29] Office-of-the-Australian-Information-Commissioner. Notifiable Data
Breaches Report: July–December 2020. Accessed: Apr. 5, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/notifiable-databreaches/notifiable-data-breaches-statistics/notifiable-data-breachesreport-july-december-2020/
[30] IBM-Security. Cost of a Data Breach Report 2020. Accessed:
Jun. 26, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.capita.com/
sites/g/files/nginej291/files/2020-08/Ponemon-Global-Cost-of-DataBreach-Study-2020.pdf
[31] Ponemon-Institute. (2018). State of Cybersecurity in Small & MediumSized Businesses (SMB). [Online]. Available: https://www.keepersecurity.
com/assets/pdf/Keeper-2018-Ponemon-Report.pdf
[32] Verizon. (2016). Data Breach Investigations Report. [Online]. Available:
https://conferences.law.stanford.edu/cyberday/wp-content/uploads/sites/
10/2016/10/2b_Verizon_Data-Breach-InvestigationsReport_2016_Report_en_xg.pdf
[33] K. E. Krahl, ‘‘Cybersecurity and small to medium business,’’ M.S. thesis,
Utica College, ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 2019.
[34] S. Keller, A. Powell, B. Horstmann, C. Predmore, and M. Crawford,
‘‘Information security threats and practices in small businesses,’’ (in
English) Inf. Syst. Manag., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 7–19, Mar. 2005, doi:
10.1201/1078/45099.22.2.20050301/87273.2.
[35] C. Valli, I. Martinus, and M. Johnstone, ‘‘Small to medium enterprise cyber
security awareness: An initial survey of Western Australian business,’’
Presented at the Int. Conf. Secur. Manag., Las Vegas, Nevada, Jul. 2014,
pp. 1–6.
[36] Z. Polkowski and J. Dysarz, ‘‘IT security management in small and
medium enterprises,’’ (in English) Sci. Bull.-Econ. Sci., vol. 16, no. 3,
pp. 134–148, 2017.
[37] Keeper-Security. (2019). Global State of Cybersecurity in Small and
Medium-Sized Businesses. [Online]. Available: https://www.keeper.io/
hubfs/PDF/2019%20Keeper%20Report%20V7.pdf
[38] Norton. What Is A Botnet?. Accessed: Apr. 8, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://au.norton.com/internetsecurity-malware-what-is-a-botnet.html
[39] Z. Walker. Data Breaches and Small Businesses. Rippleshot. Accessed:
Apr. 3, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://info.rippleshot.com/blog/databreach-small-businesses
[40] IBM-Security. (2019). Cost of Data Breach Report. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ibm.com/account/reg/au-en/signup?formid=urx-42215
[41] Australian-Federal-Police. Cybercrime. Accessed: May 15, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.afp.gov.au/what-we-do/crime-types/
cyber-crime#: :text=Cybercrime%20offences%20are%20found
%20in,including%20denial%20of%20service%20attacks
[42] J. Galvin. 60 Percent of Small Businesses Fold Within 6 Months of a
Cyber Attack Here’s How to Protect Yourself. Accessed: May 15, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.Inc.com/joe-galvin/60-percent-of-smallbusinesses-fold-within-6-months-of-a-cyber-attack-heres-how-to-protectyourself.html
[43] NSW-Small-Business-Commissioner. (2017). Cyber Aware. Accessed:
Jul. 6, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.smallbusiness.
nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2019-07/Cyber-Aware-full-report.pdf
[44] C. Bucolo. Get PCI Compliance Right the First Time. PCI Compliance Guide. Accessed: Aug. 2, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.
pcicomplianceguide.org/get-pci-compliance-right/
[45] R. F. I. V. Boese, ‘‘PCI DSS compliance challenges for small businesses,’’ M.S. thesis, Utica College, ProQuest Dissertations Publishing,
2020, Art. no. 27672228.
[46] Ponemon-Institute. (2017). State of Cybersecurity in Small & MediumSized Businesses (SMB). Keeper Security. [Online]. Available:
https://keepersecurity.com/2017-State-Cybersecurity-Small-MediumBusinesses-SMB.html
[47] G. Lloyd, ‘‘The business benefits of cyber security for SMEs,’’ (in
English) Comput. Fraud Secur., vol. 2020, no. 2, pp. 14–17, 2020, doi:
10.1016/S1361-3723(20)30019-1.
[48] B. Krebs. Target Hackers Broke in Via HVAC Company.
Accessed: Aug. 8, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://krebsonsecurity.
com/2014/02/target-hackers-broke-in-via-hvac-company/
[49] A. House, ‘‘The price of a cybersecurity culture: How the CMMC should
secure the department of defense’s supply chain without harming small
businesses and competition,’’ (in English) Public Contract Law J., vol. 50,
no. 3, pp. 449–470, 2021.
[50] Reciprocity. What is a Cybersecurity Framework?. Accessed: Apr. 1,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://reciprocity.com/resources/what-is-acybersecurity-framework/
VOLUME 10, 2022 85717
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
[51] National-Institute-of-Standards-and-Technology. Evolution of the Framework. Accessed: Jul. 23, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.nist.gov/
cyberframework/evolution
[52] N. Kshetri, The Quest to Cyber Superiority: Cybersecurity Regulations,
Frameworks, and Strategies of Major Economies. Switzerland: Springer,
(in English), 2016.
[53] National-Institute-of-Standards-and-Technology. New to Framework.
Accessed: Jul. 23, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.nist.gov/
cyberframework/new-framework
[54] National-Institute-of-Standards-and-Technology. NIST Releases Version
1.1 of its Popular Cybersecurity Framework. Accessed: Aug. 2, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.nist.gov/news-events/news/2018/04/nistreleases-version-11-its-popular-cybersecurity-framework
[55] A. Calder, NIST Cybersecurity Framework: A Pocket Guide. Ely, U.K.: IT
Governance, 2018.
[56] National-Institute-of-Standards-and-Technology, Fundamentals of Small
Business Information Security, 1st ed. U.S. Department of Commerce,
Gaithersburg, Maryland, 2020, pp. 1–4. Accessed: Apr. 11, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2016/NIST.IR.7621r1.pdf
[57] National-Institute-of-Standards-and-Technology. An Introduction to the
Components of the Framework. Accessed: Aug. 30, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework/online-learning/componentsframework
[58] C. Paulsen and P. Toth, ‘‘Small business information security: The
fundamentals,’’ U.S. Dept. Commerce, Gaithersburg, MD, USA,
Tech. Rep. IR7621r1, 2016. Accessed: Jul. 10, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2016/NIST.IR.7621r1.pdf
[59] Australian-Cyber-Security-Centre. Essential Eight Explained.
Australian Government. Accessed: Jul. 12, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/view-all-content/essential-eight
[60] Information Technology, Security Techniques, Code of Practice for Information Security Management, Int. Org. Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland, 2005.
[61] G. Disterer, ‘‘ISO/IEC 27000, 27001 and 27002 for information
security management,’’ J. Inf. Secur., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 92–100, 2013.
[Online]. Available: https://www.scirp.org/journal/paperinformation.
aspx?paperid=30059
[62] (in English) Information Technology—Security Techniques—Information
Security Management Systems—Requirements, Standard ISO 270001, 1st
ed. Sydney, AU, USA: Standards Australia, 2015.
[63] T. Cornelius. Understanding Cybersecurity & Privacy Best Practices.
Accessed: May 1, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.linkedin.
com/pulse/understanding-cybersecurity-privacy-best-practices-tomcornelius/
[64] Compliance-Forge. NIST 800-53 vs ISO 27002 vs NIST CSF. Accessed:
Jun. 10, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.complianceforge.com/
faq/nist-800-53-vs-iso-27002-vs-nist-csf.html
[65] D. Tranfield, D. Denyer, and P. Smart, ‘‘Towards a methodology for developing evidence-informed management knowledge by means of systematic
review,’’ in English Brit. J. Manag., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 207–222, Sep. 2003,
doi: 10.1111/1467-8551.00375.
[66] M. J. Grant and A. Booth, ‘‘A typology of reviews: An analysis of
14 review types and associated methodologies,’’ (in English) Health Inf.
Libraries J., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 91–108, Jun. 2009, doi: 10.1111/j.1471-
1842.2009.00848.x.
[67] A. Asti, ‘‘Cyber defense challenges from the small and mediumsized business perspective,’’ GIAC Certifications, SANS Inst., 2017,
p. 16, Art. no. 38160. [Online], Available: https://www.giac.org/researchpapers/38160/
[68] Deloitte. Connected Small business 2017. Deloitte Access Economics.
Accessed: Jul. 14, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www2.deloitte.
com/au/en/pages/economics/articles/connected-small-businessesgoogle.html
[69] J. Borenstein. Overview of the Marsh-Microsoft 2019 Global Cyber Risk
Perception survey results. Accessed: Aug. 5, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2019/09/18/marsh-microsoft2019-global-cyber-risk-perception-survey-results
[70] E. Rohn, G. Sabari, and G. Leshem, ‘‘Explaining small business InfoSec
posture using social theories,’’ (in English) Inf. Comput. Secur., vol. 24,
no. 5, pp. 534–556, Nov. 2016, doi: 10.1108/ICS-09-2015-0041.
[71] S. Kabanda, M. Tanner, and C. Kent, ‘‘Exploring SME cybersecurity
practices in developing countries,’’ (in English) J. Organizational Comput. Electron. Commerce, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 269–282, Jul. 2018, doi:
10.1080/10919392.2018.1484598.
[72] M. Grevey. Survey: How Prepared are Small Business Owners for Cyber
Attacks. Experian. Accessed: Apr. 1, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://
www.experianpartnersolutions.com/2016/05/survey-how-prepared-aresmall-business-owners-for-cyber-attacks/
[73] Office-of-the-Australian-Information-Commissioner. What is
Personal Information?. Accessed: Jul. 13, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/guidance-and-advice/what-ispersonal-information/
[74] N. K. Sangani, P. Velmurugan, T. Vithani, and M. Madiajagan, ‘‘Security
& privacy architecture as a service for small and medium enterprises,’’
in Proc. Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. Technol., Appl. Manag. (ICCCTAM),
Dubai, United Arab Emirates, Dec. 2012, pp. 16–21, doi: 10.1109/ICCCTAM.2012.6488064.
[75] D. J. Fehér, ‘‘Cybersecurity threats of cloud and third-party services in
small and medium-sized enterprise environment,’’ in Proc. 8th Int. Conf.
Manag., Enterprise, Benchmarking, 2020, pp. 36–41.
[76] D. Bhattacharya, ‘‘Evolution of cybersecurity issues in small businesses,’’
in Proc. 4th Annu. ACM Conf. Res. Inf. Technol., New York, NY, USA,
Sep. 2015, p. 11, doi: 10.1145/2808062.2808063.
[77] E. Osborn and A. Simpson, ‘‘Risk and the small-scale cyber security
decision making dialogue—A U.K. case study,’’ (in English) Comput. J.,
vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 472–495, Apr. 2018, doi: 10.1093/comjnl/bxx093.
[78] C. Paulsen, ‘‘Cybersecuring small businesses,’’ (in English) Computer,
vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 92–97, Aug. 2016, doi: 10.1109/MC.2016.223.
[79] J. C. Beachboard, A. Cole, M. Mellor, S. Hernandez, K. Aytes, and
N. Massad, ‘‘Improving information security risk analysis practices for
small- and medium-sized enterprises: A research agenda,’’ (in English)
J. Issues Informing Sci. Inf. Technol. Educ., vol. 5, pp. 73–85, Jan. 2008,
doi: 10.28945/996.
[80] K. Carnell. Cyber Security a Growing Issue for Small Business. Accessed:
Aug. 8, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.asbfeo.gov.au/news/newsarticles/cyber-security-growing-issue-small-business
[81] E. M. Raineri and J. Resig, ‘‘Evaluating self-efficacy pertaining to cybersecurity for small businesses,’’ (in English) Appl. Bus. Econ., vol. 22, no. 12,
pp. 13–23, 2020.
[82] J. Patterson, ‘‘Cyber-security policy decisions in small businesses,’’
Ph.D. dissertation, College Manag. Technol., Walden Univ., Minneapolis,
MN, USA, 2017.
[83] V. Burton-Howard, ‘‘Protecting small business information from cyber
security criminals: A qualitative study,’’ Ph.D. dissertation, Colorado Tech.
Univ., ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 2018, Art. no. 10928879.
[84] N. Rawindaran, A. Jayal, and E. Prakash, ‘‘Machine learning cybersecurity
adoption in small and medium enterprises in developed countries,’’ (in
English) Computers, vol. 10, no. 11, p. 150, Nov. 2021, doi: 10.3390/computers10110150.
[85] K. D. Cook, ‘‘Effective cyber security strategies for small businesses,’’
Ph.D. dissertation, College Manag. Technol., Walden Univ., Minneapolis,
MN, USA, ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 2017.
[86] L. L. Bryan, ‘‘Effective information security strategies for small business,’’
Int. J. Cyber Criminology, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 341–360, Jan. 2020.
[87] A. Santos-Olmo, L. Sánchez, I. Caballero, S. Camacho, and
E. Fernandez-Medina, ‘‘The importance of the security culture in
SMEs as regards the correct management of the security of their
assets,’’ (in English) Future Internet, vol. 8, no. 4, p. 30, Jul. 2016, doi:
10.3390/fi8030030.
[88] C. T. Berry and R. L. Berry, ‘‘An initial assessment of small business
risk management approaches for cyber security threats,’’ (in English)
Int. J. Bus. Continuity Risk Manag., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2018, doi:
10.1504/IJBCRM.2018.090580.
[89] L. Clozel, ‘‘Banks get (yet another) cybersecurity framework,
this time from G-7,’’ American Banker, 2016, no. 196. [Online].
Available: https://www.proquest.com/newspapers/banks-get-yet-anothercybersecurity-framework/docview/1828205806/se-2
[90] K. Renaud, ‘‘How smaller businesses struggle with security advice,’’ (in
English) Comput. Fraud Secur., vol. 2016, no. 8, pp. 10–18, 2016, doi:
10.1016/S1361-3723(16)30062-8.
[91] Hiscox. (2019). Hiscox Cyber Readiness Report. Hiscox, Bermuda.
[Online]. Available: https://www.hiscox.co.uk/sites/uk/files/documents/
2019-04/Hiscox_Cyber_Readiness_Report_2019.PDF
[92] R. D. Feagin, ‘‘The value of cyber security in small business,’’ M.S. thesis,
Utica College, Utica, NY, USA, ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 2015,
Art. no. 1599731.
[93] J. Hogg, ‘‘Analyzing and mitigating cybersecurity risks faced by small
businesses,’’ M.S. thesis, Utica College, Utica, NY, USA, ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 2014.
85718 VOLUME 10, 2022
A. Chidukwani et al.: Survey on the Cyber Security of Small-to-Medium Businesses
[94] U. Kaila, ‘‘Information security best practices: First steps for startups and
SMEs,’’ (in English) Technol. Innov. Manag. Rev., vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 32–42,
Nov. 2018, doi: 10.22215/timreview/1198.
[95] C. Valli, ‘‘A survey of lawyers cyber security practices,’’ Brief, vol. 44,
no. 10, pp. 34–35, 2017.
[96] J. A. Saber, ‘‘Determining small business cybersecurity strategies to prevent data breaches,’’ Ph.D. dissertation, College Manag. Technol., Walden
Univ., Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2016.
[97] W. Barosy, ‘‘Successful operational cyber security strategies for small
businesses,’’ Ph.D. dissertation, College Manag. Technol., Walden Univ.,
Minneapolis, MN, USA, ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 2019.
[98] T. Al-Jumaili, ‘‘Exploring the information security policies and practices
required by small and medium-sized IT enterprises,’’ Ph.D. dissertation,
Colorado Tech. Univ., Colorado Springs, CO, USA, ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 2018, Art. no. 10975031.
[99] S. Armenia, M. Angelini, F. Nonino, G. Palombi, and M. F. Schlitzer,
‘‘A dynamic simulation approach to support the evaluation of cyber risks
and security investments in SMEs,’’ (in English) Decis. Support Syst.,
vol. 147, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 113580, doi: 10.1016/j.dss.2021.113580.
[100] M. Benz and D. Chatterjee, ‘‘Calculated risk? A cybersecurity evaluation
tool for SMEs,’’ (in English) Bus. Horizons, vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 531–540,
Jul. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.bushor.2020.03.010.
[101] J. Coertze, J. van Niekerk, and R. von Solms, ‘‘A web-based information
security management toolbox for small-to-medium enterprises in Southern
Africa,’’ in Proc. Inf. Secur. South Africa, vol. 2, no. 11. Johannesburg,
South Africa: IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–8, doi: 10.1109/ISSA.2011.6027515.
[102] A. Emer, M. Unterhofer, and E. Rauch, ‘‘A cybersecurity assessment model for small and medium-sized enterprises,’’ (in English)
IEEE Eng. Manag. Rev., vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 98–109, Jun. 2021, doi:
10.1109/EMR.2021.3078077.
[103] Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity,
National-Institute-of-Standards-and-Technology, Gaithersburg, MD,
USA, Apr. 16, 2018, doi: 10.6028/NIST.CSWP.04162018.
[104] L. Mercl and J. Horalek, ‘‘SIEM implementation for small and midsized business environments,’’ J. Eng. Appl. Sci., vol. 14, no. 9,
pp. 10497–10501, Jan. 2020, doi: 10.36478/jeasci.2019.10497.10501.
[105] F. Alharbi, M. Alsulami, A. Al-Solami, Y. Al-Otaibi, M. Al-Osimi,
F. Al-Qanor, and K. Al-Otaibi, ‘‘The impact of cybersecurity practices on
cyberattack damage: The perspective of small enterprises in Saudi Arabia,’’
(in English) Sensors, vol. 21, no. 20, p. 6901, Oct. 2021.
[106] M. S. Gordon, ‘‘Economic and national security effects of cyber attacks
against small business communities,’’ M.S. thesis, Utica College, Utica,
NY, USA, ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 2018, Art. no. 10935780.
[107] Resilience, Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary, Merriam-Webster,
Springfield, MA, USA, 2020.
[108] J. Pamula, S. Jajodia, P. Ammann, and V. Swarup, ‘‘A weakest-adversary
security metric for network configuration security analysis,’’ in Proc. 2nd
ACM Workshop Quality Protection (QoP), New York, NY, USA, 2006,
pp. 31–38, doi: 10.1145/1179494.1179502.
[109] D. W. A. Hubbard and R. A. Seiersen, How to Measure Anything in
Cybersecurity Risk. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2016.
[110] S. Ouaftouh, A. Zellou, and A. Idri, ‘‘User profile model: A user
dimension based classification,’’ in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Intell. Syst.,
Theories Appl. (SITA), Rabat, Morocco, Oct. 2015, pp. 1–5, doi:
10.1109/SITA.2015.7358378.
[111] J. A. Iglesias, P. Angelov, A. Ledezma, and A. Sanchis, ‘‘Creating evolving user behavior profiles automatically,’’ (in English) IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Data Eng., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 854–867, May 2012.
[112] M. Balnaves and P. Caputi, Starting the Inquiry: But What Happened
then?. London, U.K.: SAGE, 2001.
[113] M. A. McQueen, W. F. Boyer, M. A. Flynn, and G. A. Beitel, ‘‘Quantitative cyber risk reduction estimation methodology for a small SCADA
control system,’’ in Proc. 39th Annu. Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci. (HICSS),
Kauai, HI, USA, 2006, p. 226, doi: 10.1109/HICSS.2006.405.
[114] Y. Cherdantseva, P. Burnap, A. Blyth, P. Eden, K. Jones, H. Soulsby,
and K. Stoddart, ‘‘A review of cyber security risk assessment methods
for SCADA systems,’’ (in English) Comput. Secur., vol. 56, pp. 1–27,
Feb. 2015.
[115] T. W. A. Edgar and D. O. A. Manz, Research Methods for Cyber Security.
Cambridge, MA, USA: Elsevier, 2017.
[116] B. Pritha. What Is Quantitative Research? | Definition, Uses & Methods.
Accessed: May 22, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.scribbr.com/
methodology/quantitative-research/
[117] R. Baskerville, P. Spagnoletti, and J. Kim, ‘‘Incident-centered information
security: Managing a strategic balance between prevention and response,’’
(in English) Inf. Manag., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 138–151, Jan. 2014, doi:
10.1016/j.im.2013.11.004.
[118] D. Eilts, ‘‘An empirical assessment of cybersecurity readiness and
resilience in small businesses,’’ Ph.D. dissertation, College Comput. Eng.,
Nova Southeastern Univ., Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 2020, Art. no. 27831857.
[119] E. L. Opitz, ‘‘Cybersecurity for the board of directors of small and
midsized businesses,’’ (in English) Board Leadership, vol. 2018, no. 159,
pp. 4–5, Sep. 2018, doi: 10.1002/bl.30115.
[120] Canon. The Canon Business Readiness Index—Security. Accessed:
Jul. 20, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.canon.com.au/business
insights/business-readiness-index-2018-security
[121] I. Pagura, ‘‘Law report: Small business and cyber security,’’ J. Austral.-
Traditional Med. Soc., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 38–39, 2020.
[122] G. Gilead, ‘‘Managing cybersecurity governance,’’ Governance Directions, vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 267–270, 2019.
[123] M. Nycz, M. J. Martin, and Z. Polkowski, ‘‘The cyber security in SMEs
in Poland and Tanzania,’’ in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Electron., Comput. Artif.
Intell. (ECAI), Jun. 2015, pp. 25–27, doi: 10.1109/ECAI.2015.7301182.
ALLADEAN CHIDUKWANI was born in Gokwe,
Zimbabwe, in 1983. He received the Advanced
Diploma degrees in information technology and
technology education from the Chinhoyi University of Technology, Chinhoyi, Zimbabwe, in
2004 and 2005, respectively, and the master’s
degree in IT management from Murdoch University, Perth, WA, in 2017, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in cyber security.
From 2006 to 2020, he has worked in numerous
roles, including a network systems administrator, a technical it trainer,
an assistant training manager, a technology training officer, and an IT security consultant. He provides cyber security mentoring for small-mediumbusinesses through an Australian government funded project delivered by
Belmont Enterprise Centre. He also casually lectures the cyber security
bootcamp course at The University of Western Australia as well as penetration testing courses at the Australian Government’s Vocational Education
Training (VET) Institution South Metro TAFE. His research interest includes
cyber security in small-to-medium sized businesses. He is a member of the
Australian Information Security Association (AISA). He is also a Technical
Reviewer for Packt Publishing’s CompTIA Server + and Security + books.
SEBASTIAN ZANDER received the Ph.D. degree
in telecommunications engineering from the
Swinburne University of Technology, Australia,
in 2010. He is currently a Lecturer at Murdoch University. Previously, he has worked as a
Research Fellow at the Swinburne University of
Technology and a Scientist at Fraunhofer FOKUS,
Germany. He has coauthored the Wiley book Information Hiding in Communication Networks, over
50 peer-reviewed journal and conference papers,
two IETF RFCs, and one patent held by Hitachi Ltd. His research interests
include cyber security and networking, in particular information hiding
and covert channels, network traffic classification, network measurement,
transport protocols, and IPv6.
POLYCHRONIS KOUTSAKIS (Senior Member,
IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in electronic and
computer engineering from the Technical University of Crete, Greece. From July 2006 to December 2008, he was an Assistant Professor at the
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department,
McMaster University, Canada. In January 2009,
he joined the School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Technical University of Crete,
where he received tenure as an Associate Professor, in 2014. In January 2016, he joined Murdoch University. He has authored
more than 120 peer-reviewed papers and is the co-inventor of one U.S.
patent acquired by Blackberry Ltd. He has been honored three times as an
Exemplary Editor of the IEEE Communications Society, for his work as an
Editor of the IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS journal. He has
served as the General Chair for the IEEE WoWMoM 2018.
VOLUME 10, 2022 85719
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose
The good, the bad and the missing: A
Narrative review of cyber-security implications for
australian small businesses
Tracy Tam∗
, Asha Rao, Joanne Hall
RMIT University, 124 Latrobe St, Melbourne 3000, Australia
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 26 November 2020
Revised 21 May 2021
Accepted 21 June 2021
Available online 25 June 2021
Keywords:
Cyber-security
Small business
SME
Security culture
Literature review
a b s t r a c t
Small businesses (0–19 employees) are becoming attractive targets for cyber-criminals, but
struggle to implement cyber-security measures thatlarge businesses routinely deploy.There
is an urgent need for effective and suitable cyber-security solutions for small businesses as
they employ a signifcant proportion of the workforce.
In this paper, we consider the small business cyber-security challenges not currently addressed by research or products, contextualised via an Australian lens. We also highlight
some unique characteristics of small businesses conducive to cyber-security actions.
Small business cyber-security discussions to date have been narrow in focus and lack reusability beyond specifc circumstances. Our study uses global evidence from industry, government and research communities across multiple disciplines. We explore the technical
and non-technical factors negatively impacting a small business’ ability to safeguard itself,
such as resource constraints, organisational process maturity, and legal structures. Our research shows that some small business characteristics, such as agility, large cohort size, and
piecemeal IT architecture, could allow for increased cyber-security.
We conclude that there is a gap in current research in small business cyber-security. In
addition, legal and policy work are needed to help small businesses become cyber-resilient.
1. Introduction
Businesses around the world are under pressure to use and
adopt technology, with the COVID-19 pandemic accelerating
this need ABC News (2020). At the same time, cyber-crimes
are becoming increasingly sophisticated Symantec (2019) with
the Australian Government Australian Government (2016) estimating the cost of cyber-crime to the Australian economy at over AU$15 billion annually. Small businesses employ nearly half of the Australian private sector workforce
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: tracy.tam@student.rmit.edu.au (T. Tam).
Department of Parliamentary Services (2018) and need to be
supported against cyber-criminals.
Anecdotes Armstrong (2019); Bainbridge and Florance (2020b); BBC News (2019), industry Hiscox (2019);
Symantec (2019) and government Australian Cyber Security
Centre (2019c) studies indicate that small businesses and
individuals are increasingly becoming cyber-crime targets.
A small business can lose data and customers, and incurs
compliance penalties from a cyber-security incident. These
penalties include fnes greater of 4% of global turnover or 20
million for non-compliance to the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) Council of The European Union (2016) in
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2021.102385
2 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
the European Union, and levies up to US$1.8 million per
violation Azar (2020) of HIPAA Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (2018) in the US. In Australia, most small
businesses with less than AU$3 million turnover are exempt
from the Privacy Act Offce of Parliarmentary Counsel (2019),
but this exemption may not remain in the future Kelkar and
Rao (2013); Newbury (2017). Beyond these penalties, the
importance and practicalities of small businesses preparing for and recovering from cyber-incidents are still poorly
articulated and communicated.
Previous research has considered the Australian small
and medium enterprise (SME) cyber-security situation from
different perspectives. Valli et al Valli et al. (2014) survey
Western Australian SMEs and call for cyber-security education for SMEs, while Dojkovki et al. Dojkovski et al.
(2007, 2010, 2006) highlight the infuence of Australian
culture on SME cyber-security. Internationally, reviews of
SME cyber-security (albeit with different size defnitions)
emphasise ineffective security management practices
Alahmari and Duncan (2020) and differences between
SMEs and large corporations Heidt et al. (2019); Osborn and
Simpson (2017). Other research offers global insights into
culture Ruhwanya and Ophoff (2019), strategies Bryan (2020),
policies Almeida et al. (2018) and specifc technologies
Salleh et al. (2018). Several surveys on cyber-security, for
example Australian Cyber Security Centre and Australian
Signals Directorate (2020); Cynch Security et al. (2021);
NSW Government (2017), focus on self-reported data on
cyber-security from Australian SMEs.
This paper uses existing global research as well as evidence
from multiple disciplines to identify gaps and opportunities
for Australian small business cyber-security. We look in detail at the characteristics of Australian small businesses that
may be impeding their cyber-security posture. We fnd that
certain characteristics could help small businesses better secure themselves.
The defnition we use here, of 0–19 employees, covers a
signifcant proportion of business communities around the
world. In 2015, around 29 million US frms employed 0–19 employees Luque et al. (2019); US Census (2015), while in 2019,
in the UK over 98% of private sector businesses employed 0–
49 people British Crown (2019). Thus, this research has relevance to small businesses from other countries with similar
societal profles to Australia Hofstede (2001); Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (2018),
since human owners run small businesses Kickul and
Gundry (2002); Moran (1998).
This paper is structured as follows: In the next section we
examine the background to business cyber-security and the
Australian small business context. Section 3 looks at existing
review articles and compares them to our study. Section 4 discusses the diffculties in research and data collection for small
business cyber-security. Section 5 looks at the constraints
faced by small businesses in implementing cyber-security,
while Section 6 highlights potential opportunities that unique
small business characteristics present with respect to cybersecurity. We end with a conclusion and suggestions for future
work.
2. Background to small business
cyber-security
Small business cyber-security has some commonalities with
large business cyber-security. The traditional aim of cybersecurity is to protect business IT infrastructure, and the information essential for the business’ day to day operations. However evidence has since emerged that the beneft of business
cyber-security extends beyond this, to its people, processes
and assets.
The cyber-security industry is currently worth over US$100
billion globally IDC (2019). While cyber-security previously
focused on maintaining the confdentiality, integrity and
availability Kaur and Mustafa (2013) of information systems
and data, current best practice includes non-technical aspects such as the people using the information (security
culture) Cheng et al. (2013); Sawaya et al. (2017). A onesize-fts-all cyber-security solution does not exist Bernik and
Prislan (2016); D’Arcy and Hovav (2009); Von Solms and
Von Solms (2004). Large businesses have adopted a variety of measures to secure their information and IT assets
Deloitte (2019b) against cyber-security threats.
The benefts of securing a business extends beyond protecting the assets owned directly by the business. The disruptions to individuals from data breaches such as Equifax
115th Congress Oversight & Government Reform Committee (2018) and Ticketmaster Chau (2018) highlight the societal
cost. The fnancial cost of an incident can severely disrupt
the personal lives of small business owners, putting livelihoods in jeopardy Bainbridge and Florance (2020a). The high
level of codependency between people, technologies and processes has resulted in modern security standards/frameworks
including “processes, organisational structures, policies and
procedures, information fows, culture and behaviors, skills
and infrastructure” (ISACA, 2019b, P.13).
2.1. The australian small business context
In Australia, over 40% of private sector employment is from
micro (0–4 employees) and small (5–19 employees) businesses
Department of Parliamentary Services (2018). The Australian
Bureau of Statistics (ABS) defnes a small business as one with
0–19 employees Australian Bureau of Statistics (2019). In 2016,
42% of Australian small businesses believed limiting online
presence protected their business NSW Government (2017).
In the 2018/19 fnancial year, only 40.3% of small businesses
received orders via the Internet1 Australian Bureau of Statistics (2020b).
Technology avoidance is no longer a feasible strategy for
managing cyber-security risks. Online sales are becoming
more attractive, infuenced by market forces and offcial bodies Australian Productivity Commission and New Zealand Productivity Commission (2019) with the social distancing requirements of COVID-19 only hastening this ABC News (2020);
State Government of Victoria (2020).
1 Note: This includes any sale of services or goods that have been
committed to/ordered via the Internet.
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 3
Table 1 – Existing Literature, Reviews and Focus Comparison on Small Business Cyber-security. (!denotes areas addressed.
˜denotes areas partially addressed. Blank denotes areas not addressed.) See page 5 for criteria used for comparison.
Paper Literature
Type
Focus A B C D E
Alahmari &
Duncan Alahmari
and Duncan (2020)
Academic Review ! ˜
Heidt et al. Heidt
et al. (2019)
Academic IT Security
Investment
˜
Suryotrisongko & Musashi
Suryotrisongko and
Musashi (2019)
Academic Cyber-security
Research
Taxonomy
Review
˜ ˜
Salleh et al. Salleh
et al. (2018)
Academic Cloud Adoption
in SME
˜
Our Paper Academic &
Industry
Small Business
Cyber-security
! ! ! ! !
With nearly half of Australian small businesses allocating
less than AU$500 annually to cyber-security Australian Cyber Security Centre (2019c), they cannot afford cyber-security
expertise. Without external help, small businesses cannot
secure themselves, and not just in times of emergency
Woschke et al. (2017).
3. Existing reviews
There is considerable literature, both academic and industry, on small and medium business (or SME) cyber-security.
Here we identify the literature examining cyber-security challenges.
3.1. Search method
A keyword search was conducted within 5 academic search
engines, namely Scopus, ProQuest, Science Direct, SpringerLink and IEEE Xplore. The keywords used were kept broad
to maximise the number of results returned and constructed
from the core concepts of “small business”, “cyber-security”
and “literature review”. These are listed below:
1. Small business - “small business”, “small enterprise” or
“SME”.
2. Cyber security - Various spellings of “cyber-security”, “IT
security” or “information security”.
3. Literature review - “review” or “survey” with “literature”
The keyword pertaining to “literature review” (3) was replaced with a search flter of review articles where this option
was offered by the database. Where possible, the search was
limited to title, abstract and keywords. To ensure relevance
to today’s context, the search was restricted to publications
dated on or after 2016. No fltering was done based on journal
or conference ranking.
Due to the general nature of the keywords, the initial
searches returned a total of 2759 papers. Each of these papers was examined to determine whether the primary focus was small business (or SME) cyber-security. Most importantly, we looked for papers that exclusively discussed
their cyber-security topic in a small business/SME context,
rather than treating the cohort as a sub-discussion. Based on
this criteria 22 papers were shortlisted. A detailed examination of these papers gave us one very relevant review paper
Alahmari and Duncan (2020), and three partially relevant papers Heidt et al. (2019); Salleh et al. (2018); Suryotrisongko and
Musashi (2019).
3.2. Comparing research aims
Table 1 compares the aims of our paper to the selected review
papers, based on the following contexts:
A Restricts context to small business.
B Critically examines landscape of existing small business
cyber-security research.
C Examines potential technical issues with small business
use of cyber-security solutions.
D Examines potential human issues for small business.
E Identifes structural opportunities for small businesses.
From Table 1, the shortlisted reviews do not distinguish small
business as a separate cohort, despite the large proportion
of small businesses present in global economies. Small business is often grouped together with medium businesses in the
wider cyber-security context. In this article, we examine the
problems arising from such grouping.
Alahmari and Duncan Alahmari and Duncan (2020) provide an overview of existing research on cyber-security risk
management within the SME cohort. They identify lack
of skills/knowledge, lack of appropriate management behaviours and sub-par defence as common themes, but do not
explore how such situations arise. In this paper, we trace these
symptoms back to possible contributing factors, which could
enable better security solutions.
Heidt et al. Heidt et al. (2019) point out that differences
between SME and their larger cousins potentially contributes
to diffculties in generalising cyber-security results to SMEs.
They fnd that data is often obtained from non-representative
enterprises (e.g. larger or industry specifc groups). We re-
4 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
examine the sampling issue within the industry context and
fnd this trend extends beyond academia to industry and government. Given the lack of industry standard terminologies,
we discuss how both cyber-security self-reporting and lack of
agreed defnitions are contributing to confusion.
As demonstrated by Suryotrisongko & Musashi
Suryotrisongko and Musashi (2019), there are a wide variety of topic areas and technologies within the study
of cyber-security. Reviews that focus on specifc topics Almeida et al. (2018); Bryan (2020); Ruhwanya and
Ophoff (2019); Salleh et al. (2018) provide little room for
exploration of alternative solutions, e.g. a technical problem
solved via a process. In this paper, we explore cross feld
opportunities in the context of small business cyber-security.
In conclusion, there are no broad-based reviews exploring
small business organisational characteristics that can impact
their cyber-security posture, both negatively and positively.
We address these gaps in this paper.
4. Research data challenges
Given the importance of micro/small business in global
economies, there is limited research into the cyber-security
posture of, and corresponding solutions for small businesses
in the 0–19 employee range. While there is much research
in large enterprise cyber-security from various countries, the
transferability of this research to small business is problematic.
Each developed country is at a different stage in the
small business cyber-security research journey. In the USA,
CISA (Cyber-security and Infrastructure Security Agency) conducted an online survey in 2019, on providing assistance with
cyber-security issues, to small businesses US Small Business
Administration (2019), but results are still awaited. In Europe,
Eurostat breaks down enterprise size across multiple variables
in its most recent 2020 ICT Security in Enterprise security report Eurostat (2020a). Businesses with 0–9 employees are excluded from the above Eurostat report, highlighting the research data gap within the small business cohort. This lack
of inclusion also occurs in the Australian Bureau of Statistics’
business characteristics surveys Australian Bureau of Statistics (2019). These surveys ask IT and cyber-security questions,
but explicitly exclude non-employers/sole traders from the respondent pool.
The cyber-security surveys conducted in Australia include:
• The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) annual business
characteristics survey asks detailed IT usage and cyber incident questions Australian Bureau of Statistics (2019).
• The NSW small business commissioner CyberAware survey studied SME cyber-security NSW Government (2017) in
2017, in collaboration with various small business related
commissions around Australia.
• The Australian Cyber Security Centre’s (ACSC) online survey in 2019, looked at the usage of IT, security incidents and
knowledge Australian Cyber Security Centre (2019c).
Each of the above surveys has its own focus, producing
results within its own scope. Some of these scopes overTable 2 – Small Business Self-Reported Breach Results.
Source Percentage of
respondents answering
affrmative/neutral for
experiencing breaches
Reference
ACSC Small
Business Survey
62% Australian Cyber
Security
Centre (2019c)
Business
Characteristics
Survey
Micro Businesses:
8.7%(+17.4% “Don’t know”)
Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2019)
Small Businesses:
13.4%(+17.1% “Don’t know”)
lap. Some results appear to contradict others. For example,
in answer to whether small businesses have encountered a
breach/attack/cyber-crime, the percentage of people that answered in the affrmative varied based on the survey (Table 2).
The discrepancies are not necessarily due to deliberate actions or errors. They appear to be a symptom of the diffculty
in reaching and obtaining comparable data from the disparate
and technically inexperienced cohort that is small business.
Discrepancies in the survey results also extend past national borders. In the Hiscox report Hiscox (2019), the average business cyber-security spend in European countries
for organisations with 9 or less employees was US$7,000.
In contrast, the ACSC survey Australian Cyber Security Centre (2019c) found close to half of Australian small businesses
spent less than AU$500 annually on cyber-security. This order
of magnitude difference in expenditure from seemingly similar socio-economic cohorts requires further analysis. While
there is speculation Sommestad et al. (2014) that complexity
within the cyber-security feld accounts for the disparity in results, it is possible these are due to challenges in getting accurate data from small businesses.
4.1. The elusive cohort
The inability to gather data from diverse small businesses is a signifcant barrier to cyber-security research
Abid et al. (2011); Deloitte Australia (2016); Gupta and Hammond (2005); Osborn and Simpson (2017); Valli et al. (2014).
Consistently low response rates to broad-based voluntary surveys highlight the diffculty in obtaining a comprehensive
sample. This is exacerbated by a lack of public domain data,
especially where mandatory breach reporting regulations are
immature. There is dis-incentive to self-reporting due to fear
of reputational damage US Government (2018), given the low
possibility of prosecution (United Nations Offce on Drugs and
Crime, 2013, Fig 6.7).
This diffculty in reaching the small business cohort could
result in convenience sampling, which is known to introduce
its own set of limitations and challenges Acar et al. (2019);
Kam et al. (2007). The impact and bias arising from such sampling must be accounted for and discussed in research fndings.
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 5
Table 3 – Small Business Defnitions Around the World .
Offcial
Business
Labels
0
Employees
Micro
Business
Small Business Sources
Australia Sole
Traders
0-4 5-19 Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2001)
UK NoEmployee
Business
1-9 10-49 British Crown (2015)
European
Union1
Not
Applicable
0-9 10-49 Eurostat (2020b)
US Not
Applicable
Not
Applicable
<250 or
1500 or industry specifc
annual
receipt2
U.S. Small Business
Administration (2017)
1 Prior to 2020, all European Union data includes the UK. Any data 2020 and beyond, does not include UK statistics. Where relevant, this is noted
in the discussion. 2 Industry dependent.
4.2. Disparate technical terms
Numerous industry cyber-security reports address the gap
in business cyber-security Deloitte (2019b); Hiscox (2019);
Ponemon Institute and IBM Security (2019); Symantec (2019);
Vistage et al. (2018). However, there are few standard defnitions, structures and classifcations within cyber-security.
Data and fndings are often adhoc, incomplete and focused
on headline worthy items. For example, Symantec reports
Symantec (2019) that globally, in 2018, small and medium
businesses were more likely to be hit with “Formjacking”. Formjacking is Symantec’s term for “use of malicious JavaScript
code to steal credit card details and other information from
payment forms on the checkout web pages of e-commerce
sites” Symantec (2019). Formjacking is a subset of code injection attacks Watson et al. (2018), where code is injected for various purposes, and not just on e-commerce sites. The use of
specialised terms such as “formjacking” makes comparisons
between different reports diffcult.
4.3. Size does matter
The differing defnitions of small buisness worldwide makes
data comparison diffcult, see Table 3.
Each research entity adopts the local small business convention or presents a brand new defnition Deloitte Australia (2016). This disparity across the globe changes the
context of fndings. Clearly, an organisation managing 200
employees operates and communicates very differently
to one with less than 10 employees Bales et al. (1951);
Cruz et al. (1997); Steinheider and Al-Hawamdeh (2004). Given
the signifcant infuence communication and human factors
have on attacks such as phishing, email fraud, etc, size matters in any cyber-security discussion.
Few researchers acknowledge the potential complexity of
the large range of small business sizes. The Ponemon Institute’s data breach report Ponemon Institute and IBM Security (2019) extrapolates small business data breach costs from
incident costs for businesses employing 500–1000. This cost
fgure is discussed as the cost for “smaller organisations”. The
bundling of small businesses with larger (in size) cohorts hampers the ability to action the lessons learnt.
4.4. Self-Reporting fallacies
Self-reporting of data is another problem. The accuracy of
self-reported cyber-incidents by small business owners needs
examining. Non-technical persons fnd it diffcult to report
subtle cyber attacks. In addition, there are psychological
self-reporting biases Donaldson and Grant-Vallone (2002);
Fisher and Katz (2000). Thus, self-reported breaches can only
be a starting point data set for analysis.
Self-reporting surveys require business owners to be aware
of cyber breaches. Common detectable symptoms of an incident, from a non-technical user’s perspective, are unavailability of computer systems or data. For example, ransomware
renders a computer unusable. Many attacks have no obvious symptoms. Active monitoring is required for subtle attacks such as data ex-fltration, man in the middle, spyware
etc. System owners may not be aware of a breach for months
or even years Ponemon Institute and IBM Security (2019);
Redscan (2019); US Government (2018). While large enterprises can detect subtle attacks using active traffc monitoring systems, few small businesses can afford this monitoring
Australian Cyber Security Centre (2019c). The under-detection
can be exacerbated by the lack of technical knowledge among
small business owners (see Section 5.2).
In Australia,the Privacy Act,the main legislation governing
data, does not apply to organisations with less than AU$3 million annual turnover Offce of Parliarmentary Counsel (2019),
i.e. most Australian small businesses. As such there are no
legislative repercussions or fnancial incentives to report any
breaches or cyber-incidents. Embarrassment in victims of online fraud Emami et al. (2019) is another powerful reason for
Australian small businesses not reporting incidents.
Symantec Symantec (2019) avoids this self-reporting gap by
using known threat detection software installed within an end
user’s computer. Eliminating human interaction increases accuracy by recording incident details automatically. However,
the proprietary nature of this software and reporting results
6 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
in only Symantec customers and devices being included. This
leads to a bias towards people willing (and able) to pay for
Symantec’s services. Detailed analysis and strategy design requires a more comprehensive small business sector view.
In conclusion, alternative data collection strategies are
needed to supplement existing self-reporting surveys.
4.5. Business versus IT perspectives
The under-representation of non-technical respondents in
online surveys deserves scrutiny. Studies targeting technically
savvy businesses often reach very different conclusions to
those including a broader range.
Cyber-security research relies heavily on online surveys
due to logistical ease, and the assumption that potential respondents use the internet for business purposes. In contrast,
less than 40% of Australian small and micro-businesses used
the internet for business development or monitoring market
information in the 2017-18 fnancial year Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2019).
Self-selection bias is enhanced by a particular group’s
comfort level to a survey method. More respondents are
likely to complete surveys that use familiar technology
Boynton (2004). Cyber-security studies tracking industry
breakdowns show IT/technical industry respondents are
over-represented Hiscox (2019); NSW Government (2017);
Osborn and Simpson (2017).
Challenges exist around demographic representation
in samples with online surveys as the sole method of
data collection. “Younger, male, avid Internet users, and
those with greater technological sophistication” Kwak and
Radler (2002) are more likely to complete online surveys
compared to surveys done via traditional mail. In contrast,
in 2016, over half of small business owners in Australia were
over 45 Commonwealth of Australia and Australian Small
Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman (2019).
A survey with more technically literate respondents can
introduce signifcant biases in results. Studies with input from technical experts Coertze and Von Solms (2013);
Dojkovski et al. (2010); Panjwani et al. (2017) identifed
different concerns compared to general small business
owners Almubayedh et al. (2018); Bada and Nurse (2019);
Dimopoulos et al. (2004); Laleh et al. (2013). A series of interviews from a single study Osborn and Simpson (2018) shows
that small scale IT users have constraints in security decision making that are not expected by technical security
providers. Australian small businesses in information, media
and telecommunication, and professional, scientifc and technical services categories made up less than 14% of all businesses, by business count, in 2019 Australian Bureau of Statistics (2020a).
In summary, the majority of small business owners in Australia cannot be assumed to intuitively understand the technical fundamentals central to cyber-security. Exclusively sourcing data from voluntary online surveys favours respondents
comfortable with technology. Results from surveys must account for and reconcile any gaps between sample respondents
versus small business profles, from both demographic and
technology literacy perspectives.
5. Challenges faced by small businesses
Large enterprises have been amongst the earliest adopters of
cyber-security technologies. Current business cyber-security
solutions favour these businesses in terms of scale, cost and
usage.
Today’s cyber-security lessons and conventions are a result
of early large-scale incidents e.g. NotPetya, Equifax, Wikileaks
etc affecting mostly large organisations. With new threats
constantly emerging, large enterprises are ideal customers
for vendors, with a higher likelihood of return on investment. Consequently cyber-security industry best practices,
standards and products are heavily infuenced by the needs
of larger organisations.
Small business cyber-security cannot be “cut and paste”
from large scale solutions. Resource availability, technical
landscape and operational processes of small business need
careful consideration. Small businesses face some common
challenges that need to be accounted for in cyber-security
strategies since cyber-criminals are looking for smaller targets
McDonald (2019); Smith (2016); Symantec (2019).
5.1. Technical challenges
The technical landscape of a small business can potentially be
very different to that of a large enterprise Osborn and Simpson (2017), making it impractical to apply solutions for the
larger enterprises to smaller scale users. The small business
IT technical landscape (“architecture”) in which the cybersecurity solution must function is a barrier to adopting a solution.
Current industry practice tests changes in an environment
separate from customer-facing sites and systems to ensure
the changes do not impact IT system availability for live customers. A test or staging environment is a copy that mirrors
the customer-facing (live) business system in hardware, software and confguration. Testing in a separate environment is
recommended by many application providers before software
upgrade processes Microsoft (2017a); Raul (2020). This testing
ensures unintended consequences of changes/tests do not affect the business’ live systems, keeping them “safe” and operational. A test environment can be used to conduct destructive
testing such as disaster recovery scenarios.
Cyber-security solutions designed to test a response to debilitating events require a safe testing environment. For example, denial of service (DoS) simulation tools Iyamuremye and
Shima (2018); Rapid7 (2019) simulate a service overwhelmed
with requests resulting in legitimate requests not getting
through. A DoS simulator, if implemented on a live system,
would render the business IT infrastructure, e.g. website, unavailable to customers, or worse, jeopardise overall system integrity. Live environments cannot be used for stress-inducing
tests. Consequently, businesses without a test environment
will never be able to test the full suite of catastrophic scenarios as part of their incident response training.
A test environment requires substantial technical knowledge, time and ongoing maintenance. Australian and New
Zealand small and medium enterprises spend only 6% of their
total revenue Deloitte Australia (2016) on IT. For 2016, the me-
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 7
dian Australian small business had an average turnover of
AU$125,000 Commonwealth of Australia and Australian Small
Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman (2019), translating to an annual IT spend of about AU$7,500. This budget covers all IT spend, including hardware, software, network services, IT personnel and other incidentals, making a test environment just one of many competing priorities. While cloud
technologies have reduced costs associated with test environments, the technical knowledge required is still substantial.
Less than a quarter of Australian small businesses have inhouse, qualifed IT support personnel (with roughly a third using contractors/consultants as needed) Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2019). There is no mention of small business testing environments for off-line testing in the literature.
The small business move towards cloud infrastructure and
services makes large enterprise cyber-security solutions unsuitable. Over a third of micro businesses and half of small
businesses used cloud based services in 2018 Australian Bureau of Statistics (2019). This demand is expected to increase
Deloitte (2019a) and accelerated due to the COVID19 pandemic
Gartner Inc (2020). While offcial statistics on cloud services
adoption during the pandemic are still pending, anecdotally
the uptake of third party IT services in general has increased
substantially Chiappetta (2020), many of which are enabled
through the cloud Dignan (2019). This move away from private, or on premise, infrastructure (i.e. IT equipment set up
and owned by the business) is driven by the associated set-up
and maintenance costs Deloitte (2019a), a proposition especially attractive for resource constrained smaller businesses.
Cloud infrastructure presents challenges for traditional
cyber-security products. For example, general network scanning Detken et al. (2013) assumes the infrastructure is local
and/or reachable for scanning purposes, an assumption valid
only for private infrastructure. The increasing suite of cloudbased network perimeter scanning services Intruder (2020);
Spyse (2020); Tenable (2020) require explicit input from users
on the target devices to be scanned. Targeted device scanning
is a subset of a complete network scanning solution and cannot discover private assets (e.g. printers) with external interfaces left accidentally unsecured. This potential gap could be
addressed by other technical or process remedies, and needs
further examination by individual businesses - a task requiring technical knowledge and resources that many small businesses do not have.
Scanning in the cloud is a challenge for shared computing resources. Any customer sharing the same target
computing resource will be affected if the targeted application is overwhelmed. Cloud infrastructure providers impose strict conditions on security-related testing activities
Amazon AWS (2020); Microsoft (2020), with the notable exception being Google Cloud Google (2020a).
Nearly 90% Australian Bureau of Statistics (2019) of small
business cloud users utilise software in the cloud. Many application providers explicitly prohibit activities interfering with
their service, preventing customers from pro-actively discovering any vulnerability in their service provider. Indemnity
and liability around use of an outsourced function needs
clarifcation August and Tunca (2011); Selznick and LaMacchia (2018).
It is necessary to address when testing and monitoring
of privately owned devices is permissible. Mixed-use personal and company-owned assets, e.g. mobile devices, are
common amongst small businesses Almubayedh et al. (2018);
Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA)
(2013); Osborn and Simpson (2017). Mobile device management (MDM) software Google (2020b); Harris and Patten (2014) allows businesses to monitor data and software residing on and transiting through devices. MDM can freeze certain functions and/or data, and, if needed, reset the entire device. Many large enterprises routinely deploy MDM on devices
issued to staff. The level of access that MDM requires raises
questions of the extent of non-work information shared with
work IT administrators Perez (2019) when a device is not a
work exclusive device.
To address the privacy concerns of MDM, mobile application management (MAM) offers a subset of the functions of
MDM Google (2020c); Microsoft(2017b). MAM functions require
business trade-offs and must be paired with mitigating policies based on the sensitivity of business data. This requires
expert guidance and is at odds with other revenue generating
priorities for a small business.
Clearly, re-using cyber-security solutions designed for large
scale infrastructures is not a feasible strategy for small businesses. More appropriate cyber-security products are needed
for small business given their mix of stand alone and shared
IT resources. The liability arising from small business’ use of
cloud service needs clarifcation.
5.2. Human challenges
Small business cyber-security human resources are very different to those of large enterprises. A qualifed and accountable IT department is common in large enterprises but not in
small businesses.
In a European & US survey Dimopoulos et al. (2004) less
than 30% of small businesses, and less than 5% of micro businesses, indicated existence of a security administrator or any
formal IT security qualifcations. Approximately 10–25% of
Australian micro and small businesses have no IT support at
all Australian Bureau of Statistics (2019).
In Australia, most small business support comes from external contractor/consultants, suppliers of software/hardware
or non-IT qualifed staff Australian Bureau of Statistics (2019).
External contractors are engaged for specifc tasks. They do
not undertake cyber-security risk assessments unless contracted specifcally. Suppliers only support supplied software
and/or hardware, unless an extra support contract has been
purchased. Small businesses’ constrained resources and the
low number of devices used imply support contracts are unlikely.
Cyber-security requires risk analysis and mitigation of the
entire IT system, not just individual components. The small
IT budgets of small businesses do not cover the salary of an IT
administrator Glassdoor (2019).
Furthermore, small business owners are at a knowledge
disadvantage in advocating for their cyber-security needs. In
the start-up phase of a small business, owner-managers have
to perform any functions that they cannot afford fnancially, or
haven’t had the time, to outsource or hire. As discussed previ-
8 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
ously, given small business’ small IT budget, these include being the IT support person, and by extension the cyber-security
person. Some tasks, such as cleaning, physical security etc.
can conceivably be done by a person with limited experience.
A cyber-security assessment cannot be done effectively by a
novice.
The age demographic of Australian small business owners indicates less exposure to technology. Nearly 60% of
Australian small business owners were born before 1971
Commonwealth of Australia and Australian Small Business
and Family Enterprise Ombudsman (2019) - well before publicly available Internet Taylor (2014). This technical skills gap
is refected in OECD testing Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (2019) with less than 40%
of Australian adults scoring within levels 2 or 3 (out of maximum 3 levels) of OECD’s computer problem-solving skills
scale. This percentage falls to 17.2% within the 55–65 age
group.
The timing of technology introduction places Australian
business owners at a disadvantage when dealing with cybersecurity. Assistance must be designed taking into account
this lack of experience and cater to non-technical small
business owners. However, training in a receptive format is
well received by small businesses Walker et al. (2007). In
Section 6.1 we discuss the advantages inherent in this demographic.
5.3. Organisational/process maturity
Cyber-security requires ongoing effort in education, process
and investment and is effected by the IT maturity of organisations. In Australia, approximately a third of small businesses operating in June 2015 did not survive to June 2019
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2020a). The small business
sector constantly has new entrants. Small businesses in
early inception and survival stages do not focus on processes Scott and Bruce (1987). In these early phases, owners/managers usually have direct oversight of business tasks
with formal processes coming in as the business matures and
expands. This is at odds with a well-rounded cyber defence
posture Alqatawna (2014) requiring business policies and controls. This lack of clarity on process details (for example on IT
fx times and specifc responsibilities around patching) leaves
the organisation exposed to opportunistic cyber-criminals.
Research on small business behaviour in the early stages of
business is required. Any cyber-security solutions or policies
for small business must consider that the business’ focus may
not be on the management of cyber-security processes and
rules.
5.4. Industry standards
The bewildering variety and complexity of industry standards
is a challenge that small business owners face. Some examples of cyber-security standards and frameworks include:
• NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology (2018)
• COBIT ISACA (2019c)
• ISO27001 Standards Australia Limited (2015)
• Australian Government Information Security Manual
Australian Signals Directorate and Australian Cyber
Security Centre (2020)
When used by a technical stakeholder such as a Chief Information Offcer, these guidelines and standards ft any business wishing to protect itself from cyber attackers. The base
assumption of many standards is a technically literate person being available to guide the business through analysis
and implementation. Few small businesses can justify such
a resource especially in the initial phase of setting up the
business. Simplifed versions of the above standards are available Commonwealth of Australia (2017), for example, the Australian Signals Directorate’s (ASD) Essential 8 Australian Cyber
Security Centre (2019a) and the small business cyber-security
guide Australian Cyber Security Centre (2020). However, the
range of available summarised resources vary in depth and
format. More importantly, these resources have limited comparability between each other or existing security standards.
It is unclear how a small business’ cyber-security work fts in
with other advice and standards once one list is completed.
The complex relationships between the different standards leaves non-technical small business owners with a very
low sense of self-effcacy, or sense of control. The relationship
between self-effcacy and action is a well-established driver of
human behaviour Maddux and Rogers (1983). In addition, low
self-effcacy in cyber-security could be a factor in an owner
rationalising inaction Renaud (2016).
Industry bodies have recognised the diffculties faced by
small businesses. ISACA, the governing body for COBIT, indicates small and medium enterprises will be catered for as part
of their COBIT 2019 standards ISACA (2019a). Unfortunately,to
date, this focus area is still under review and not available.
Until cyber-security standards recognise small business’
constraints, small business will fnd it hard to contextualise
cyber-security within their own business, or implement the
necessary controls.
5.5. Cyber insurance
Cyber insurance is a challenge for smaller businesses. Traditionally, insurance policies are used to protect a business
against disruption or loss, ranging from natural disasters
to theft. Business cyber insurance is a relatively new phenomenon, with many variations offered by different providers.
Various providers in Australia offer cyber insurance to their
small business customers Insurance Business Australia (2020).
Each insurer appears to require slightly different levels of
due diligence from the small business, while each policy provides coverage based on disparate internal standards and
policies BizCover (2019); Cyber Insurance Australia (2020);
Davenport (2017). Further study and research is needed to
provide clarity to small businesses around standards applied
across insurers.
Cyber insurance coverage has been called into question.
One highly publicised debate Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (2017); Satariano and Perlroth (2019) surrounds the insurance exemption for “act of war”
or “terrorism”. In most politically stable countries, a clause to
exclude coverage of catastrophic events, e.g. war/terrorism is
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 9
employed to manage underwriting exposure Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (2017). Most
insurance policy takers usually accept an act of war in a developed country to be a remote, acceptable business risk.
The effectiveness of such cyber insurance came under
scrutiny when Mondelez submitted a claim on suffering
US$700 million in damage from NotPetya malware in 2017
Satariano and Perlroth (2019). Zurich Insurance denied the
claim, citing the attack as an act of terrorism, as NotPetya
was designed to cause maximum damage as opposed to fnancial gain. The situation was further exacerbated when the US
government attributed NotPetya to Russian origins. The ongoing confict between Russia and Ukraine further strengthened
the terrorism case as Mondelez had infrastructure in Ukraine.
The decision by Zurich continues to be challenged in court by
Mondelez, and other insured companies. The issue of terrorism is so contentious that Lloyd’s of London Lloyds of London (2017) explicitly excludes terrorism related scenarios in
its cyber insurance cost analysis.
“It is diffcult to attribute a cyber-attack to a particular
group or actor” (Lloyds of London, 2017, P.17). The diffculty
stems partly from code from one malware author being reused
by another. When malware code is examined forensically, it
may contain artefacts of authors other than the criminal. For
example,the NotPetya malware contains code stolen from the
US National Security Agency (NSA) Greenberg (2018). Thus the
malware contains signatures indicative of US origin, despite
the attack being attributed to Russia. Accurate attack attribution is out of reach of the average organisation, especially
small business. This lack of attribution makes it diffcult to
prove an insurance claim as non-terrorism.
Small businesses and personal computers are often collateral damage of large scale cyber-attacks. The NotPetya
malware wiped clean 10% of all computers in Ukraine
Satariano and Perlroth (2019), along with many other international companies (including bouncing back into a company in
Russia itself Greenberg (2018)). Many small businesses were
highly likely to have been caught up in this fallout. Numerous Australian SME and large corporations were impacted by
the 2016 Petya attack NSW Government (2017),from which the
NotPetya malware is derived.
In addition to the Mondolez owned Cadbury factory in Hobart, NotPetya affected companies with an Australian presence such as DLA Piper, Maersk, TNT etc ABC News (2017);
Crozier (2018). Unfortunately,following the Australian government’s attribution of NotPetya to Russia, and NotPetya’s classsifcation as malware Taylor (2018), any Australian businesses’
with an act of terrorism insurance exception would reasonably fnd themselves not covered by their cyber insurance policy.
The battles still being fought through the international judicial systems indicate that cyber insurance is not mature
enough for Australian small businesses to use effectively. For
cyber insurance to be a risk mitigation tool for small business, signifcant industry, regulatory and assistance efforts are
needed to clarify and provide adequate coverage to small businesses in case of a breach.
5.6. Legal remediation
Despite the act of breaking into computers being covered under various legislations in different countries United Nations
Offce on Drugs and Crime (2013), cyber-criminals continue
to operate with impunity. One reason for this perceived lack
of consequences is the legal complexity of investigating and
prosecuting cyber-crimes.
Criminal and remediation processes are complicated when
the pepetrators are under a different legal jurisdiction to the
victims and properties and hence, subject to different legal processes and laws. The ease with which attacks can be
launched over the internet makes cross-jurisdictional cybercrime possible for criminals with minimal resources. Over half
of the countries responding to a 2013 United Nation’s (UN)
survey described a transnational element in the majority of
the cyber-crimes reported (United Nations Offce on Drugs and
Crime, 2013, P.117).
This cross jurisdictional complication is discussed in the
2014 Australian government Cross et al. (2014) study on online
fraud. The negative impact of transnational barriers on investigations and judicial outcomes for victims continues today
Bainbridge and Florance (2020a). Jurisdictional complications
possibly contribute to the overall low conviction rate (10%) of
police recorded cyber-crimes (United Nations Offce on Drugs
and Crime, 2013, P.172). However, international co-operation in
fghting cyber-crime is benefcial Reitano et al. (2015) in overcoming structural barriers to prosecuting international cybercrime.
The low conviction rate is exacerbated by the low rate
of reporting. Most cyber-crimes are not likely to be reported
(United Nations Offce on Drugs and Crime, 2013, P.119). In
Australia, the top 3 reasons Emami et al. (2019) for nonreporting of online fraud include embarrassment, belief police cannot fnd offender and uncertainty of right reporting
authority. Given these factors,the overall redress that actually
occurs is even smaller.
Even in the remote event a cyber-crime results in a conviction, the loss of confdentiality of data is a major issue.
Once a receiver has stolen data, this knowledge/data cannot
be removed from the receiver. Even where data can be located,the ease with which copies can be made and distributed
makes containment diffcult. One such example is the classifed data taken from the United States National Security
Agency (NSA) by an insider Bamford (2014). Despite investigations and knowledge of the locations of the document caches,
information from this breach is still available on the Internet
Szoldra (2016).
Outside of legislative penalties, there is little incentive for
Australian small businesses to report cyber-crime. With low
remediation rates and investigative diffculties, reporting to
authorities is replaced by the priority of recovering from the
cyber-incident.Without dedicated legal personnel to follow up
and navigate the complex systems involved, legal remediation
remains out of reach of most small businesses.
Substantial work is still needed on the cyber-crime legal
framework to convince small businesses that it is effective in
delivering remediation when needed.
10 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
5.7. Cost of a data breach
The gap in knowledge of the cost of inaction makes investing in cyber-security a diffcult decision for small businesses.
A small business needs to weigh up each investment decision against perceived benefts/loss. Existing data breach costing studies around the globe have primarily focused on larger
businesses Deloitte (2019b); Ponemon Institute and IBM Security (2019); US Government (2018).
Small businesses (1–49 employees) suffer an average loss
of US$14,000 per year per frm Hiscox (2019) across the US and
some European countries. Despite a low small business sample size, a US Government report US Government (2018) speculates the impact/cost of a breach on small business is possibly more devastating than for a large business due to the
loss of customers. There is no data available for Australian
businesses in the 0–19 employee range. In a survey by ACSC
Australian Cyber Security Centre (2019c), about half of small
business owners predicted it would take a few days to recover
from a hypothetical cyber attack.
Until relevant cyber-breach cost data is available, it will be
hard to persuade small business owners to invest in managing cyber-security risks Australian Government (2016). Scientifc and industry research is needed to examine ways of determining actual costs to small businesses from cyber breaches,
similar to larger enterprises Ponemon Institute and IBM Security (2019); US Government (2018).
6. Advantages for small businesses
The small business cohort has advantages over larger enterprises, despite the many challenges they face. With the right
assistance, a small business can become a less attractive target to cyber-criminals.
6.1. Small business agility
Two advantages for small businesses over their larger
counterparts are their fexibility and willingness to
learn. The COVID-19 pandemic showcased the agility
with which small businesses adapted to fuid situations Broadsheet (2020); Gallagher (2020); Gray (2020);
Khadem (2020); Longbottom (2020). Small business owners possess qualities allowing them to react with agility
Branicki et al. (2018); De Vries and Shields (2006).
The older demographic of small business owners comes
with advantages. Creative and critical thinking related digital
skills actually improve faster within older age groups with this
improvement attributed to everyday hands-on experience of
working with technology Eshet-Alkalai and Chajut (2010).
Flexibility, willingness to learn and creative thinking
are important cyber-security skills Bashir et al. (2015);
Freed (2014); Hall and Rao (2020). However small business owners, dominated by older but adventurous learners
Moran (1998); Zhao and Seibert (2006), still struggle with cybersecurity Laleh et al. (2013); Renaud (2016). Creative thinking skills cannot be used effectively when the basic information needed to create solutions is unavailable in an accessible format. Unlike conventional IT knowledge, e.g. productivity software and mass-market hardware, cyber-security
knowledge is still highly technical and inaccessible to the
public. In Australia, small business owners are largely offered adhoc cyber-security workshops and resources via disparate small business training and communication channels,
e.g. Australian Cyber Security Centre (2019b); Business Victoria (2019); Commonwealth of Australia (2017). With research
showing that cyber-security needs to be a gradual, ongoing and persuasive effort Von Solms and Van Niekerk (2013);
Vroom and Von Solms (2004), alternative formats and continuous approaches to small business cyber-security training need
to be examined.
A targeted capacity building curriculum, encompassing
both prevention and response, can be used to take advantage
of small businesses’ agility. Building practical coping skills appeals to creative problem solvers like small business owners,
without relying on formal processes Branicki et al. (2018). A
good starting point would be cyber-security advice for small
businesses focusing on prevention, e.g. password policies,
spotting phishing etc. This advice should extend to other aspects of a cyber-incident’s lifecycle such as incident response,
record keeping, technical recovery strategies etc.
Victim assistance facilities (as part of incident response)
like IDCare IDCare (2019), ACSC Report Australian Cyber Security Centre (0000), Scamwatch Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission (2019) etc do exist in Australia but
public awareness is not ubiquitous Emami et al. (2019). Increased education around crime reporting processes and
forensic practices will improve response to breaches by small
business owners.
Further research is needed to enable cyber-security education to take advantage of small business owners’ agility. Solutions need to be tailored to Walker et al. (2007), and take advantage of, the unique abilities of small business owners.
6.2. Small business networking and alliances
An alliance between small business owners would enable data
collection and advanced intelligence sharing, as well as peer
support. This real time knowledge of trending threats and attack methods would help small businesses to be vigilant to
emerging threats.
International large enterprises Abolhassan (2017);
Verizon (2019) have formed cyber-security alliances allowing members to gain advanced intelligence and work
collaboratively, and forming a cyber-security feedback loop.
In Australia, alliances between industry, government and
research such as AusCERT AusCERT (2019) and ACSC Partners
Australian Cyber Security Centre (2021) exist. Unfortunately
these alliances target organisations with dedicated cybersecurity IT personnel/budgets. For small businesses such
an alliance would provide easily accessible intelligence and
affordable skills. Yanpiboon and Schjoedt (2017).
A cyber-security alliance of small business owners could
allow law enforcement, legislators and technical support companies to respond rapidly to emerging threats. Each small
business could contribute cyber-security incidents and intelligence into a central database providing cyber-security peer
support to each other. Education and awareness act as exten-
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 11
sions of such an alliance, leading to it becoming a trusted authority on small business cyber-security.
Technical and administrative facilitators are needed to
overcome existing communication barriers between small
businesses and facilitate such an alliance. The exact facilitation and support needed to start and maintain such a new
alliance needs to be researched and clarifed.
6.3. Advantages of zero trust model
Suitable security models differ due to the scale of organisations. The low requirement for IT homogeneity makes zero
trust security models Rose et al. (2020) a prime framework
for small business. Small businesses have limited large scale
technical legacy to undo and their scattered IT operations suit
a zero trust model.
The traditional network perimeter safeguards an IT ecosystem that is relatively obstacle-free internally, leading
to the analogy of a hard shell enclosing a chewy centre
Kindervag (2016). The problem of an attacker having free reign
once a perimeter is bypassed has been demonstrated in large
scale breaches 115th Congress Oversight & Government Reform Committee (2018); Australian National University (2019).
Google BeyondCorp (2014), as well as other stakeholders
Curran (2016), have recognised the futility of safeguarding an
ever changing network perimeter SE Radio (2019); Ward and
Beyer (2014), and have adopted zero trust principles in their
services in their BeyondCorp design. The zero trust security
model Kindervag (2010) is a network model for defence that
presumes an attacker has gained access inside the hardened
perimeter. In a zero trust model, access control is no longer
performed at the network surrounding the IT systems, but focused on authentication and authorisation of user access to
individual services.
Small businesses have diffculty with perimeter defence as
they don’t own many of the IT services used. In many ways,
the zero trust architecture is one small businesses have been
managing for many years. Zero trust allows focus on individual service protection, thus limiting impacts even if an individual service gets breached.
However, small businesses need assistance with implementing a zero trust model. Each new device needs arduous processes of set-up for multiple services rather than one
perimeter Escobedo et al. (2017). Abstracting security into a
layer/functional component Cittadini et al. (2016) allows standardisation and re-use across multiple businesses. This creates an opportunity for a reusable design/platform that small
businesses can implement in their unique IT environments.
Currently there are very few products and little research
in this context. Despite implementation within large international companies such as Google and Akamai, zero trust has
yet to see signifcant momentum within the Australian business landscape. Development of zero trust IT ecosystems for
small business could bring high returns due to the large number of end users.
6.4. Open source cyber-security tools
Open source software & hardware (OSSH) is developed and
(usually) released for free by a community of software makers and hardware designers. OSSH is an option used by IT
professionals when paid IT products, including cyber-security
products, do not meet technical or cost requirements. In embracing OSSH, Australian small businesses would be following in the footsteps of Australian government authorities.
Various Australian government departments have encouraged use of OSS software as well as making software open
source in general Australian Government Information Management Offce (2011); Digital Transformation Agency (0000);
Queensland Government (2020); Victorian Government (0000).
However, a lack of technical expertise has hampered small
business’ ability to take advantage of free OSSH security solutions Cisco (2020); Lyon (2019); Welte and Ayuso (2014).
The ethos of open contribution by volunteers results in
OSSH products being released under broad licenses (e.g. GNU
general public use Free Software Foundation (2007), creative
commons licenseCreative Commons (2020) etc.) that permit
most uses. In some cases, this includes commercial use with
nothing more than attribution. OSSH has produced popular
projects such as the MySQL database, Fedora Linux operating
system, Arduino microcontroller etc which enable the development of commercial products. A variety of free OSSH cybersecurity tools are now available CyberX (2018).
However, characterising OSSH as free or low cost ignores
the overall cost of ownership beyond initial fnancial outlay
for supporting equipment and setup effort Ven et al. (2008).
Both the Equifax breach 115th Congress Oversight & Government Reform Committee (2018) and industry standards like
ITIL Alojail (2013) have demonstrated the critical role played
by post-implementation operational support in securing an IT
environment.
To enable ongoing maintenance, enterprise versions of
OSSH are sold by third party vendors including items such
as on-going support, updates, certifcations etc. For example, RedHat Enterprise Linux is based on OSSH Fedora Linux
RedHat (2020) and offers the support options that Fedora does
not. In larger businesses, where enterprise level OSSH products may not exist, in-house support is enabled by internal
staff with dedicated responsibilities. A lack of technical expertise and fnancial resources in a small business is an impediment to the use of OSSH.
OSSH presents an opportunity for technical security solutions for small business owners. OSSH provides many benefts
for small businesses including:
• On-going reviews minimising security vulnerabilities from
human error Ebart (2008).
• Reducing vendor lock-in Ven et al. (2008).
• Being part of the software community with a stake as users
in the software development Wesselius (2008).
• Encouraging good cyber-security hygiene habits by enabling adoption in the early stages of the business lifecycle.
Australian small businesses could leverage the expertise
of developers active in open source development. They could
participate in local open source communities like PyCon
PyCon AU (2021) and Linux Australia Linux Australia (0000) to
make their business needs met and their voices heard. Building bridges between the OSSH and small business communities could provide value for both.
12 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
Table 4 – Cyber-security Data Collection Practice Issues and Desired Outcomes.
Section Current Challenge Proposed Solution Proposed
Responsible
Bodies
4 & 4.1 Lack of focus Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2019); Eurostat (2020a)
on micro businesses in research.
Focused research on <20 employee businesses to
capture the operational behaviour of small
businesses.
Government;
Research
4.2 Use of novel technical
Symantec (2019) terminologies.
Standard terminologies used to ensure language
describes the same phenomenon.
Standards Bodies;
Industry
4.3 Use of disparate
Deloitte Australia (2016) grouping
sizes.
Acknowledgement of group size range impacts
in fndings.
Industry; Research
4.4 Unaccounted self-reporting bias
Donaldson and
Grant-Vallone (2002); Fisher and
Katz (2000) in results.
Social desirability and awareness adjustments
incorporated into self-reported statistics to
account for bias from collection method, both
technical and psychological.
Statistical
Collection; Research
Over reliance on surveys
Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2019); Australian Cyber
Security Centre (2019c);
NSW Government (2017) as a data
gathering instrument.
Detection based small business monitoring to
reduce reliance on self-reported statistics.
Industry;
Government
4.5 Survey instruments Boynton (2004)
favouring technically savvy
Hiscox (2019);
NSW Government (2017) cohorts.
Demographically representative respondents of
the small business landscape sourced to obtain
relevant understanding of gaps and priorities.
Government;
Statistical Collection
Note: In the rapidly evolving feld of cyber-security, research is advanced by a combination of different parties: scientifc, government, industry, journalistic etc. The“research” bodies referenced here, and in subsequent tables, include all who investigate the
cyber-security challenge in question.
Given the importance of cyber-security in business, further
research is needed to analyse the suitability of OSSH security
products into the Australian small business landscape and the
obstacles to be negotiated to remove entry barriers.
7. Discussion
There are few reviews dedicated to the small business cybersecurity landscape. Our research reveals many constraints in
small business adoption of cyber-security practices, but also
advantages in the cohort that should be leveraged.
7.1. Data collection
As Table 4 illustrates, data collection in small business cybersecurity research requires improvements in regards to scope,
consistency and respondent range.
From our review of the literature, current cyber-security research lacks representative results and insights on small business only cohorts due to being bundled with better resourced
medium businesses. Comparison between widely disparate
groups introduces diffculties in producing focused learnings
that can be applied to micro businesses and sole traders. Further research is needed on the sub 20 employee cohort to produce targeted fndings.
Our research shows that the wide variety of language
and defnitions used within the cyber-security industry poses
issues with interpretation of survey/research fndings. Mismatched cohort sizes make comparisons diffcult, and sometimes misleading. Standardisation of both group defnitions
and terminologies is needed within cyber-security research
and industry to enable useful comparison and longitudinal
use of research data.
The heavy use of self-reported surveys introduces social
desirability and awareness bias in results. Rather than relying solely on self-reported data for small business research on
quantitative matters e.g. breach rate, technology involved, we
suggest a wider deployment of detection based collection. For
qualitative research, researchers should actively account and
compensate for self-reporting bias, if possible, as part of their
results.
Finally as our research highlights, distortion in research results is worsened by the technical methods by which many
surveys are conducted. Technical data collection channels
such as online surveys, result in samples biased towards respondents comfortable with using technology. Demographic
data shows small business owners are not all technically
savvy. Surveys need to be accessible and promoted towards
both technically savvy and non-technical respondents to ensure all types of business owners are represented.
7.2. Small business challenges
In addition to the research challenges listed above that being
a small business poses many hurdles in understanding and
implementing cyber-security, as summarised in Table 5.
Our research found that small businesses tend to operate
differently from large corporations due to their size, leading
to different IT usage pattern. One phenomenon is the tendency to mix personal and business use in devices and se-
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 13
Table 5 – Cyber-security Challenges for Small Businesses.
Section Current Situation The Way Forward Best Responsible
Bodies
5.1 Lack of clarity on application user liability
August and Tunca (2011); Selznick and
LaMacchia (2018) in the event of a breach.
Clarifcation of breach liability if small business
uses an external IT service.
Professional Bodies;
Government
Small number of cyber-security solutions
that take into account mixed physical
ownership Almubayedh et al. (2018);
Australian Communications and Media
Authority (ACMA) (2013) IT environments.
Small business mode of operation research and
product development that recognises the need
for hybrid IT environments.
Research; Industry
Effective reuse of current cyber-security
solutions are prevented by existing
differences between large and small
enterprise IT architectures [Section 5.1].
Small business common IT architecture research
and tailored resources built for small businesses
leading to ft-for-purpose cyber-security tools
and advice.
Research; Government
5.2 Small business owners have several
challenges in technical knowledge to
effectively use cyber-security information
today.
Development of material suitable for small
business knowledge level and mode of learning
Government
5.3 Small businesses are likely to be in an
inception state Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2020a) with immature
processes and organisation Scott and
Bruce (1987).
Further development of standards and tools that
takes organisational immaturity into account.
Industry; Research
5.4 Industry standards Australian Signals
Directorate and Australian Cyber Security
Centre (2020); ISACA (2019c);
National Institute of Standards and
Technology (2018); Standards Australia
Limited (2015) require a high level of
technical expertise to follow.
Standards that are targeted towards a small
business audience recognising external
constraints ISACA (2019a) with a migration path
to existing full standards.
Standards Bodies;
Research; Government
5.5 Lack of clarity Satariano and
Perlroth (2019) around insurance
requirements and coverage.
Further research, product development and
guidance for small business on all aspects of
cyber insurance to enable informed choices and
adequate coverage.
Research; Government
5.6 Lack of small business self-effcacy
around legal remediation United Nations
Offce on Drugs and Crime (2013) from
cyber-crime.
Further clarifcation, research and development
around legal aspects of cyber-crime and
associated remediation for small businesses.
Government
5.7 Lack of relevant data
US Government (2018) on costs associated
with cyber breaches for small business.
Further research to clarify the cost of data
breaches for comparable small business cohort,
to enable accurate risk based decisions making
from small business.
Research; Statistical
Collection
curing these devices using traditional security solutions such
as MDM and MAM pose ethical and logistical dilemmas. The
rising use of cloud services by small business also raises questions around liability, control and visibility a small business
actually has over its IT security.
Through demographic statistics we found that small businesses and their owners are at a disadvantage in regards to
experience with and knowledge of technology. Given the older
demographic, the majority of small business owners have
spent a smaller proportion of their working lives on the internet, when compared to younger generations. This lower level
of technical literacy needs to be accounted for in training and
standards. It is unrealistic to expect non-technical people to
self-drive and implement the highly technical security standards available today.
Small businesses’ tendency to be at an inception stage
is also at odds with the process and oversight driven cybersecurity standards, with research showing early stage businesses do not have many established processes and management practices. Standards and solutions for small businesses
need to factor in this mode of operation.
The general lack of maturity around cyber insurance, judicial processes and cost data all contribute to the state of confusion in cyber-security for small businesses. The ongoing litigation between insurance providers and larger corporations
shows cyber insurance is not yet an effective risk management tool for small business. Furthermore, the lack of comparable cyber-incident data leaves business owners with little
understanding of the potential loss they are insuring against.
Compounding this are the general diffculties in successfully
prosecuting cyber-criminals, leaving small business owners
with a lack of self-effcacy in the judicial system. The low
sense of self-effcacy leads to inaction and is refected in the
low rate of reporting. Unfortunately, a low rate of reporting
leads to cyber-criminals continuing to operate with impunity.
14 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
Table 6 – Small Business Cyber-security Advantages.
Section Advantages Opportunities Best Responsible
Bodies
6.1 Agility and resilience of small businesses
Branicki et al. (2018); De Vries and
Shields (2006) in the face of challenges -
take advantage of traditional fexibility
that small businesses present.
Support Walker et al. (2007) for small business to
develop capabilities around ongoing cyber
hygiene and response to breaches.
Government
6.2 Cohort size - leverage the large number of
small businesses.
Further research into feasibility and assistance
required in forming networks Abolhassan (2017);
Verizon (2019) that can be an early warning
system within small business cohort. Sharing of
knowledge to enable peer support.
Government
6.3 Zero Trust Model Kindervag (2016) - make
use of similarities between zero trust
model and common small business
architecture.
Further technical research to clarify how the use
of zero trust principles can ft into small
business’ highly hybridised IT environments;
Identifcation of opportunities and development
of solutions to leverage overlaps.
Research; Industry
6.4 Open Source Security Products
Cisco (2020); Lyon (2019); Welte and
Ayuso (2014) - repurpose existing low cost
solutions to ft small business needs.
Further research into the possibilities and
logistics required to leverage open source
security products to match small business’
operating model and constraints, making use of
advantages Ebart (2008); Ven et al. (2008);
Wesselius (2008) that open source offers.
Research
Our examination reveals the need to better understand
small business IT usage, demographics, mode of operation
and structural constraints. By understanding the differences
and challenges involved,the discussion around cyber-security
could match small business users’ needs and expectations.
7.3. Opportunities
By taking a step back to look at small business as a whole,
our research (summarised in Table 6) found opportunities for
small business with regards to cyber-security. These opportunities take advantage of the unique landscape and characteristics of small businesses and their owners, and if leveraged,
would lead to more resilient small businesses.
Our research found a small business owner’s agility and
responsiveness could lead to better cyber-security responses.
Rather than focus on formal and process based security
standards, a more effective method would be to teach the
skills/capabilities a small business needs to both protect itself as well as respond to an incident. Focusing on the skills
needed taps into the natural ways in which small businesses
excel at solving problems.
Small businesses could use their large numbers to their advantage by establishing alliances. Cyber-security alliances are
not new and have been shown to beneft members. To date, alliances have formed between large organisations. Small business would obtain defnite advantages from such an alliance,
especially in terms of peer support, early intelligence and education.
Our research identifed a couple of technical cyber-security
solutions that could be leveraged for small business cybersecurity with the right collaboration and product development. A zero trust model, by assuming no safe network
boundaries, aligns the base IT architecture closer to the
small businesses mode of operation. By discarding a need
to ring-fence disparate IT systems, a zero trust model would
drive a realistic security architecture plan to protect small
businesses. In a similar manner, open source cyber-security
software would give small businesses opportunities both
in overcoming fnancial barriers to entry and having their
needs met.
7.4. International implications
In this study we detailed the effects of cyber-security decisions/actions by organisations (legal or otherwise) on countries outside their geographical boundaries. Within countries
with similar societal profle to Australia, such as UK and US, a
similarity in cyber-security has been observed in the evidence
produced. The parallels ranged from research approaches e.g.
survey, interviews, sole trader/micro business exclusion, to
government actions e.g. advisories, frameworks etc. These
similarities extended to small business dominance of economy, owners’ awareness of cyber-security knowledge gaps, as
well as comparable technology skill levels.
Given technology landscapes are also very similar across
these countries, it is not inconceivable that small businesses
in other countries with similar societal profles to Australia,
such as the UK and US, share similar human struggles with
cyber-security. As such any solutions shown to work in Australia would merit further examinations in other such countries.
The important role of human infuence on small business
cyber-security leads us to conclude that the small business
challenges and characteristics discussed in this paper are not
unique to Australian small businesses.
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 15
8. Conclusion
The urgent need to protect small businesses from cybercriminals is driven by increasing pressures on small businesses to use technology. Small businesses face pressure to
adopttechnology from multiple fronts, ranging from customer
expectations to world events. Through our examination of evidence from both research and industry, we have identifed
gaps in the pursuit of cyber-security for small businesses at
multiple levels.
At a data level, further efforts are needed to clarify and
improve understanding around small and micro businesses’
ways of working, their IT architecture and real world small
business breach loss statistics. The understanding must be
gained through representative small and micro business samples and communicated using standardised security terminologies, so that data and lessons can be transferred in a wider
context.
In addition, we discussed small business constraints that
impacts on small business’s ability to protect themselves.
These range from availability of technical knowledge within
the business, organisational maturity and mixed IT ownership. Uncertainties around external factors such as cyberinsurance, legal remediation and cost of cyber-incidents also
make small business decisions around cyber-security diffcult.
Through our overview approach, opportunities to apply
non-traditional solutions to cyber-security are also becoming
apparent. Promising characteristics including alliances, a new
security paradigm and open source community for helping
small businesses to build up their defences were also identifed.
With the right research and support, a more coherent understanding of small business cyber-security needs and risks
can lead to more resilient small businesses. It is through a
combination of these insights that cyber-security solutions
can be made accessible to ft better with small businesses,
rather than expect small businesses to ft into current cybersecurity solutions. Industry, government and society at large
also beneft from the reduced investigative and human costs
of cyber-incidents. Supporting small business cyber-security
has far reaching benefts, to the economy, the community and
national security.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing fnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to infuence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgement
This research is supported by an Australian Government Research Training Program (RTP) Scholarship.
Thanks to the reviewers for their comments and insight
which improved the clarity and focus of this article.
REFERENCES
115th Congress Oversight & Government Reform Committee,
2018. Congressional report, The equifax data breach, majority
staff report. https://republicans-oversight.house.gov/
wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Equifax-Report.pdf.
ABC News. Petya cyber attack: ransomware virus hits computer
servers across globe, australian offce affected. ABC News
2017.
ABC News, 2020. NT Chief minister delivers emotional address to
territorians about coronavirus shutdown | ABC News Video.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QBV1gfcectU.
Abid AA, Rahim M, Scheepers H. Experienced benefts and
barriers of e-Business technology adoption by SME suppliers.
Commun. IBIMA 2011;2011(October):1–11.
doi:10.5171/2011.7917780.
Abolhassan F. Cyber security. simply. make it happen. leveraging
digitization through IT security. 1st ed 20. Springer
International Publishing : Imprint: Springer; 2017.
Acar Y, Stransky C, Wermke D, Mazurek ML, Fahl S. Security
developer studies with github users: exploring a convenience
sample. Proc. 13th Symp. Usable Priv. Secur. SOUPS 2017
2019(Soups):81–95.
Alahmari A, Duncan B. Cybersecurity risk management in small
and medium-Sized enterprises: A Systematic review of recent
evidence. 2020 Int. Conf. Cyber Situational Awareness, Data
Anal. Assessment, Cyber SA 2020 2020.
doi:10.1109/CyberSA49311.2020.9139638.
Almeida F, Carvalho I, Cruz F. Structure and challenges of a
security policy on small and medium enterprises. KSII Trans.
Internet Inf. Syst. 2018;12(2):747–63.
doi:10.3837/tiis.2018.02.012.
Almubayedh D, Khalis MA, Alazman G, Alabdali M, Al-Refai R,
Nagy N. Security related issues in Saudi Arabia small
organizations: A Saudi case study. In: 21st Saudi Comput. Soc.
Natl. Comput. Conf. NCC 2018. Ar Riyad, Saudi Arabia: IEEE;
2018. p. 1–6. doi:10.1109/NCG.2018.8593058.
Alojail MA. ITIL usage, and use of ITIL recommended practices
and the IT outsourcing relationship quality. RMIT; 2013.
Alqatawna J. The challenge of implementing information
security standards in small and medium e-Business
enterprises. J. Softw. Eng. Appl. 2014;7(10):883.
Amazon AWS, 2020. AWS Customer support policy for
penetration customer service policy for penetration testing.
https://aws.amazon.com/security/penetration-testing/.
Armstrong D. I lost my identity to a fraudster, and it took six
years to clean up the mess. Bloom. Businessweek 2019;2019.
August T, Tunca TI. Who should be responsible for software
security? a comparative analysis of liability policies in
network environments. Manage. Sci. 2011;57(5):934–59.
doi:10.1287/mnsc.1100.1304.
AusCERT, 2019. AusCERT become a member.
https://www.auscert.org.au/become-a-member/.
Australian bureau of statistics, 2001. 1321.0 - Small business in
Australia, 2001.
https://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/1321.0.
Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2019. 8167.0 Selected
characteristics of Australian business.
https://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/
allprimarymainfeatures/C575766838376FA0CA
2573E1000E3F2F?opendocument.
Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2020a. 8165.0 - Counts of
Australian businesses, including entries and exits, June 2015
to June 2019. https://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/
DetailsPage/8165.0June 2015 to June 2019?OpenDocument.
Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2020b. 8167.0 - Characteristics of
Australian business, 2018-19. https://www.abs.gov.au/
16 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
statistics/industry/technology-and-innovation/
characteristics-australian-business/latest-release.
Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA), 2013.
The connected business - ACMA research snapshot.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=etjjds2PIN0.
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, 2019.
ScamWatch. https://www.scamwatch.gov.au/.
Australian Cyber Security Centre, Report cyber, are you a victim
of cybercrime? https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/report.
Australian Cyber Security Centre, 2019a. Australian signal
directorate essential eight maturity model.
https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/view-all-content/publications/
essential-eight-maturity-model.
Australian Cyber Security Centre, 2019b. Small business cyber
security guide. https://www.cyber.gov.au/sites/default/fles/
2019-10/SmallBusinessCyberSecurityGuide.pdf.
Australian Cyber Security Centre, 2019c. Supporting Small
Businesses The ACSC Small Business Cyber Security Guide
and Companion Materials.
Australian cyber security centre, 2020. Small business cyber
security guide.
https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/view-all-content/publications/
small-business-cyber-security-guide.
Australian Cyber Security Centre, 2021. Become a partner. https:
//www.cyber.gov.au/partner-hub/become-a-partner#no-back.
Australian Cyber Security Centre, Australian Signals Directorate,
2020. Cyber security and Australian small businesses.
https://www.cyber.gov.au/sites/default/fles/2020-07/
ACSCSmallBusinessSurveyReport.pdf.
Australian Government, 2016. Australia’s cyber security strategy -
enabling innovation, growth and prosperity.
https://cybersecuritystrategy.homeaffairs.gov.au/
AssetLibrary/dist/assets/images/PMC-Cyber-Strategy.pdf.
Australian Government Information Management Offce, 2011. A
guide to open source software for Australian government
agencies. https://www.ghdonline.org/uploads/
AGuidetoOpenSourceSoftware.pdf.
Australian National University, 2019. Incident report on the
breach of the Australian national university administrative
systems. https://imagedepot.anu.edu.au/scapa/Website/
SCAPA190209_Public_report_web_2.pdf.
Australian Productivity Commission and New Zealand
Productivity Commission, 2019. Growing the digital economy
in Australia and New Zealand. Maximising opportunities for
SMEs. https://www.pc.gov.au/research/completed/
growing-digital-economy/growing-digital-economy.pdf.
Australian Signals Directorate, Australian Cyber Security Centre,
2020. Australian government information security manual.
https://www.cyber.gov.au/sites/default/fles/2020-06/
AustralianGovernmentInformationSecurityManual%
28June 2020%29.pdf.
Azar A. Department of health and human services, Annual civil
monetary penalties infation adjustment, Vol. 85; 2020.
p. 2869–87. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/
FR-2020-01-17/pdf/2020-00738.pdf.
Bada M, Nurse J. Developing cybersecurity education and
awareness programmes for small- and medium-Sized
enterprises (SMEs). Inf. Comput. Secur. 2019;27(3):393–410.
doi:10.1108/ICS-07-2018-0080.
Bainbridge A, Florance L. Tradies frustrated by banks as business
email scam costs them $51000. ABC News 2020.
Bainbridge A, Florance L. Victims to vigilantes. ABC News 2020.
Bales RF, Strodtbeck FL, Mills TM, Roseborough ME. Channels of
communication in small groups. Am. Sociol. Rev.
1951;16(4):461–8.
Bamford J. The most wanted man in the world. Wired Mag. 2014.
Bashir M, Lambert A, Wee JMC, Guo B. An examination of the
vocational and psychological characteristics of cybersecurity
competition participants. USENIX Summit Gaming, Games,
Gamifcation Secur. Educ. 2015:1–8.
BBC News. Margaret atwood says thieves targeted Handmaid’s
tale sequel. BBC News 2019.
Bernik I, Prislan K. Measuring information security performance
with 10 by 10 model for holistic state evaluation. PLoS ONE
2016;11(9):1–33. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0163050.
BeyondCorp, 2014. Beyondcorp : A new approach to enterprise
security. www.beyondcorp.com.
BizCover, 2019. Fact sheet cyber liability insurance.
https://www.bizcover.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/
BC1243_FactSheet_CyberLiability_Nov19_FINAL-5.pdf.
Boynton PM. Administering, analysing, and reporting your
questionnaire. BMJ(Clinical Res. Ed. 2004;328(7452):1372–5.
doi:10.1136/bmj.328.7452.1372.
Branicki LJ, Sullivan-Taylor B, Livschitz SR. How entrepreneurial
resilience generates resilient SMEs. Int. J. Entrep. Behav. Res.
2018;24(7):1244–63. doi:10.1108/IJEBR-11-2016-0396.
British Crown, 2015. Small business survey 2014: SME Employers.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/414963/
bis-15-151-small-business-survey-2014-sme-employers_v1.
pdf.
British Crown, 2019. Business population estimates for the UK
and regions 2019. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/254552/
13-92-business-population-estimates-2013-stats-release-4.
pdf.
Broadsheet, 2020. Live list: Melbourne restaurants pivoting to
takeaway due to coronavirus.
https://www.broadsheet.com.au/melbourne/guides/live-listmelbourne-restaurants-pivoting-takeaway-due-coronavirus.
Bryan LL. Effective information security strategies for small
business. Int. J. Cyber Criminol. 2020;14(1):341–60.
doi:10.5281/zenodo.3760328.
Business Victoria, 2019. Small business workshops and events.
https://www.business.vic.gov.au/events.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018. Health
insurance portability and accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).
https://www.cdc.gov/phlp/publications/topic/hipaa.html.
Chau D. Ticketmaster admits customer details may have been
stolen in hack. ABC News 2018.
Cheng L, Li Y, Li W, Holm E, Zhai Q. Understanding the violation
of IS security policy in organizations: an integrated model
based on social control and deterrence theory. Comput. Secur.
2013;39(PART B):447–59. doi:10.1016/j.cose.2013.09.009.
Chiappetta M. Uber eats demand soars due to COVID-19 crisis.
Forbes 2020.
Cisco, 2020. Snort intrusion detection system.
https://www.snort.org/.
Cittadini L, Spear B, Beyer B, Saltonstall M. Beyondcorp part III:
the access proxy. login Mag. USENIX SAGE 2016:28–33.
Coertze J, Von Solms R. A software gateway to affordable and
effective information security governance in SMMEs. In: 2013
Inf. Secur. South Africa - Proc. ISSA 2013 Conf.. IEEE; 2013.
p. 1–8. doi:10.1109/ISSA.2013.6641035.
Commonwealth of Australia, 2017. Cyber security: The small
business best practice guide.
https://www.asbfeo.gov.au/sites/default/fles/documents/
ASBFEO-cyber-security-research-report.pdf.
Commonwealth of Australia, Australian Small Business and
Family Enterprise Ombudsman, 2019. Small Business Counts,
Small Business in the Australian Economy.
http://www.asbfeo.gov.au/sites/default/fles/
Small_Business_Statistical_Report-Final.pdf.
Council of The European Union, 2016. GDPR Legislative Act.
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=
CELEX:32016R0679&from=EN.
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 17
Creative Commons, 2020. Creative Commons.
https://creativecommons.org/.
Cross, C., Smith, R. G., Richards, K., 2014. Challenges of
responding to online fraud victimisation in Australia. https:
//www.aic.gov.au/sites/default/fles/2020-05/tandi474.pdf.
Crozier R. DLA Piper paid 15000 hours of IT overtime after
notpetya attack. ITNews 2018.
Cruz M, Boster F, Rodriguez J. The impact of group size and
proportion of shared information on the exchange and
integration of information in groups. Communic. Res.
1997;24(3):291–313.
Curran J. Chaffetz urges ’zero-Trust Model’ for network security.
Cybersecurity Policy Rep. 2016.
Cyber Insurance Australia, 2020. Cyber insurance Australia quote
form. https://www.cyberinsuranceaustralia.com.au/.
CyberX, 2018. Free cyberSecurity tools : The ultimate list (2018).
https://cyberx.tech/free-cybersecurity-tools/.
Cynch Security, Deakin University, RMIT University, AustCyber,
2021. Big cyber security questions for small business The state
of cyber ftness in Australian small businesses.
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/
576a6006f5e23175ba4e41d8/t/601b2bcc8724d11f1c78b95c/
1612393427067/Cynch+-+Big+cyber+security+questions+for+
small+business+-+White+paper.pdf.
D’Arcy J, Hovav A. Does one size ft all? examining the differential
effects of is security countermeasures. J. Bus. Ethics
2009;89(SUPPL. 1):59–71. doi:10.1007/s10551-008-9909-7.
Davenport A. Is cyber insurance really worth it? CRN Mag. 2017.
De Vries H, Shields M. Towards a theory of entrepreneurial
resilience : acase study analysis of new zealand SME owner
operators. Appl. Res. J. 2006;5(1):33–44.
Deloitte, 2019a. The economic value of cloud services in
Australia. https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/
au/Documents/Economics/deloitte-au-economicsvalue-cloud-services-australia-230719.pdf.
Deloitte, 2019b. The future of cyber survey 2019.
https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/pages/advisory/articles/
future-of-cyber-survey.html.
Deloitte Australia, 2016. SMBs in the digital race for the customer.
http://www2.deloitte.com/au/en/pages/economics/articles/
SMBs-race-digital-customer.html.
Department of Parliamentary Services, 2018. Small Business
Sector Contribution to the Australian Economy.
https://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/library/prspub/
6272043/upload_binary/6272043.pdf.
Detken KO, Jahnke M, Birkholz H, Dwertmann C. Design and
implementation of virtual security appliances (VSA) for SME.
In: Proc. 2013 IEEE 7th Int. Conf. Intell. Data Acquis. Adv.
Comput. Syst. IDAACS 2013. IEEE; 2013. p. 30–5.
doi:10.1109/IDAACS.2013.6662634.
Digital Transformation Agency,. Simple, clear and fast public
services. https://www.dta.gov.au/help-and-advice/
digital-service-standard/digital-service-standard-criteria.
Dignan L. Uber vs. lyft: how the rivals approach cloud, AI, and
machine learning. ZDNet 2019.
Dimopoulos V, Furnell S, Jennex M, Kritharas I. Approaches to IT
security in small and medium enterprises. In: Proc. 2nd Aust.
Inf. Secur. Manag. Conf. Secur. Futur. Perth, West. Aust.
Novemb. 26th, 2004; 2004. p. 73–82.
https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/221148270_Approaches_to_IT_Security_in_Small_
and_Medium_Enterprises.
Dojkovski S, Lichenstein S, Warren M. Fostering information
security culture in small and medium size enterprises: An
interpretive study in Australia. In: Eur. Conf. Inf. Syst..
Association for Information Systems Electronic Library
(AISeL); 2007. p. 1560–71. http://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2007/120.
Dojkovski S, Lichenstein S, Warren M. Enabling information
security culture: Infuences and challenges for Australian
SMEs. Australas. Conf. Inf. Syst.. Association for information
systems (AISeL), 2010. http://aisel.aisnet.org/acis2010/61.
Dojkovski S, Lichtenstein S, Warren M. Challenges in fostering an
information security culture in australian small and medium
sized enterprises. 5th Eur. Conf. Inf. Warf. Secur. 2006, ECIW
2006 2006:31–40.
Donaldson SI, Grant-Vallone EJ. Understanding self-Report bias in
organizational behavior research. J. Bus. Psychol.
2002;17(2):245–60. doi:10.1023/A:1019637632584.
Ebart C. Open source software in industry. IEEE Softw.
2008;25(3):52–3.
Emami, C., Smith, R. G., Jorna, P., 2019. Online fraud victimisation
in Australia: Risks and protective factors.
https://www.aic.gov.au/sites/default/fles/2020-05/
rr16_online_fraud_victimisation_in_australia-v3.pdf.
Escobedo V, Beyer B, Saltonstall M, Zyzniewski F. Beyondcorp 5:
the user experience. login Mag. USENIX SAGE 2017;42(3):38–43.
Eshet-Alkalai Y, Chajut E. You can teach old dogs new tricks: the
factors that affect changes over time in digital literacy. J. Inf.
Technol. Educ. Res. 2010;9:173–81. doi:10.28945/1186.
Eurostat, 2020a. ICT security in enterprises. https://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/statistics-explained/pdfscache/9132.pdf.
Eurostat, 2020b. Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
https:
//ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/structural-business-statistics/
structural-business-statistics/sme.
Fisher R, Katz J. Social-Desirability bias and the validity of
self-Reported values. Psychol. Mark. 2000;17(2):105–20.
Free Software Foundation, 2007. GNU general public license.
https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html.
10.1007/3-540-28623-3_23
Freed SE. Examination of personality characteristics among
cybersecurity and information technology professionals.
University of Tennessee at Chattanoog; 2014. Masters.
Gallagher N. One of KC’s best craft cocktail bars adapts with
bottled drinks and kits during coronavirus quarantine. Kansas
City Mag. 2020.
Gartner Inc, 2020. Gartner forecasts worldwide public cloud
end-user spending to grow 18% in 2021.
https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/
2020-11-17-gartner-forecasts-worldwide-public-cloudend-user-spending-to-grow-18-percent-in-2021.
Glassdoor, 2019. Average IT administrator salaries.
https://www.glassdoor.com.au/Salaries/
it-administrator-salary-SRCH_KO0,16.htm.
Google, 2020a. Cloud Security FAQ.
https://support.google.com/cloud/answer/6262505?hl=en.
Google, 2020b. GSuite by google cloud endpoint management.
https://gsuite.google.com/products/admin/endpoint/.
Google, 2020c. Overview : Manage devices with google endpoint
management tailor your basic mobile device management.
https://support.google.com/a/answer/1734200?hl=en-AU.
Gray D. Craft brewer pivots to hand sanitiser as frms rise to virus
challenge. Age (Omaha). 2020.
Greenberg A. The untold story of notpetya, the most devastating
cyberattack in history. Wired 2018.
Gupta A, Hammond R. Information systems security issues and
decisions for small businesses: an empirical examination. Inf.
Manag. Comput. Secur. 2005;13(4):297–310.
doi:10.1108/09685220510614425.
Hall JL, Rao A. Non-Technical skills needed by cyber security
graduates. In: IEEE Educ. Conf.. Porto, Portugal: IEEE Education
Society; 2020. p. 14–18.
Harris MA, Patten KP. Mobile device security considerations for
small- and medium-Sized enterprise business mobility. Inf.
Manag. Comput. Secur. 2014;22(1):97–114.
doi:10.1108/IMCS-03-2013-0019.
18 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
Heidt M, Gerlach JP, Buxmann P. Investigating the security divide
between SME and large companies: how SME characteristics
infuence organizational IT security investments. Inf. Syst.
Front. 2019;21(6):1285–305. doi:10.1007/s10796-019-09959-1.
Hiscox, 2019. Hiscox cyber readiness report 2019.
https://www.hiscox.co.uk/sites/uk/fles/documents/2019-04/
Hiscox_Cyber_Readiness_Report_2019.PDF.
Hofstede GH. Culture’S consequences : Comparing values,
behaviors, institutions, and organizations across nations. 2nd
ed. Thousand Oaks, Calif: Sage Publications; 2001.
IDC, 2019. Worldwide spending on security solutions forecast to
reach $103.1 billion in 2019, according to new IDC spending
guide.
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS44150518.
IDCare, 2019. IDCare. https://www.idcare.org.
Insurance Business Australia, 2020. Cyber insurance products.
https://www.insurancebusinessmag.com/au/
commercial-insurance-coverage-area/cyber-12/.
Intruder, 2020. External vulnerability scanner.
https://www.intruder.io/.
ISACA. COBIT 2019 : Design guide designing an information and
technology governance solution. Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA;
2019.
ISACA. COBIT 2019 framework: Introduction and methodology;
2019. doi:10.4337/9781786431936.00008.
ISACA, 2019c. COBIT 2019 Publications & Resources.
http://www.isaca.org/COBIT/Pages/
COBIT-2019-Publications-Resources.aspx.
Iyamuremye B, Shima H. Network Security Testing Tools for SMEs
(Small and Medium Enterprises). In: Proc. 4th IEEE Int. Conf.
Appl. Syst. Innov. 2018, ICASI 2018. IEEE; 2018. p. 414–17.
doi:10.1109/ICASI.2018.8394272.
Kam CD, Wilking JR, Zechmeister EJ. Beyond the ”narrow data
base”: another convenience sample for experimental research.
Polit. Behav. 2007;29(4):415–40. doi:10.1007/s11109-007-9037-6.
Kaur J, Mustafa N. Examining the effects of knowledge, attitude
and behaviour on information security awareness: A case on
SME. In: Int. Conf. Res. Innov. Inf. Syst. ICRIIS. IEEE; 2013.
p. 286–90. doi:10.1109/ICRIIS.2013.6716723.
Kelkar A, Rao A. Co-designing compliance to the anti-Money
laundering act within the small and medium enterprise
sector. J. Financ. Regul. Compliance 2013;21(1):84–101.
doi:10.1108/13581981311297849.
Khadem N. Coronavirus wreaks havoc on wedding industry as
chinese factories remain closed and workers quarantined.
ABC News 2020.
Kickul J, Gundry L. Prospecting for strategic advantage: the
proactive entrepreneurial personality and small frm
innovation. J. Small Bus. Manag. 2002;40(2):85–97.
doi:10.1111/1540-627x.00042.
Kindervag, J., 2010. Build security into your network’s DNA: The
zero trust network architecture. http://www.virtualstarmedia.
com/downloads/Forrester_zero_trust_DNA.pdf.
Kindervag, J., 2016. No more chewy centers: The zero trust model
of information security vision: The security architecture and
operations playbook.
http://crystaltechnologies.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/
forrester-zero-trust-model-information-security.pdf.
Kwak N, Radler B. A comparison between mail and web surveys:
response pattern, respondent profle, and data quality. J. Off.
Stat. 2002;18(2):257.
Laleh E, Masoudi Y, Fathy F, Ghorbani S. Infuencing factors of
information security management in small- and mediumsized enterprises and organizations. In: Proc. - 2013 Int. Conf.
Commun. Syst. Netw. Technol. CSNT 2013. IEEE; 2013. p. 445–9.
doi:10.1109/CSNT.2013.99.
Linux Australia, Linux Australia. https://linux.org.au/.
Lloyds of London, 2017. Counting the cost: cyber exposure
eecoded. https://www.lloyds.com/news-and-insight/
risk-insight/library/technology/countingthecost.
Longbottom J. Coronavirus forces businesses to adapt to survive
the COVID-19 pandemic. ABC News 2020.
Luque, A., Bhaskar, R., Noon, J., Rinz, K., Victoria Udalova, 2019.
Nonemployer statistics by demographics (NES-D): Using
administrative and census records data in business statistics.
https://www2.census.gov/ces/wp/2019/CES-WP-19-01.pdf.
Lyon, G., 2019. NMap Tool. https://nmap.org/.
Maddux JE, Rogers RW. Protection motivation and self-Effcacy: A
Revised theory of fear appeals and attitude change. J. Exp. Soc.
Psychol. 1983;19(5):469–79. doi:10.1016/0022-1031(83)90023-9.
McDonald, C., 2019. A whopping 78% of small business are being
targeted by cyber criminals. Here’s How to Stay Ahead.
https://www.smartcompany.com.au/fnance/fraud/
cyber-crime-stay-ahead/.
Microsoft, 2017a. Planning the development, testing, staging, and
production environments.
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/biztalk/technical-guides/
planning-the-development-testing-staging-and-productionenvironments.
Microsoft, 2017b. Technology decisions for BYOD with EMS |
Microsoft Docs. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-gb/intune/
fundamentals/byod-technology-decisions.
Microsoft, 2020. Microsoft cloud penetration testing rules of
engagement. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/msrc/
pentest-rules-of-engagement?rtc=1.
Moran P. Personality characteristics and growth-orientation of
the small business owner-manager. Int. Small Bus. J. Res.
Entrepeursh. 1998;16(3):17–38. doi:10.1177/07399863870092005.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2018. NIST
framework for improving critical infrastructure cybersecurity.
10.6028/NIST.CSWP.04162018
Newbury M. Designated non-fnancial businesses and
professions: the weak link in Australia’s AML/CTF regime. J.
Money Laund. Control 2017;20(3):247–61.
doi:10.1108/JMLC-08-2016-0038.
NSW Government, 2017. Cyber aware.
https://www.smallbusiness.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/fles/
2019-07/Cyber-Aware-key-fndings.pdf,
https://www.smallbusiness.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/fles/
2019-07/Cyber-Aware-full-report.pdf.
Offce of Parliarmentary Counsel, 2019. Privacy act 1988.
https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2019C00241.
Organisation for economic Co-operation and development
(OECD), 2017. Enhancing the Role of Insurance in Cyber Risk
Management. 10.1787/9789264282148-en
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD), 2018. Key Facts Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC): Full
Selection of Indicator - UK, US, Australia and OECD Data
Table. https://gpseducation.oecd.org/IndicatorExplorer.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD), 2019. Survey of adult skills (PIAAC): Full selection of
indicators. https://gpseducation.oecd.org/IndicatorExplorer,
https://doi-org.ezproxy.lib.rmit.edu.au/10.1787/
eco_surveys-aus-2018-graph60-en
Osborn E, Simpson A. On small-scale IT users’ system
architectures and cyber security: a UK case study. Comput.
Secur. 2017;70:27–50. doi:10.1016/j.cose.2017.05.001.
Osborn E, Simpson A. Risk and the small-Scale cyber security
decision making dialogue - A UK case study. Comput. J.
2018;61(4):472–95. doi:10.1093/comjnl/bxx093.
Panjwani M, Jantti M, Sormunen J. IT service management from a
perspective of small and medium sized companies. In: Proc. -
2016 10th Int. Conf. Qual. Inf. Commun. Technol. QUATIC 2016.
IEEE; 2017. p. 210–15. doi:10.1109/QUATIC.2016.053.
Perez S. Apple is making corporate BYOD’ programs less invasive
to user privacy. TechCrunch 2019.
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 19
Ponemon Institute, IBM Security. In: Technical Report. Cost of a
Data Breach Report. Ponemon Institute, IBM; 2019.
PyCon AU, 2021. Pyconlineau. https://2021.pycon.org.au/.
Queensland Government, 2020. Open source software guideline
Guideline. https://www.qgcio.qld.gov.au/documents/
open-source-software-guideline.
Rapid7, 2019. Metasploit Framework.
https://metasploit.help.rapid7.com/docs/msf-overview.
Raul, H., 2020. Setting up Systems for a Staged Upgrade.
https://docs.bmc.com/docs/brid91/en/
setting-up-systems-for-a-staged-upgrade-825210729.html.
RedHat, 2020. What’s the difference between Fedora and Red Hat
Enterprise Linux?https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/linux/
fedora-vs-red-hat-enterprise-linux.
Redscan, 2019. Most ICO Data Breach Reports Late and
Incomplete Prior to GDPR, Reveals Redscan FOI. https://www.
redscan.com/press-release/most-ico-data-breach-reportslate-and-incomplete-prior-to-gdpr-reveals-redscan-foi/.
Reitano T, Oerting T, Hunter M. Innovations in international
cooperation to counter cybercrime: the joint cybercrime
action taskforce. Eur. Rev. Organ. Crime 2015;2(2):142–54.
Renaud K. How smaller businesses struggle with security advice.
Comput. Fraud Secur. 2016;2016(8):10–18.
doi:10.1016/S1361-3723(16)30062-8.
Rose, S., Borchert, O., Mitchell, S., Connelly, S., 2020. Zero trust
architecture - NIST special publication 800-207.
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.
800-207-draft2.pdf.
Ruhwanya Z, Ophoff J, Vol. 551. Springer International Publishing;
2019. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-18400-1_63.
Salleh NA, Hussin H, Suhaimi MA, Md Ali A. A systematic
literature review of cloud computing adoption and impacts
among small medium enterprises (SMEs). Proc. - Int. Conf. Inf.
Commun. Technol. Muslim World 2018, ICT4M 2018
2018:278–84. doi:10.1109/ICT4M.2018.00058.
Satariano A, Perlroth N. Big companies thought insurance
covered a cyberattack. they may be wrong. - The new york
times. N.Y. Times 2019:3–5.
Sawaya Y, Sharif M, Christin N, Kubota A, Nakarai A, Yamada A.
Self-Confdence trumps knowledge : A cross-cultural study of
security behavior. In: Proc. 2017 CHI Conf. Hum. Factors
Comput. Syst.. Denver; 2017. p. 2202–14.
Scott M, Bruce R. Five stages of growth in small business. Long
Range Plann. 1987;20(3):45–52.
doi:10.1016/0024-6301(87)90071-9.
SE Radio, 2019. SE Radio: Episode 385: Evan gilman and doug
barth on zero-trust networks.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ES-6zAQo1WU.
Selznick L, LaMacchia C. Cybersecurity liability: how technically
savvy can we expect small business owners to be? J. Bus.
Technol. Law 2018;13(2):217.
Smith M. Huge rise in hack attacks as cyber-Criminals target
small businesses. Guard. 2016.
Sommestad T, Hallberg J, Lundholm K, Bengtsson J. Variables
infuencing information security policy compliance: A
Systematic review of quantitative studies. Inf. Manag.
Comput. Secur. 2014;22(1):42–75.
doi:10.1108/IMCS-08-2012-0045.
Spyse, 2020. Spyse subscriptions.
https://spyse.com/user/subscription.
Standards Australia limited, 2015. AS ISO/IEC 27001 Australian
standard information technology - security techniques -
information security management systems - requirements.
State Government of Victoria, 2020. Stage 4 restrictions.
https://www.dhhs.vic.gov.au/stage-4-restrictions-covid-19.
Steinheider B, Al-Hawamdeh S. Team coordination,
communication and knowledge sharing in smes and large
organisations. J. Inf. Knowl. Manag. 2004;3(3):223–32.
doi:10.1142/S0219649204000845.
Suryotrisongko H, Musashi Y. Review of cybersecurity research
topics, taxonomy and challenges: interdisciplinary
perspective. Proc. 2019 IEEE 12th Conf. Serv. Comput. Appl.
SOCA 2019 2019:162–7. doi:10.1109/SOCA.2019.00031.
Symantec, 2019. Internet security threat teport.
https://img03.en25.com/Web/Symantec/
%7B984e78e2-c9e5-43b8-a6ee-417a08608b60%
7D_ISTR_24_2019_April_en.pdf.
Szoldra P. This is everything edward snowden revealed in one
year of unprecedented top-Secret leaks. Bus. Insid. India 2016.
Taylor, A., 2018. Australian government attribution of the
’NotPetya’ cyber incident to Russia.
https://www.dfat.gov.au/sites/default/fles/
australia-attributes-cyber-incident-to-russia.pdf.
Taylor L. Happy 25 years of the internet, australia. SBS News 2014.
Tenable, 2020. Purchase tenable solutions.
https://www.tenable.com/buy.
United Nations Offce on Drugs and Crime, 2013. Comprehensive
study on cybercrime.
http://www.unodc.org/documents/organized-crime/
UNODC_CCPCJ_EG.4_2013/CYBERCRIME_STUDY_210213.pdf.
US Census, 2015. 2015 SUSB annual datasets by establishment
industry - data by enterprise employment size.
https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/susb/datasets/
2015/us_state_6digitnaics_2015.txt.
US Government. In: Technical Report. The Cost of Malicious
Cyber Activity to the U.S. Economy; 2018.
U.S. Small Business Administration, 2017. Table of small business
standards matched to morth American industry classifcation
system codes. https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/fles/fles/
Size_Standards_Table_2017.pdf.
US Small Business Administration, 2019. Participants sought for
survey on small and mid-size business cybersecurity issues.
https://advocacy.sba.gov/2019/10/21/
participants-sought-for-survey-on-small-and-mid-sizebusiness-cybersecurity-issues/.
Valli C, Martinus I, Johnstone M. Small to medium enterprise
cyber security awareness: an initial survey of western
Australian business. In: Valli C, editor. In: Proc. Int. Conf.
Secur. Manag.; 2014. p. 1.
Ven K, Verelst J, Mannaert H. Should you adopt open source
software? IEEE Softw. 2008;25(3):54–9. doi:10.1109/MS.2008.73.
Verizon, 2019. 2019 Data Breach Investigations Report.
https://enterprise.verizon.com/resources/reports/
2019-data-breach-investigations-report.pdf.
Victorian Government,. Vic Open Source Policy.pdf. https://www.
vic.gov.au/make-your-project-open-source-digital-standards.
Vistage, Cisco, National center for the middle market, 2018.
Cyberthreats and Solutions for Small and Midsize Businesses.
https://www.sap.com/uk/solution/sme-business-software/
analytics.html.
Von Solms B, Von Solms R. The 10 deadly sins of information
security management. Comput. Secur. 2004;23(5):371–6.
doi:10.1016/j.cose.2004.05.002.
Von Solms R, Van Niekerk J. From information security to cyber
security. Comput. Secur. 2013;38:97–102.
doi:10.1016/j.cose.2013.04.004.
Vroom C, Von Solms R. Towards information security behavioural
compliance. Comput. Secur. 2004;23(3):191–8.
doi:10.1016/j.cose.2004.01.012.
Walker E, Redmond J, Webster B, Le Clus M. Small business
owners: too busy to train? J. Small Bus. Enterp. Dev.
2007;14(2):294–306. doi:10.1108/14626000710746718.
Ward R, Beyer B. Beyondcorp : A New approach to enterprise
security. login Mag. USENIX SAGE 2014;39(6):6–11.
Watson C, Zaw T, Andriushchenko I, Justiniano GM, Tesauro M.
20 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
OWASP Automated threat handbook web applications. Bel Air,
United States: OWASP; 2018.
Welte, H., Ayuso, P. N., 2014. The netflter.org Project.
https://netflter.org/.
Wesselius J. The bazaar inside the cathedral: business models for
internal markets. IEEE Softw. 2008;25(3):60–6.
doi:10.1109/MS.2008.79.
Woschke T, Haase H, Kratzer J. Resource scarcity in SMEs: effects
on incremental and radical innovations. Manag. Res. Rev.
2017;40(2):195–217. doi:10.1108/MRR-10-2015-0239.
Yanpiboon T, Schjoedt L. The effect of strategic alliance on small
business performance: A meta- analysis. ICSB World Conf.
Proc.. Washington, 2017.
Zhao H, Seibert SE. The big fve personality dimensions and
entrepreneurial status: A Meta-Analytical review. J. Appl.
Psychol. 2006;91(2):259–71. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.91.2.259.
Tracy Tam is a doctoral candidate (Mathematical Science) within
the School of Science at RMIT University. She holds a Bachelor degree (with Honours) in Telecommunications Engineering
from Monash University. She worked for a decade as an engineer
within the IT industry. She also has experience in managing her
own small business. Her research interests include cyber-security
within small business context, cyber-security human factors and
security risk management.
Prof. Asha Rao is Professor and Associate Dean (Mathematical
Sciences) within the School of Science at RMIT University, Australia. She is an Australian 2019–2020 Superstar of STEM. She has
won over AUD 3.5M in grants since 2007 from Government and
Industry to research a variety of issues including insider threat
and continuous authentication. As a trans-disciplinary researcher,
she works on a variety of problems, ranging from designing better codes for communication, exploring the mathematics behind
quantum cryptography, fnding links between various combinatorial structures, to cybersecurity problems such as risk management for SME, detecting insider threats, and money laundering.
Joanne Hall is a Senior Lecturer in mathematics and cybersecurity
at RMIT. With a background in abstract algebra, her research is on
quantum key distribution and post quantum cryptography. Dr Hall
completed her PhD at RMIT in 2011 on quantum key distribution.
She has held research and teaching positions at Charles University
in Prague and the Queensland University of Technology. As the
internships coordinator for the Master of Cybersecurity Degree, Dr
Hall has a keen interest in the cybersecurity needs of businesses.
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose
The good, the bad and the missing: A
Narrative review of cyber-security implications for
australian small businesses
Tracy Tam∗
, Asha Rao, Joanne Hall
RMIT University, 124 Latrobe St, Melbourne 3000, Australia
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 26 November 2020
Revised 21 May 2021
Accepted 21 June 2021
Available online 25 June 2021
Keywords:
Cyber-security
Small business
SME
Security culture
Literature review
a b s t r a c t
Small businesses (0–19 employees) are becoming attractive targets for cyber-criminals, but
struggle to implement cyber-security measures thatlarge businesses routinely deploy.There
is an urgent need for effective and suitable cyber-security solutions for small businesses as
they employ a signifcant proportion of the workforce.
In this paper, we consider the small business cyber-security challenges not currently addressed by research or products, contextualised via an Australian lens. We also highlight
some unique characteristics of small businesses conducive to cyber-security actions.
Small business cyber-security discussions to date have been narrow in focus and lack reusability beyond specifc circumstances. Our study uses global evidence from industry, government and research communities across multiple disciplines. We explore the technical
and non-technical factors negatively impacting a small business’ ability to safeguard itself,
such as resource constraints, organisational process maturity, and legal structures. Our research shows that some small business characteristics, such as agility, large cohort size, and
piecemeal IT architecture, could allow for increased cyber-security.
We conclude that there is a gap in current research in small business cyber-security. In
addition, legal and policy work are needed to help small businesses become cyber-resilient.
© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Businesses around the world are under pressure to use and
adopt technology, with the COVID-19 pandemic accelerating
this need ABC News (2020). At the same time, cyber-crimes
are becoming increasingly sophisticated Symantec (2019) with
the Australian Government Australian Government (2016) estimating the cost of cyber-crime to the Australian economy at over AU$15 billion annually. Small businesses employ nearly half of the Australian private sector workforce
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: tracy.tam@student.rmit.edu.au (T. Tam).
Department of Parliamentary Services (2018) and need to be
supported against cyber-criminals.
Anecdotes Armstrong (2019); Bainbridge and Florance (2020b); BBC News (2019), industry Hiscox (2019);
Symantec (2019) and government Australian Cyber Security
Centre (2019c) studies indicate that small businesses and
individuals are increasingly becoming cyber-crime targets.
A small business can lose data and customers, and incurs
compliance penalties from a cyber-security incident. These
penalties include fnes greater of 4% of global turnover or 20
million for non-compliance to the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) Council of The European Union (2016) in
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2021.102385
2 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
the European Union, and levies up to US$1.8 million per
violation Azar (2020) of HIPAA Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (2018) in the US. In Australia, most small
businesses with less than AU$3 million turnover are exempt
from the Privacy Act Offce of Parliarmentary Counsel (2019),
but this exemption may not remain in the future Kelkar and
Rao (2013); Newbury (2017). Beyond these penalties, the
importance and practicalities of small businesses preparing for and recovering from cyber-incidents are still poorly
articulated and communicated.
Previous research has considered the Australian small
and medium enterprise (SME) cyber-security situation from
different perspectives. Valli et al Valli et al. (2014) survey
Western Australian SMEs and call for cyber-security education for SMEs, while Dojkovki et al. Dojkovski et al.
(2007, 2010, 2006) highlight the infuence of Australian
culture on SME cyber-security. Internationally, reviews of
SME cyber-security (albeit with different size defnitions)
emphasise ineffective security management practices
Alahmari and Duncan (2020) and differences between
SMEs and large corporations Heidt et al. (2019); Osborn and
Simpson (2017). Other research offers global insights into
culture Ruhwanya and Ophoff (2019), strategies Bryan (2020),
policies Almeida et al. (2018) and specifc technologies
Salleh et al. (2018). Several surveys on cyber-security, for
example Australian Cyber Security Centre and Australian
Signals Directorate (2020); Cynch Security et al. (2021);
NSW Government (2017), focus on self-reported data on
cyber-security from Australian SMEs.
This paper uses existing global research as well as evidence
from multiple disciplines to identify gaps and opportunities
for Australian small business cyber-security. We look in detail at the characteristics of Australian small businesses that
may be impeding their cyber-security posture. We fnd that
certain characteristics could help small businesses better secure themselves.
The defnition we use here, of 0–19 employees, covers a
signifcant proportion of business communities around the
world. In 2015, around 29 million US frms employed 0–19 employees Luque et al. (2019); US Census (2015), while in 2019,
in the UK over 98% of private sector businesses employed 0–
49 people British Crown (2019). Thus, this research has relevance to small businesses from other countries with similar
societal profles to Australia Hofstede (2001); Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (2018),
since human owners run small businesses Kickul and
Gundry (2002); Moran (1998).
This paper is structured as follows: In the next section we
examine the background to business cyber-security and the
Australian small business context. Section 3 looks at existing
review articles and compares them to our study. Section 4 discusses the diffculties in research and data collection for small
business cyber-security. Section 5 looks at the constraints
faced by small businesses in implementing cyber-security,
while Section 6 highlights potential opportunities that unique
small business characteristics present with respect to cybersecurity. We end with a conclusion and suggestions for future
work.
2. Background to small business
cyber-security
Small business cyber-security has some commonalities with
large business cyber-security. The traditional aim of cybersecurity is to protect business IT infrastructure, and the information essential for the business’ day to day operations. However evidence has since emerged that the beneft of business
cyber-security extends beyond this, to its people, processes
and assets.
The cyber-security industry is currently worth over US$100
billion globally IDC (2019). While cyber-security previously
focused on maintaining the confdentiality, integrity and
availability Kaur and Mustafa (2013) of information systems
and data, current best practice includes non-technical aspects such as the people using the information (security
culture) Cheng et al. (2013); Sawaya et al. (2017). A onesize-fts-all cyber-security solution does not exist Bernik and
Prislan (2016); D’Arcy and Hovav (2009); Von Solms and
Von Solms (2004). Large businesses have adopted a variety of measures to secure their information and IT assets
Deloitte (2019b) against cyber-security threats.
The benefts of securing a business extends beyond protecting the assets owned directly by the business. The disruptions to individuals from data breaches such as Equifax
115th Congress Oversight & Government Reform Committee (2018) and Ticketmaster Chau (2018) highlight the societal
cost. The fnancial cost of an incident can severely disrupt
the personal lives of small business owners, putting livelihoods in jeopardy Bainbridge and Florance (2020a). The high
level of codependency between people, technologies and processes has resulted in modern security standards/frameworks
including “processes, organisational structures, policies and
procedures, information fows, culture and behaviors, skills
and infrastructure” (ISACA, 2019b, P.13).
2.1. The australian small business context
In Australia, over 40% of private sector employment is from
micro (0–4 employees) and small (5–19 employees) businesses
Department of Parliamentary Services (2018). The Australian
Bureau of Statistics (ABS) defnes a small business as one with
0–19 employees Australian Bureau of Statistics (2019). In 2016,
42% of Australian small businesses believed limiting online
presence protected their business NSW Government (2017).
In the 2018/19 fnancial year, only 40.3% of small businesses
received orders via the Internet1 Australian Bureau of Statistics (2020b).
Technology avoidance is no longer a feasible strategy for
managing cyber-security risks. Online sales are becoming
more attractive, infuenced by market forces and offcial bodies Australian Productivity Commission and New Zealand Productivity Commission (2019) with the social distancing requirements of COVID-19 only hastening this ABC News (2020);
State Government of Victoria (2020).
1 Note: This includes any sale of services or goods that have been
committed to/ordered via the Internet.
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 3
Table 1 – Existing Literature, Reviews and Focus Comparison on Small Business Cyber-security. (!denotes areas addressed.
˜denotes areas partially addressed. Blank denotes areas not addressed.) See page 5 for criteria used for comparison.
Paper Literature
Type
Focus A B C D E
Alahmari &
Duncan Alahmari
and Duncan (2020)
Academic Review ! ˜
Heidt et al. Heidt
et al. (2019)
Academic IT Security
Investment
˜
Suryotrisongko & Musashi
Suryotrisongko and
Musashi (2019)
Academic Cyber-security
Research
Taxonomy
Review
˜ ˜
Salleh et al. Salleh
et al. (2018)
Academic Cloud Adoption
in SME
˜
Our Paper Academic &
Industry
Small Business
Cyber-security
! ! ! ! !
With nearly half of Australian small businesses allocating
less than AU$500 annually to cyber-security Australian Cyber Security Centre (2019c), they cannot afford cyber-security
expertise. Without external help, small businesses cannot
secure themselves, and not just in times of emergency
Woschke et al. (2017).
3. Existing reviews
There is considerable literature, both academic and industry, on small and medium business (or SME) cyber-security.
Here we identify the literature examining cyber-security challenges.
3.1. Search method
A keyword search was conducted within 5 academic search
engines, namely Scopus, ProQuest, Science Direct, SpringerLink and IEEE Xplore. The keywords used were kept broad
to maximise the number of results returned and constructed
from the core concepts of “small business”, “cyber-security”
and “literature review”. These are listed below:
1. Small business - “small business”, “small enterprise” or
“SME”.
2. Cyber security - Various spellings of “cyber-security”, “IT
security” or “information security”.
3. Literature review - “review” or “survey” with “literature”
The keyword pertaining to “literature review” (3) was replaced with a search flter of review articles where this option
was offered by the database. Where possible, the search was
limited to title, abstract and keywords. To ensure relevance
to today’s context, the search was restricted to publications
dated on or after 2016. No fltering was done based on journal
or conference ranking.
Due to the general nature of the keywords, the initial
searches returned a total of 2759 papers. Each of these papers was examined to determine whether the primary focus was small business (or SME) cyber-security. Most importantly, we looked for papers that exclusively discussed
their cyber-security topic in a small business/SME context,
rather than treating the cohort as a sub-discussion. Based on
this criteria 22 papers were shortlisted. A detailed examination of these papers gave us one very relevant review paper
Alahmari and Duncan (2020), and three partially relevant papers Heidt et al. (2019); Salleh et al. (2018); Suryotrisongko and
Musashi (2019).
3.2. Comparing research aims
Table 1 compares the aims of our paper to the selected review
papers, based on the following contexts:
A Restricts context to small business.
B Critically examines landscape of existing small business
cyber-security research.
C Examines potential technical issues with small business
use of cyber-security solutions.
D Examines potential human issues for small business.
E Identifes structural opportunities for small businesses.
From Table 1, the shortlisted reviews do not distinguish small
business as a separate cohort, despite the large proportion
of small businesses present in global economies. Small business is often grouped together with medium businesses in the
wider cyber-security context. In this article, we examine the
problems arising from such grouping.
Alahmari and Duncan Alahmari and Duncan (2020) provide an overview of existing research on cyber-security risk
management within the SME cohort. They identify lack
of skills/knowledge, lack of appropriate management behaviours and sub-par defence as common themes, but do not
explore how such situations arise. In this paper, we trace these
symptoms back to possible contributing factors, which could
enable better security solutions.
Heidt et al. Heidt et al. (2019) point out that differences
between SME and their larger cousins potentially contributes
to diffculties in generalising cyber-security results to SMEs.
They fnd that data is often obtained from non-representative
enterprises (e.g. larger or industry specifc groups). We re-
4 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
examine the sampling issue within the industry context and
fnd this trend extends beyond academia to industry and government. Given the lack of industry standard terminologies,
we discuss how both cyber-security self-reporting and lack of
agreed defnitions are contributing to confusion.
As demonstrated by Suryotrisongko & Musashi
Suryotrisongko and Musashi (2019), there are a wide variety of topic areas and technologies within the study
of cyber-security. Reviews that focus on specifc topics Almeida et al. (2018); Bryan (2020); Ruhwanya and
Ophoff (2019); Salleh et al. (2018) provide little room for
exploration of alternative solutions, e.g. a technical problem
solved via a process. In this paper, we explore cross feld
opportunities in the context of small business cyber-security.
In conclusion, there are no broad-based reviews exploring
small business organisational characteristics that can impact
their cyber-security posture, both negatively and positively.
We address these gaps in this paper.
4. Research data challenges
Given the importance of micro/small business in global
economies, there is limited research into the cyber-security
posture of, and corresponding solutions for small businesses
in the 0–19 employee range. While there is much research
in large enterprise cyber-security from various countries, the
transferability of this research to small business is problematic.
Each developed country is at a different stage in the
small business cyber-security research journey. In the USA,
CISA (Cyber-security and Infrastructure Security Agency) conducted an online survey in 2019, on providing assistance with
cyber-security issues, to small businesses US Small Business
Administration (2019), but results are still awaited. In Europe,
Eurostat breaks down enterprise size across multiple variables
in its most recent 2020 ICT Security in Enterprise security report Eurostat (2020a). Businesses with 0–9 employees are excluded from the above Eurostat report, highlighting the research data gap within the small business cohort. This lack
of inclusion also occurs in the Australian Bureau of Statistics’
business characteristics surveys Australian Bureau of Statistics (2019). These surveys ask IT and cyber-security questions,
but explicitly exclude non-employers/sole traders from the respondent pool.
The cyber-security surveys conducted in Australia include:
• The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) annual business
characteristics survey asks detailed IT usage and cyber incident questions Australian Bureau of Statistics (2019).
• The NSW small business commissioner CyberAware survey studied SME cyber-security NSW Government (2017) in
2017, in collaboration with various small business related
commissions around Australia.
• The Australian Cyber Security Centre’s (ACSC) online survey in 2019, looked at the usage of IT, security incidents and
knowledge Australian Cyber Security Centre (2019c).
Each of the above surveys has its own focus, producing
results within its own scope. Some of these scopes overTable 2 – Small Business Self-Reported Breach Results.
Source Percentage of
respondents answering
affrmative/neutral for
experiencing breaches
Reference
ACSC Small
Business Survey
62% Australian Cyber
Security
Centre (2019c)
Business
Characteristics
Survey
Micro Businesses:
8.7%(+17.4% “Don’t know”)
Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2019)
Small Businesses:
13.4%(+17.1% “Don’t know”)
lap. Some results appear to contradict others. For example,
in answer to whether small businesses have encountered a
breach/attack/cyber-crime, the percentage of people that answered in the affrmative varied based on the survey (Table 2).
The discrepancies are not necessarily due to deliberate actions or errors. They appear to be a symptom of the diffculty
in reaching and obtaining comparable data from the disparate
and technically inexperienced cohort that is small business.
Discrepancies in the survey results also extend past national borders. In the Hiscox report Hiscox (2019), the average business cyber-security spend in European countries
for organisations with 9 or less employees was US$7,000.
In contrast, the ACSC survey Australian Cyber Security Centre (2019c) found close to half of Australian small businesses
spent less than AU$500 annually on cyber-security. This order
of magnitude difference in expenditure from seemingly similar socio-economic cohorts requires further analysis. While
there is speculation Sommestad et al. (2014) that complexity
within the cyber-security feld accounts for the disparity in results, it is possible these are due to challenges in getting accurate data from small businesses.
4.1. The elusive cohort
The inability to gather data from diverse small businesses is a signifcant barrier to cyber-security research
Abid et al. (2011); Deloitte Australia (2016); Gupta and Hammond (2005); Osborn and Simpson (2017); Valli et al. (2014).
Consistently low response rates to broad-based voluntary surveys highlight the diffculty in obtaining a comprehensive
sample. This is exacerbated by a lack of public domain data,
especially where mandatory breach reporting regulations are
immature. There is dis-incentive to self-reporting due to fear
of reputational damage US Government (2018), given the low
possibility of prosecution (United Nations Offce on Drugs and
Crime, 2013, Fig 6.7).
This diffculty in reaching the small business cohort could
result in convenience sampling, which is known to introduce
its own set of limitations and challenges Acar et al. (2019);
Kam et al. (2007). The impact and bias arising from such sampling must be accounted for and discussed in research fndings.
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 5
Table 3 – Small Business Defnitions Around the World .
Offcial
Business
Labels
0
Employees
Micro
Business
Small Business Sources
Australia Sole
Traders
0-4 5-19 Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2001)
UK NoEmployee
Business
1-9 10-49 British Crown (2015)
European
Union1
Not
Applicable
0-9 10-49 Eurostat (2020b)
US Not
Applicable
Not
Applicable
<250 or
1500 or industry specifc
annual
receipt2
U.S. Small Business
Administration (2017)
1 Prior to 2020, all European Union data includes the UK. Any data 2020 and beyond, does not include UK statistics. Where relevant, this is noted
in the discussion. 2 Industry dependent.
4.2. Disparate technical terms
Numerous industry cyber-security reports address the gap
in business cyber-security Deloitte (2019b); Hiscox (2019);
Ponemon Institute and IBM Security (2019); Symantec (2019);
Vistage et al. (2018). However, there are few standard defnitions, structures and classifcations within cyber-security.
Data and fndings are often adhoc, incomplete and focused
on headline worthy items. For example, Symantec reports
Symantec (2019) that globally, in 2018, small and medium
businesses were more likely to be hit with “Formjacking”. Formjacking is Symantec’s term for “use of malicious JavaScript
code to steal credit card details and other information from
payment forms on the checkout web pages of e-commerce
sites” Symantec (2019). Formjacking is a subset of code injection attacks Watson et al. (2018), where code is injected for various purposes, and not just on e-commerce sites. The use of
specialised terms such as “formjacking” makes comparisons
between different reports diffcult.
4.3. Size does matter
The differing defnitions of small buisness worldwide makes
data comparison diffcult, see Table 3.
Each research entity adopts the local small business convention or presents a brand new defnition Deloitte Australia (2016). This disparity across the globe changes the
context of fndings. Clearly, an organisation managing 200
employees operates and communicates very differently
to one with less than 10 employees Bales et al. (1951);
Cruz et al. (1997); Steinheider and Al-Hawamdeh (2004). Given
the signifcant infuence communication and human factors
have on attacks such as phishing, email fraud, etc, size matters in any cyber-security discussion.
Few researchers acknowledge the potential complexity of
the large range of small business sizes. The Ponemon Institute’s data breach report Ponemon Institute and IBM Security (2019) extrapolates small business data breach costs from
incident costs for businesses employing 500–1000. This cost
fgure is discussed as the cost for “smaller organisations”. The
bundling of small businesses with larger (in size) cohorts hampers the ability to action the lessons learnt.
4.4. Self-Reporting fallacies
Self-reporting of data is another problem. The accuracy of
self-reported cyber-incidents by small business owners needs
examining. Non-technical persons fnd it diffcult to report
subtle cyber attacks. In addition, there are psychological
self-reporting biases Donaldson and Grant-Vallone (2002);
Fisher and Katz (2000). Thus, self-reported breaches can only
be a starting point data set for analysis.
Self-reporting surveys require business owners to be aware
of cyber breaches. Common detectable symptoms of an incident, from a non-technical user’s perspective, are unavailability of computer systems or data. For example, ransomware
renders a computer unusable. Many attacks have no obvious symptoms. Active monitoring is required for subtle attacks such as data ex-fltration, man in the middle, spyware
etc. System owners may not be aware of a breach for months
or even years Ponemon Institute and IBM Security (2019);
Redscan (2019); US Government (2018). While large enterprises can detect subtle attacks using active traffc monitoring systems, few small businesses can afford this monitoring
Australian Cyber Security Centre (2019c). The under-detection
can be exacerbated by the lack of technical knowledge among
small business owners (see Section 5.2).
In Australia,the Privacy Act,the main legislation governing
data, does not apply to organisations with less than AU$3 million annual turnover Offce of Parliarmentary Counsel (2019),
i.e. most Australian small businesses. As such there are no
legislative repercussions or fnancial incentives to report any
breaches or cyber-incidents. Embarrassment in victims of online fraud Emami et al. (2019) is another powerful reason for
Australian small businesses not reporting incidents.
Symantec Symantec (2019) avoids this self-reporting gap by
using known threat detection software installed within an end
user’s computer. Eliminating human interaction increases accuracy by recording incident details automatically. However,
the proprietary nature of this software and reporting results
6 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
in only Symantec customers and devices being included. This
leads to a bias towards people willing (and able) to pay for
Symantec’s services. Detailed analysis and strategy design requires a more comprehensive small business sector view.
In conclusion, alternative data collection strategies are
needed to supplement existing self-reporting surveys.
4.5. Business versus IT perspectives
The under-representation of non-technical respondents in
online surveys deserves scrutiny. Studies targeting technically
savvy businesses often reach very different conclusions to
those including a broader range.
Cyber-security research relies heavily on online surveys
due to logistical ease, and the assumption that potential respondents use the internet for business purposes. In contrast,
less than 40% of Australian small and micro-businesses used
the internet for business development or monitoring market
information in the 2017-18 fnancial year Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2019).
Self-selection bias is enhanced by a particular group’s
comfort level to a survey method. More respondents are
likely to complete surveys that use familiar technology
Boynton (2004). Cyber-security studies tracking industry
breakdowns show IT/technical industry respondents are
over-represented Hiscox (2019); NSW Government (2017);
Osborn and Simpson (2017).
Challenges exist around demographic representation
in samples with online surveys as the sole method of
data collection. “Younger, male, avid Internet users, and
those with greater technological sophistication” Kwak and
Radler (2002) are more likely to complete online surveys
compared to surveys done via traditional mail. In contrast,
in 2016, over half of small business owners in Australia were
over 45 Commonwealth of Australia and Australian Small
Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman (2019).
A survey with more technically literate respondents can
introduce signifcant biases in results. Studies with input from technical experts Coertze and Von Solms (2013);
Dojkovski et al. (2010); Panjwani et al. (2017) identifed
different concerns compared to general small business
owners Almubayedh et al. (2018); Bada and Nurse (2019);
Dimopoulos et al. (2004); Laleh et al. (2013). A series of interviews from a single study Osborn and Simpson (2018) shows
that small scale IT users have constraints in security decision making that are not expected by technical security
providers. Australian small businesses in information, media
and telecommunication, and professional, scientifc and technical services categories made up less than 14% of all businesses, by business count, in 2019 Australian Bureau of Statistics (2020a).
In summary, the majority of small business owners in Australia cannot be assumed to intuitively understand the technical fundamentals central to cyber-security. Exclusively sourcing data from voluntary online surveys favours respondents
comfortable with technology. Results from surveys must account for and reconcile any gaps between sample respondents
versus small business profles, from both demographic and
technology literacy perspectives.
5. Challenges faced by small businesses
Large enterprises have been amongst the earliest adopters of
cyber-security technologies. Current business cyber-security
solutions favour these businesses in terms of scale, cost and
usage.
Today’s cyber-security lessons and conventions are a result
of early large-scale incidents e.g. NotPetya, Equifax, Wikileaks
etc affecting mostly large organisations. With new threats
constantly emerging, large enterprises are ideal customers
for vendors, with a higher likelihood of return on investment. Consequently cyber-security industry best practices,
standards and products are heavily infuenced by the needs
of larger organisations.
Small business cyber-security cannot be “cut and paste”
from large scale solutions. Resource availability, technical
landscape and operational processes of small business need
careful consideration. Small businesses face some common
challenges that need to be accounted for in cyber-security
strategies since cyber-criminals are looking for smaller targets
McDonald (2019); Smith (2016); Symantec (2019).
5.1. Technical challenges
The technical landscape of a small business can potentially be
very different to that of a large enterprise Osborn and Simpson (2017), making it impractical to apply solutions for the
larger enterprises to smaller scale users. The small business
IT technical landscape (“architecture”) in which the cybersecurity solution must function is a barrier to adopting a solution.
Current industry practice tests changes in an environment
separate from customer-facing sites and systems to ensure
the changes do not impact IT system availability for live customers. A test or staging environment is a copy that mirrors
the customer-facing (live) business system in hardware, software and confguration. Testing in a separate environment is
recommended by many application providers before software
upgrade processes Microsoft (2017a); Raul (2020). This testing
ensures unintended consequences of changes/tests do not affect the business’ live systems, keeping them “safe” and operational. A test environment can be used to conduct destructive
testing such as disaster recovery scenarios.
Cyber-security solutions designed to test a response to debilitating events require a safe testing environment. For example, denial of service (DoS) simulation tools Iyamuremye and
Shima (2018); Rapid7 (2019) simulate a service overwhelmed
with requests resulting in legitimate requests not getting
through. A DoS simulator, if implemented on a live system,
would render the business IT infrastructure, e.g. website, unavailable to customers, or worse, jeopardise overall system integrity. Live environments cannot be used for stress-inducing
tests. Consequently, businesses without a test environment
will never be able to test the full suite of catastrophic scenarios as part of their incident response training.
A test environment requires substantial technical knowledge, time and ongoing maintenance. Australian and New
Zealand small and medium enterprises spend only 6% of their
total revenue Deloitte Australia (2016) on IT. For 2016, the me-
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 7
dian Australian small business had an average turnover of
AU$125,000 Commonwealth of Australia and Australian Small
Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman (2019), translating to an annual IT spend of about AU$7,500. This budget covers all IT spend, including hardware, software, network services, IT personnel and other incidentals, making a test environment just one of many competing priorities. While cloud
technologies have reduced costs associated with test environments, the technical knowledge required is still substantial.
Less than a quarter of Australian small businesses have inhouse, qualifed IT support personnel (with roughly a third using contractors/consultants as needed) Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2019). There is no mention of small business testing environments for off-line testing in the literature.
The small business move towards cloud infrastructure and
services makes large enterprise cyber-security solutions unsuitable. Over a third of micro businesses and half of small
businesses used cloud based services in 2018 Australian Bureau of Statistics (2019). This demand is expected to increase
Deloitte (2019a) and accelerated due to the COVID19 pandemic
Gartner Inc (2020). While offcial statistics on cloud services
adoption during the pandemic are still pending, anecdotally
the uptake of third party IT services in general has increased
substantially Chiappetta (2020), many of which are enabled
through the cloud Dignan (2019). This move away from private, or on premise, infrastructure (i.e. IT equipment set up
and owned by the business) is driven by the associated set-up
and maintenance costs Deloitte (2019a), a proposition especially attractive for resource constrained smaller businesses.
Cloud infrastructure presents challenges for traditional
cyber-security products. For example, general network scanning Detken et al. (2013) assumes the infrastructure is local
and/or reachable for scanning purposes, an assumption valid
only for private infrastructure. The increasing suite of cloudbased network perimeter scanning services Intruder (2020);
Spyse (2020); Tenable (2020) require explicit input from users
on the target devices to be scanned. Targeted device scanning
is a subset of a complete network scanning solution and cannot discover private assets (e.g. printers) with external interfaces left accidentally unsecured. This potential gap could be
addressed by other technical or process remedies, and needs
further examination by individual businesses - a task requiring technical knowledge and resources that many small businesses do not have.
Scanning in the cloud is a challenge for shared computing resources. Any customer sharing the same target
computing resource will be affected if the targeted application is overwhelmed. Cloud infrastructure providers impose strict conditions on security-related testing activities
Amazon AWS (2020); Microsoft (2020), with the notable exception being Google Cloud Google (2020a).
Nearly 90% Australian Bureau of Statistics (2019) of small
business cloud users utilise software in the cloud. Many application providers explicitly prohibit activities interfering with
their service, preventing customers from pro-actively discovering any vulnerability in their service provider. Indemnity
and liability around use of an outsourced function needs
clarifcation August and Tunca (2011); Selznick and LaMacchia (2018).
It is necessary to address when testing and monitoring
of privately owned devices is permissible. Mixed-use personal and company-owned assets, e.g. mobile devices, are
common amongst small businesses Almubayedh et al. (2018);
Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA)
(2013); Osborn and Simpson (2017). Mobile device management (MDM) software Google (2020b); Harris and Patten (2014) allows businesses to monitor data and software residing on and transiting through devices. MDM can freeze certain functions and/or data, and, if needed, reset the entire device. Many large enterprises routinely deploy MDM on devices
issued to staff. The level of access that MDM requires raises
questions of the extent of non-work information shared with
work IT administrators Perez (2019) when a device is not a
work exclusive device.
To address the privacy concerns of MDM, mobile application management (MAM) offers a subset of the functions of
MDM Google (2020c); Microsoft(2017b). MAM functions require
business trade-offs and must be paired with mitigating policies based on the sensitivity of business data. This requires
expert guidance and is at odds with other revenue generating
priorities for a small business.
Clearly, re-using cyber-security solutions designed for large
scale infrastructures is not a feasible strategy for small businesses. More appropriate cyber-security products are needed
for small business given their mix of stand alone and shared
IT resources. The liability arising from small business’ use of
cloud service needs clarifcation.
5.2. Human challenges
Small business cyber-security human resources are very different to those of large enterprises. A qualifed and accountable IT department is common in large enterprises but not in
small businesses.
In a European & US survey Dimopoulos et al. (2004) less
than 30% of small businesses, and less than 5% of micro businesses, indicated existence of a security administrator or any
formal IT security qualifcations. Approximately 10–25% of
Australian micro and small businesses have no IT support at
all Australian Bureau of Statistics (2019).
In Australia, most small business support comes from external contractor/consultants, suppliers of software/hardware
or non-IT qualifed staff Australian Bureau of Statistics (2019).
External contractors are engaged for specifc tasks. They do
not undertake cyber-security risk assessments unless contracted specifcally. Suppliers only support supplied software
and/or hardware, unless an extra support contract has been
purchased. Small businesses’ constrained resources and the
low number of devices used imply support contracts are unlikely.
Cyber-security requires risk analysis and mitigation of the
entire IT system, not just individual components. The small
IT budgets of small businesses do not cover the salary of an IT
administrator Glassdoor (2019).
Furthermore, small business owners are at a knowledge
disadvantage in advocating for their cyber-security needs. In
the start-up phase of a small business, owner-managers have
to perform any functions that they cannot afford fnancially, or
haven’t had the time, to outsource or hire. As discussed previ-
8 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
ously, given small business’ small IT budget, these include being the IT support person, and by extension the cyber-security
person. Some tasks, such as cleaning, physical security etc.
can conceivably be done by a person with limited experience.
A cyber-security assessment cannot be done effectively by a
novice.
The age demographic of Australian small business owners indicates less exposure to technology. Nearly 60% of
Australian small business owners were born before 1971
Commonwealth of Australia and Australian Small Business
and Family Enterprise Ombudsman (2019) - well before publicly available Internet Taylor (2014). This technical skills gap
is refected in OECD testing Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (2019) with less than 40%
of Australian adults scoring within levels 2 or 3 (out of maximum 3 levels) of OECD’s computer problem-solving skills
scale. This percentage falls to 17.2% within the 55–65 age
group.
The timing of technology introduction places Australian
business owners at a disadvantage when dealing with cybersecurity. Assistance must be designed taking into account
this lack of experience and cater to non-technical small
business owners. However, training in a receptive format is
well received by small businesses Walker et al. (2007). In
Section 6.1 we discuss the advantages inherent in this demographic.
5.3. Organisational/process maturity
Cyber-security requires ongoing effort in education, process
and investment and is effected by the IT maturity of organisations. In Australia, approximately a third of small businesses operating in June 2015 did not survive to June 2019
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2020a). The small business
sector constantly has new entrants. Small businesses in
early inception and survival stages do not focus on processes Scott and Bruce (1987). In these early phases, owners/managers usually have direct oversight of business tasks
with formal processes coming in as the business matures and
expands. This is at odds with a well-rounded cyber defence
posture Alqatawna (2014) requiring business policies and controls. This lack of clarity on process details (for example on IT
fx times and specifc responsibilities around patching) leaves
the organisation exposed to opportunistic cyber-criminals.
Research on small business behaviour in the early stages of
business is required. Any cyber-security solutions or policies
for small business must consider that the business’ focus may
not be on the management of cyber-security processes and
rules.
5.4. Industry standards
The bewildering variety and complexity of industry standards
is a challenge that small business owners face. Some examples of cyber-security standards and frameworks include:
• NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology (2018)
• COBIT ISACA (2019c)
• ISO27001 Standards Australia Limited (2015)
• Australian Government Information Security Manual
Australian Signals Directorate and Australian Cyber
Security Centre (2020)
When used by a technical stakeholder such as a Chief Information Offcer, these guidelines and standards ft any business wishing to protect itself from cyber attackers. The base
assumption of many standards is a technically literate person being available to guide the business through analysis
and implementation. Few small businesses can justify such
a resource especially in the initial phase of setting up the
business. Simplifed versions of the above standards are available Commonwealth of Australia (2017), for example, the Australian Signals Directorate’s (ASD) Essential 8 Australian Cyber
Security Centre (2019a) and the small business cyber-security
guide Australian Cyber Security Centre (2020). However, the
range of available summarised resources vary in depth and
format. More importantly, these resources have limited comparability between each other or existing security standards.
It is unclear how a small business’ cyber-security work fts in
with other advice and standards once one list is completed.
The complex relationships between the different standards leaves non-technical small business owners with a very
low sense of self-effcacy, or sense of control. The relationship
between self-effcacy and action is a well-established driver of
human behaviour Maddux and Rogers (1983). In addition, low
self-effcacy in cyber-security could be a factor in an owner
rationalising inaction Renaud (2016).
Industry bodies have recognised the diffculties faced by
small businesses. ISACA, the governing body for COBIT, indicates small and medium enterprises will be catered for as part
of their COBIT 2019 standards ISACA (2019a). Unfortunately,to
date, this focus area is still under review and not available.
Until cyber-security standards recognise small business’
constraints, small business will fnd it hard to contextualise
cyber-security within their own business, or implement the
necessary controls.
5.5. Cyber insurance
Cyber insurance is a challenge for smaller businesses. Traditionally, insurance policies are used to protect a business
against disruption or loss, ranging from natural disasters
to theft. Business cyber insurance is a relatively new phenomenon, with many variations offered by different providers.
Various providers in Australia offer cyber insurance to their
small business customers Insurance Business Australia (2020).
Each insurer appears to require slightly different levels of
due diligence from the small business, while each policy provides coverage based on disparate internal standards and
policies BizCover (2019); Cyber Insurance Australia (2020);
Davenport (2017). Further study and research is needed to
provide clarity to small businesses around standards applied
across insurers.
Cyber insurance coverage has been called into question.
One highly publicised debate Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (2017); Satariano and Perlroth (2019) surrounds the insurance exemption for “act of war”
or “terrorism”. In most politically stable countries, a clause to
exclude coverage of catastrophic events, e.g. war/terrorism is
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 9
employed to manage underwriting exposure Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (2017). Most
insurance policy takers usually accept an act of war in a developed country to be a remote, acceptable business risk.
The effectiveness of such cyber insurance came under
scrutiny when Mondelez submitted a claim on suffering
US$700 million in damage from NotPetya malware in 2017
Satariano and Perlroth (2019). Zurich Insurance denied the
claim, citing the attack as an act of terrorism, as NotPetya
was designed to cause maximum damage as opposed to fnancial gain. The situation was further exacerbated when the US
government attributed NotPetya to Russian origins. The ongoing confict between Russia and Ukraine further strengthened
the terrorism case as Mondelez had infrastructure in Ukraine.
The decision by Zurich continues to be challenged in court by
Mondelez, and other insured companies. The issue of terrorism is so contentious that Lloyd’s of London Lloyds of London (2017) explicitly excludes terrorism related scenarios in
its cyber insurance cost analysis.
“It is diffcult to attribute a cyber-attack to a particular
group or actor” (Lloyds of London, 2017, P.17). The diffculty
stems partly from code from one malware author being reused
by another. When malware code is examined forensically, it
may contain artefacts of authors other than the criminal. For
example,the NotPetya malware contains code stolen from the
US National Security Agency (NSA) Greenberg (2018). Thus the
malware contains signatures indicative of US origin, despite
the attack being attributed to Russia. Accurate attack attribution is out of reach of the average organisation, especially
small business. This lack of attribution makes it diffcult to
prove an insurance claim as non-terrorism.
Small businesses and personal computers are often collateral damage of large scale cyber-attacks. The NotPetya
malware wiped clean 10% of all computers in Ukraine
Satariano and Perlroth (2019), along with many other international companies (including bouncing back into a company in
Russia itself Greenberg (2018)). Many small businesses were
highly likely to have been caught up in this fallout. Numerous Australian SME and large corporations were impacted by
the 2016 Petya attack NSW Government (2017),from which the
NotPetya malware is derived.
In addition to the Mondolez owned Cadbury factory in Hobart, NotPetya affected companies with an Australian presence such as DLA Piper, Maersk, TNT etc ABC News (2017);
Crozier (2018). Unfortunately,following the Australian government’s attribution of NotPetya to Russia, and NotPetya’s classsifcation as malware Taylor (2018), any Australian businesses’
with an act of terrorism insurance exception would reasonably fnd themselves not covered by their cyber insurance policy.
The battles still being fought through the international judicial systems indicate that cyber insurance is not mature
enough for Australian small businesses to use effectively. For
cyber insurance to be a risk mitigation tool for small business, signifcant industry, regulatory and assistance efforts are
needed to clarify and provide adequate coverage to small businesses in case of a breach.
5.6. Legal remediation
Despite the act of breaking into computers being covered under various legislations in different countries United Nations
Offce on Drugs and Crime (2013), cyber-criminals continue
to operate with impunity. One reason for this perceived lack
of consequences is the legal complexity of investigating and
prosecuting cyber-crimes.
Criminal and remediation processes are complicated when
the pepetrators are under a different legal jurisdiction to the
victims and properties and hence, subject to different legal processes and laws. The ease with which attacks can be
launched over the internet makes cross-jurisdictional cybercrime possible for criminals with minimal resources. Over half
of the countries responding to a 2013 United Nation’s (UN)
survey described a transnational element in the majority of
the cyber-crimes reported (United Nations Offce on Drugs and
Crime, 2013, P.117).
This cross jurisdictional complication is discussed in the
2014 Australian government Cross et al. (2014) study on online
fraud. The negative impact of transnational barriers on investigations and judicial outcomes for victims continues today
Bainbridge and Florance (2020a). Jurisdictional complications
possibly contribute to the overall low conviction rate (10%) of
police recorded cyber-crimes (United Nations Offce on Drugs
and Crime, 2013, P.172). However, international co-operation in
fghting cyber-crime is benefcial Reitano et al. (2015) in overcoming structural barriers to prosecuting international cybercrime.
The low conviction rate is exacerbated by the low rate
of reporting. Most cyber-crimes are not likely to be reported
(United Nations Offce on Drugs and Crime, 2013, P.119). In
Australia, the top 3 reasons Emami et al. (2019) for nonreporting of online fraud include embarrassment, belief police cannot fnd offender and uncertainty of right reporting
authority. Given these factors,the overall redress that actually
occurs is even smaller.
Even in the remote event a cyber-crime results in a conviction, the loss of confdentiality of data is a major issue.
Once a receiver has stolen data, this knowledge/data cannot
be removed from the receiver. Even where data can be located,the ease with which copies can be made and distributed
makes containment diffcult. One such example is the classifed data taken from the United States National Security
Agency (NSA) by an insider Bamford (2014). Despite investigations and knowledge of the locations of the document caches,
information from this breach is still available on the Internet
Szoldra (2016).
Outside of legislative penalties, there is little incentive for
Australian small businesses to report cyber-crime. With low
remediation rates and investigative diffculties, reporting to
authorities is replaced by the priority of recovering from the
cyber-incident.Without dedicated legal personnel to follow up
and navigate the complex systems involved, legal remediation
remains out of reach of most small businesses.
Substantial work is still needed on the cyber-crime legal
framework to convince small businesses that it is effective in
delivering remediation when needed.
10 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
5.7. Cost of a data breach
The gap in knowledge of the cost of inaction makes investing in cyber-security a diffcult decision for small businesses.
A small business needs to weigh up each investment decision against perceived benefts/loss. Existing data breach costing studies around the globe have primarily focused on larger
businesses Deloitte (2019b); Ponemon Institute and IBM Security (2019); US Government (2018).
Small businesses (1–49 employees) suffer an average loss
of US$14,000 per year per frm Hiscox (2019) across the US and
some European countries. Despite a low small business sample size, a US Government report US Government (2018) speculates the impact/cost of a breach on small business is possibly more devastating than for a large business due to the
loss of customers. There is no data available for Australian
businesses in the 0–19 employee range. In a survey by ACSC
Australian Cyber Security Centre (2019c), about half of small
business owners predicted it would take a few days to recover
from a hypothetical cyber attack.
Until relevant cyber-breach cost data is available, it will be
hard to persuade small business owners to invest in managing cyber-security risks Australian Government (2016). Scientifc and industry research is needed to examine ways of determining actual costs to small businesses from cyber breaches,
similar to larger enterprises Ponemon Institute and IBM Security (2019); US Government (2018).
6. Advantages for small businesses
The small business cohort has advantages over larger enterprises, despite the many challenges they face. With the right
assistance, a small business can become a less attractive target to cyber-criminals.
6.1. Small business agility
Two advantages for small businesses over their larger
counterparts are their fexibility and willingness to
learn. The COVID-19 pandemic showcased the agility
with which small businesses adapted to fuid situations Broadsheet (2020); Gallagher (2020); Gray (2020);
Khadem (2020); Longbottom (2020). Small business owners possess qualities allowing them to react with agility
Branicki et al. (2018); De Vries and Shields (2006).
The older demographic of small business owners comes
with advantages. Creative and critical thinking related digital
skills actually improve faster within older age groups with this
improvement attributed to everyday hands-on experience of
working with technology Eshet-Alkalai and Chajut (2010).
Flexibility, willingness to learn and creative thinking
are important cyber-security skills Bashir et al. (2015);
Freed (2014); Hall and Rao (2020). However small business owners, dominated by older but adventurous learners
Moran (1998); Zhao and Seibert (2006), still struggle with cybersecurity Laleh et al. (2013); Renaud (2016). Creative thinking skills cannot be used effectively when the basic information needed to create solutions is unavailable in an accessible format. Unlike conventional IT knowledge, e.g. productivity software and mass-market hardware, cyber-security
knowledge is still highly technical and inaccessible to the
public. In Australia, small business owners are largely offered adhoc cyber-security workshops and resources via disparate small business training and communication channels,
e.g. Australian Cyber Security Centre (2019b); Business Victoria (2019); Commonwealth of Australia (2017). With research
showing that cyber-security needs to be a gradual, ongoing and persuasive effort Von Solms and Van Niekerk (2013);
Vroom and Von Solms (2004), alternative formats and continuous approaches to small business cyber-security training need
to be examined.
A targeted capacity building curriculum, encompassing
both prevention and response, can be used to take advantage
of small businesses’ agility. Building practical coping skills appeals to creative problem solvers like small business owners,
without relying on formal processes Branicki et al. (2018). A
good starting point would be cyber-security advice for small
businesses focusing on prevention, e.g. password policies,
spotting phishing etc. This advice should extend to other aspects of a cyber-incident’s lifecycle such as incident response,
record keeping, technical recovery strategies etc.
Victim assistance facilities (as part of incident response)
like IDCare IDCare (2019), ACSC Report Australian Cyber Security Centre (0000), Scamwatch Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission (2019) etc do exist in Australia but
public awareness is not ubiquitous Emami et al. (2019). Increased education around crime reporting processes and
forensic practices will improve response to breaches by small
business owners.
Further research is needed to enable cyber-security education to take advantage of small business owners’ agility. Solutions need to be tailored to Walker et al. (2007), and take advantage of, the unique abilities of small business owners.
6.2. Small business networking and alliances
An alliance between small business owners would enable data
collection and advanced intelligence sharing, as well as peer
support. This real time knowledge of trending threats and attack methods would help small businesses to be vigilant to
emerging threats.
International large enterprises Abolhassan (2017);
Verizon (2019) have formed cyber-security alliances allowing members to gain advanced intelligence and work
collaboratively, and forming a cyber-security feedback loop.
In Australia, alliances between industry, government and
research such as AusCERT AusCERT (2019) and ACSC Partners
Australian Cyber Security Centre (2021) exist. Unfortunately
these alliances target organisations with dedicated cybersecurity IT personnel/budgets. For small businesses such
an alliance would provide easily accessible intelligence and
affordable skills. Yanpiboon and Schjoedt (2017).
A cyber-security alliance of small business owners could
allow law enforcement, legislators and technical support companies to respond rapidly to emerging threats. Each small
business could contribute cyber-security incidents and intelligence into a central database providing cyber-security peer
support to each other. Education and awareness act as exten-
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 11
sions of such an alliance, leading to it becoming a trusted authority on small business cyber-security.
Technical and administrative facilitators are needed to
overcome existing communication barriers between small
businesses and facilitate such an alliance. The exact facilitation and support needed to start and maintain such a new
alliance needs to be researched and clarifed.
6.3. Advantages of zero trust model
Suitable security models differ due to the scale of organisations. The low requirement for IT homogeneity makes zero
trust security models Rose et al. (2020) a prime framework
for small business. Small businesses have limited large scale
technical legacy to undo and their scattered IT operations suit
a zero trust model.
The traditional network perimeter safeguards an IT ecosystem that is relatively obstacle-free internally, leading
to the analogy of a hard shell enclosing a chewy centre
Kindervag (2016). The problem of an attacker having free reign
once a perimeter is bypassed has been demonstrated in large
scale breaches 115th Congress Oversight & Government Reform Committee (2018); Australian National University (2019).
Google BeyondCorp (2014), as well as other stakeholders
Curran (2016), have recognised the futility of safeguarding an
ever changing network perimeter SE Radio (2019); Ward and
Beyer (2014), and have adopted zero trust principles in their
services in their BeyondCorp design. The zero trust security
model Kindervag (2010) is a network model for defence that
presumes an attacker has gained access inside the hardened
perimeter. In a zero trust model, access control is no longer
performed at the network surrounding the IT systems, but focused on authentication and authorisation of user access to
individual services.
Small businesses have diffculty with perimeter defence as
they don’t own many of the IT services used. In many ways,
the zero trust architecture is one small businesses have been
managing for many years. Zero trust allows focus on individual service protection, thus limiting impacts even if an individual service gets breached.
However, small businesses need assistance with implementing a zero trust model. Each new device needs arduous processes of set-up for multiple services rather than one
perimeter Escobedo et al. (2017). Abstracting security into a
layer/functional component Cittadini et al. (2016) allows standardisation and re-use across multiple businesses. This creates an opportunity for a reusable design/platform that small
businesses can implement in their unique IT environments.
Currently there are very few products and little research
in this context. Despite implementation within large international companies such as Google and Akamai, zero trust has
yet to see signifcant momentum within the Australian business landscape. Development of zero trust IT ecosystems for
small business could bring high returns due to the large number of end users.
6.4. Open source cyber-security tools
Open source software & hardware (OSSH) is developed and
(usually) released for free by a community of software makers and hardware designers. OSSH is an option used by IT
professionals when paid IT products, including cyber-security
products, do not meet technical or cost requirements. In embracing OSSH, Australian small businesses would be following in the footsteps of Australian government authorities.
Various Australian government departments have encouraged use of OSS software as well as making software open
source in general Australian Government Information Management Offce (2011); Digital Transformation Agency (0000);
Queensland Government (2020); Victorian Government (0000).
However, a lack of technical expertise has hampered small
business’ ability to take advantage of free OSSH security solutions Cisco (2020); Lyon (2019); Welte and Ayuso (2014).
The ethos of open contribution by volunteers results in
OSSH products being released under broad licenses (e.g. GNU
general public use Free Software Foundation (2007), creative
commons licenseCreative Commons (2020) etc.) that permit
most uses. In some cases, this includes commercial use with
nothing more than attribution. OSSH has produced popular
projects such as the MySQL database, Fedora Linux operating
system, Arduino microcontroller etc which enable the development of commercial products. A variety of free OSSH cybersecurity tools are now available CyberX (2018).
However, characterising OSSH as free or low cost ignores
the overall cost of ownership beyond initial fnancial outlay
for supporting equipment and setup effort Ven et al. (2008).
Both the Equifax breach 115th Congress Oversight & Government Reform Committee (2018) and industry standards like
ITIL Alojail (2013) have demonstrated the critical role played
by post-implementation operational support in securing an IT
environment.
To enable ongoing maintenance, enterprise versions of
OSSH are sold by third party vendors including items such
as on-going support, updates, certifcations etc. For example, RedHat Enterprise Linux is based on OSSH Fedora Linux
RedHat (2020) and offers the support options that Fedora does
not. In larger businesses, where enterprise level OSSH products may not exist, in-house support is enabled by internal
staff with dedicated responsibilities. A lack of technical expertise and fnancial resources in a small business is an impediment to the use of OSSH.
OSSH presents an opportunity for technical security solutions for small business owners. OSSH provides many benefts
for small businesses including:
• On-going reviews minimising security vulnerabilities from
human error Ebart (2008).
• Reducing vendor lock-in Ven et al. (2008).
• Being part of the software community with a stake as users
in the software development Wesselius (2008).
• Encouraging good cyber-security hygiene habits by enabling adoption in the early stages of the business lifecycle.
Australian small businesses could leverage the expertise
of developers active in open source development. They could
participate in local open source communities like PyCon
PyCon AU (2021) and Linux Australia Linux Australia (0000) to
make their business needs met and their voices heard. Building bridges between the OSSH and small business communities could provide value for both.
12 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
Table 4 – Cyber-security Data Collection Practice Issues and Desired Outcomes.
Section Current Challenge Proposed Solution Proposed
Responsible
Bodies
4 & 4.1 Lack of focus Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2019); Eurostat (2020a)
on micro businesses in research.
Focused research on <20 employee businesses to
capture the operational behaviour of small
businesses.
Government;
Research
4.2 Use of novel technical
Symantec (2019) terminologies.
Standard terminologies used to ensure language
describes the same phenomenon.
Standards Bodies;
Industry
4.3 Use of disparate
Deloitte Australia (2016) grouping
sizes.
Acknowledgement of group size range impacts
in fndings.
Industry; Research
4.4 Unaccounted self-reporting bias
Donaldson and
Grant-Vallone (2002); Fisher and
Katz (2000) in results.
Social desirability and awareness adjustments
incorporated into self-reported statistics to
account for bias from collection method, both
technical and psychological.
Statistical
Collection; Research
Over reliance on surveys
Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2019); Australian Cyber
Security Centre (2019c);
NSW Government (2017) as a data
gathering instrument.
Detection based small business monitoring to
reduce reliance on self-reported statistics.
Industry;
Government
4.5 Survey instruments Boynton (2004)
favouring technically savvy
Hiscox (2019);
NSW Government (2017) cohorts.
Demographically representative respondents of
the small business landscape sourced to obtain
relevant understanding of gaps and priorities.
Government;
Statistical Collection
Note: In the rapidly evolving feld of cyber-security, research is advanced by a combination of different parties: scientifc, government, industry, journalistic etc. The“research” bodies referenced here, and in subsequent tables, include all who investigate the
cyber-security challenge in question.
Given the importance of cyber-security in business, further
research is needed to analyse the suitability of OSSH security
products into the Australian small business landscape and the
obstacles to be negotiated to remove entry barriers.
7. Discussion
There are few reviews dedicated to the small business cybersecurity landscape. Our research reveals many constraints in
small business adoption of cyber-security practices, but also
advantages in the cohort that should be leveraged.
7.1. Data collection
As Table 4 illustrates, data collection in small business cybersecurity research requires improvements in regards to scope,
consistency and respondent range.
From our review of the literature, current cyber-security research lacks representative results and insights on small business only cohorts due to being bundled with better resourced
medium businesses. Comparison between widely disparate
groups introduces diffculties in producing focused learnings
that can be applied to micro businesses and sole traders. Further research is needed on the sub 20 employee cohort to produce targeted fndings.
Our research shows that the wide variety of language
and defnitions used within the cyber-security industry poses
issues with interpretation of survey/research fndings. Mismatched cohort sizes make comparisons diffcult, and sometimes misleading. Standardisation of both group defnitions
and terminologies is needed within cyber-security research
and industry to enable useful comparison and longitudinal
use of research data.
The heavy use of self-reported surveys introduces social
desirability and awareness bias in results. Rather than relying solely on self-reported data for small business research on
quantitative matters e.g. breach rate, technology involved, we
suggest a wider deployment of detection based collection. For
qualitative research, researchers should actively account and
compensate for self-reporting bias, if possible, as part of their
results.
Finally as our research highlights, distortion in research results is worsened by the technical methods by which many
surveys are conducted. Technical data collection channels
such as online surveys, result in samples biased towards respondents comfortable with using technology. Demographic
data shows small business owners are not all technically
savvy. Surveys need to be accessible and promoted towards
both technically savvy and non-technical respondents to ensure all types of business owners are represented.
7.2. Small business challenges
In addition to the research challenges listed above that being
a small business poses many hurdles in understanding and
implementing cyber-security, as summarised in Table 5.
Our research found that small businesses tend to operate
differently from large corporations due to their size, leading
to different IT usage pattern. One phenomenon is the tendency to mix personal and business use in devices and se-
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 13
Table 5 – Cyber-security Challenges for Small Businesses.
Section Current Situation The Way Forward Best Responsible
Bodies
5.1 Lack of clarity on application user liability
August and Tunca (2011); Selznick and
LaMacchia (2018) in the event of a breach.
Clarifcation of breach liability if small business
uses an external IT service.
Professional Bodies;
Government
Small number of cyber-security solutions
that take into account mixed physical
ownership Almubayedh et al. (2018);
Australian Communications and Media
Authority (ACMA) (2013) IT environments.
Small business mode of operation research and
product development that recognises the need
for hybrid IT environments.
Research; Industry
Effective reuse of current cyber-security
solutions are prevented by existing
differences between large and small
enterprise IT architectures [Section 5.1].
Small business common IT architecture research
and tailored resources built for small businesses
leading to ft-for-purpose cyber-security tools
and advice.
Research; Government
5.2 Small business owners have several
challenges in technical knowledge to
effectively use cyber-security information
today.
Development of material suitable for small
business knowledge level and mode of learning
Government
5.3 Small businesses are likely to be in an
inception state Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2020a) with immature
processes and organisation Scott and
Bruce (1987).
Further development of standards and tools that
takes organisational immaturity into account.
Industry; Research
5.4 Industry standards Australian Signals
Directorate and Australian Cyber Security
Centre (2020); ISACA (2019c);
National Institute of Standards and
Technology (2018); Standards Australia
Limited (2015) require a high level of
technical expertise to follow.
Standards that are targeted towards a small
business audience recognising external
constraints ISACA (2019a) with a migration path
to existing full standards.
Standards Bodies;
Research; Government
5.5 Lack of clarity Satariano and
Perlroth (2019) around insurance
requirements and coverage.
Further research, product development and
guidance for small business on all aspects of
cyber insurance to enable informed choices and
adequate coverage.
Research; Government
5.6 Lack of small business self-effcacy
around legal remediation United Nations
Offce on Drugs and Crime (2013) from
cyber-crime.
Further clarifcation, research and development
around legal aspects of cyber-crime and
associated remediation for small businesses.
Government
5.7 Lack of relevant data
US Government (2018) on costs associated
with cyber breaches for small business.
Further research to clarify the cost of data
breaches for comparable small business cohort,
to enable accurate risk based decisions making
from small business.
Research; Statistical
Collection
curing these devices using traditional security solutions such
as MDM and MAM pose ethical and logistical dilemmas. The
rising use of cloud services by small business also raises questions around liability, control and visibility a small business
actually has over its IT security.
Through demographic statistics we found that small businesses and their owners are at a disadvantage in regards to
experience with and knowledge of technology. Given the older
demographic, the majority of small business owners have
spent a smaller proportion of their working lives on the internet, when compared to younger generations. This lower level
of technical literacy needs to be accounted for in training and
standards. It is unrealistic to expect non-technical people to
self-drive and implement the highly technical security standards available today.
Small businesses’ tendency to be at an inception stage
is also at odds with the process and oversight driven cybersecurity standards, with research showing early stage businesses do not have many established processes and management practices. Standards and solutions for small businesses
need to factor in this mode of operation.
The general lack of maturity around cyber insurance, judicial processes and cost data all contribute to the state of confusion in cyber-security for small businesses. The ongoing litigation between insurance providers and larger corporations
shows cyber insurance is not yet an effective risk management tool for small business. Furthermore, the lack of comparable cyber-incident data leaves business owners with little
understanding of the potential loss they are insuring against.
Compounding this are the general diffculties in successfully
prosecuting cyber-criminals, leaving small business owners
with a lack of self-effcacy in the judicial system. The low
sense of self-effcacy leads to inaction and is refected in the
low rate of reporting. Unfortunately, a low rate of reporting
leads to cyber-criminals continuing to operate with impunity.
14 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
Table 6 – Small Business Cyber-security Advantages.
Section Advantages Opportunities Best Responsible
Bodies
6.1 Agility and resilience of small businesses
Branicki et al. (2018); De Vries and
Shields (2006) in the face of challenges -
take advantage of traditional fexibility
that small businesses present.
Support Walker et al. (2007) for small business to
develop capabilities around ongoing cyber
hygiene and response to breaches.
Government
6.2 Cohort size - leverage the large number of
small businesses.
Further research into feasibility and assistance
required in forming networks Abolhassan (2017);
Verizon (2019) that can be an early warning
system within small business cohort. Sharing of
knowledge to enable peer support.
Government
6.3 Zero Trust Model Kindervag (2016) - make
use of similarities between zero trust
model and common small business
architecture.
Further technical research to clarify how the use
of zero trust principles can ft into small
business’ highly hybridised IT environments;
Identifcation of opportunities and development
of solutions to leverage overlaps.
Research; Industry
6.4 Open Source Security Products
Cisco (2020); Lyon (2019); Welte and
Ayuso (2014) - repurpose existing low cost
solutions to ft small business needs.
Further research into the possibilities and
logistics required to leverage open source
security products to match small business’
operating model and constraints, making use of
advantages Ebart (2008); Ven et al. (2008);
Wesselius (2008) that open source offers.
Research
Our examination reveals the need to better understand
small business IT usage, demographics, mode of operation
and structural constraints. By understanding the differences
and challenges involved,the discussion around cyber-security
could match small business users’ needs and expectations.
7.3. Opportunities
By taking a step back to look at small business as a whole,
our research (summarised in Table 6) found opportunities for
small business with regards to cyber-security. These opportunities take advantage of the unique landscape and characteristics of small businesses and their owners, and if leveraged,
would lead to more resilient small businesses.
Our research found a small business owner’s agility and
responsiveness could lead to better cyber-security responses.
Rather than focus on formal and process based security
standards, a more effective method would be to teach the
skills/capabilities a small business needs to both protect itself as well as respond to an incident. Focusing on the skills
needed taps into the natural ways in which small businesses
excel at solving problems.
Small businesses could use their large numbers to their advantage by establishing alliances. Cyber-security alliances are
not new and have been shown to beneft members. To date, alliances have formed between large organisations. Small business would obtain defnite advantages from such an alliance,
especially in terms of peer support, early intelligence and education.
Our research identifed a couple of technical cyber-security
solutions that could be leveraged for small business cybersecurity with the right collaboration and product development. A zero trust model, by assuming no safe network
boundaries, aligns the base IT architecture closer to the
small businesses mode of operation. By discarding a need
to ring-fence disparate IT systems, a zero trust model would
drive a realistic security architecture plan to protect small
businesses. In a similar manner, open source cyber-security
software would give small businesses opportunities both
in overcoming fnancial barriers to entry and having their
needs met.
7.4. International implications
In this study we detailed the effects of cyber-security decisions/actions by organisations (legal or otherwise) on countries outside their geographical boundaries. Within countries
with similar societal profle to Australia, such as UK and US, a
similarity in cyber-security has been observed in the evidence
produced. The parallels ranged from research approaches e.g.
survey, interviews, sole trader/micro business exclusion, to
government actions e.g. advisories, frameworks etc. These
similarities extended to small business dominance of economy, owners’ awareness of cyber-security knowledge gaps, as
well as comparable technology skill levels.
Given technology landscapes are also very similar across
these countries, it is not inconceivable that small businesses
in other countries with similar societal profles to Australia,
such as the UK and US, share similar human struggles with
cyber-security. As such any solutions shown to work in Australia would merit further examinations in other such countries.
The important role of human infuence on small business
cyber-security leads us to conclude that the small business
challenges and characteristics discussed in this paper are not
unique to Australian small businesses.
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 15
8. Conclusion
The urgent need to protect small businesses from cybercriminals is driven by increasing pressures on small businesses to use technology. Small businesses face pressure to
adopttechnology from multiple fronts, ranging from customer
expectations to world events. Through our examination of evidence from both research and industry, we have identifed
gaps in the pursuit of cyber-security for small businesses at
multiple levels.
At a data level, further efforts are needed to clarify and
improve understanding around small and micro businesses’
ways of working, their IT architecture and real world small
business breach loss statistics. The understanding must be
gained through representative small and micro business samples and communicated using standardised security terminologies, so that data and lessons can be transferred in a wider
context.
In addition, we discussed small business constraints that
impacts on small business’s ability to protect themselves.
These range from availability of technical knowledge within
the business, organisational maturity and mixed IT ownership. Uncertainties around external factors such as cyberinsurance, legal remediation and cost of cyber-incidents also
make small business decisions around cyber-security diffcult.
Through our overview approach, opportunities to apply
non-traditional solutions to cyber-security are also becoming
apparent. Promising characteristics including alliances, a new
security paradigm and open source community for helping
small businesses to build up their defences were also identifed.
With the right research and support, a more coherent understanding of small business cyber-security needs and risks
can lead to more resilient small businesses. It is through a
combination of these insights that cyber-security solutions
can be made accessible to ft better with small businesses,
rather than expect small businesses to ft into current cybersecurity solutions. Industry, government and society at large
also beneft from the reduced investigative and human costs
of cyber-incidents. Supporting small business cyber-security
has far reaching benefts, to the economy, the community and
national security.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing fnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to infuence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgement
This research is supported by an Australian Government Research Training Program (RTP) Scholarship.
Thanks to the reviewers for their comments and insight
which improved the clarity and focus of this article.
REFERENCES
115th Congress Oversight & Government Reform Committee,
2018. Congressional report, The equifax data breach, majority
staff report. https://republicans-oversight.house.gov/
wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Equifax-Report.pdf.
ABC News. Petya cyber attack: ransomware virus hits computer
servers across globe, australian offce affected. ABC News
2017.
ABC News, 2020. NT Chief minister delivers emotional address to
territorians about coronavirus shutdown | ABC News Video.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QBV1gfcectU.
Abid AA, Rahim M, Scheepers H. Experienced benefts and
barriers of e-Business technology adoption by SME suppliers.
Commun. IBIMA 2011;2011(October):1–11.
doi:10.5171/2011.7917780.
Abolhassan F. Cyber security. simply. make it happen. leveraging
digitization through IT security. 1st ed 20. Springer
International Publishing : Imprint: Springer; 2017.
Acar Y, Stransky C, Wermke D, Mazurek ML, Fahl S. Security
developer studies with github users: exploring a convenience
sample. Proc. 13th Symp. Usable Priv. Secur. SOUPS 2017
2019(Soups):81–95.
Alahmari A, Duncan B. Cybersecurity risk management in small
and medium-Sized enterprises: A Systematic review of recent
evidence. 2020 Int. Conf. Cyber Situational Awareness, Data
Anal. Assessment, Cyber SA 2020 2020.
doi:10.1109/CyberSA49311.2020.9139638.
Almeida F, Carvalho I, Cruz F. Structure and challenges of a
security policy on small and medium enterprises. KSII Trans.
Internet Inf. Syst. 2018;12(2):747–63.
doi:10.3837/tiis.2018.02.012.
Almubayedh D, Khalis MA, Alazman G, Alabdali M, Al-Refai R,
Nagy N. Security related issues in Saudi Arabia small
organizations: A Saudi case study. In: 21st Saudi Comput. Soc.
Natl. Comput. Conf. NCC 2018. Ar Riyad, Saudi Arabia: IEEE;
2018. p. 1–6. doi:10.1109/NCG.2018.8593058.
Alojail MA. ITIL usage, and use of ITIL recommended practices
and the IT outsourcing relationship quality. RMIT; 2013.
Alqatawna J. The challenge of implementing information
security standards in small and medium e-Business
enterprises. J. Softw. Eng. Appl. 2014;7(10):883.
Amazon AWS, 2020. AWS Customer support policy for
penetration customer service policy for penetration testing.
https://aws.amazon.com/security/penetration-testing/.
Armstrong D. I lost my identity to a fraudster, and it took six
years to clean up the mess. Bloom. Businessweek 2019;2019.
August T, Tunca TI. Who should be responsible for software
security? a comparative analysis of liability policies in
network environments. Manage. Sci. 2011;57(5):934–59.
doi:10.1287/mnsc.1100.1304.
AusCERT, 2019. AusCERT become a member.
https://www.auscert.org.au/become-a-member/.
Australian bureau of statistics, 2001. 1321.0 - Small business in
Australia, 2001.
https://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/1321.0.
Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2019. 8167.0 Selected
characteristics of Australian business.
https://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/
allprimarymainfeatures/C575766838376FA0CA
2573E1000E3F2F?opendocument.
Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2020a. 8165.0 - Counts of
Australian businesses, including entries and exits, June 2015
to June 2019. https://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/
DetailsPage/8165.0June 2015 to June 2019?OpenDocument.
Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2020b. 8167.0 - Characteristics of
Australian business, 2018-19. https://www.abs.gov.au/
16 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
statistics/industry/technology-and-innovation/
characteristics-australian-business/latest-release.
Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA), 2013.
The connected business - ACMA research snapshot.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=etjjds2PIN0.
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, 2019.
ScamWatch. https://www.scamwatch.gov.au/.
Australian Cyber Security Centre, Report cyber, are you a victim
of cybercrime? https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/report.
Australian Cyber Security Centre, 2019a. Australian signal
directorate essential eight maturity model.
https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/view-all-content/publications/
essential-eight-maturity-model.
Australian Cyber Security Centre, 2019b. Small business cyber
security guide. https://www.cyber.gov.au/sites/default/fles/
2019-10/SmallBusinessCyberSecurityGuide.pdf.
Australian Cyber Security Centre, 2019c. Supporting Small
Businesses The ACSC Small Business Cyber Security Guide
and Companion Materials.
Australian cyber security centre, 2020. Small business cyber
security guide.
https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/view-all-content/publications/
small-business-cyber-security-guide.
Australian Cyber Security Centre, 2021. Become a partner. https:
//www.cyber.gov.au/partner-hub/become-a-partner#no-back.
Australian Cyber Security Centre, Australian Signals Directorate,
2020. Cyber security and Australian small businesses.
https://www.cyber.gov.au/sites/default/fles/2020-07/
ACSCSmallBusinessSurveyReport.pdf.
Australian Government, 2016. Australia’s cyber security strategy -
enabling innovation, growth and prosperity.
https://cybersecuritystrategy.homeaffairs.gov.au/
AssetLibrary/dist/assets/images/PMC-Cyber-Strategy.pdf.
Australian Government Information Management Offce, 2011. A
guide to open source software for Australian government
agencies. https://www.ghdonline.org/uploads/
AGuidetoOpenSourceSoftware.pdf.
Australian National University, 2019. Incident report on the
breach of the Australian national university administrative
systems. https://imagedepot.anu.edu.au/scapa/Website/
SCAPA190209_Public_report_web_2.pdf.
Australian Productivity Commission and New Zealand
Productivity Commission, 2019. Growing the digital economy
in Australia and New Zealand. Maximising opportunities for
SMEs. https://www.pc.gov.au/research/completed/
growing-digital-economy/growing-digital-economy.pdf.
Australian Signals Directorate, Australian Cyber Security Centre,
2020. Australian government information security manual.
https://www.cyber.gov.au/sites/default/fles/2020-06/
AustralianGovernmentInformationSecurityManual%
28June 2020%29.pdf.
Azar A. Department of health and human services, Annual civil
monetary penalties infation adjustment, Vol. 85; 2020.
p. 2869–87. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/
FR-2020-01-17/pdf/2020-00738.pdf.
Bada M, Nurse J. Developing cybersecurity education and
awareness programmes for small- and medium-Sized
enterprises (SMEs). Inf. Comput. Secur. 2019;27(3):393–410.
doi:10.1108/ICS-07-2018-0080.
Bainbridge A, Florance L. Tradies frustrated by banks as business
email scam costs them $51000. ABC News 2020.
Bainbridge A, Florance L. Victims to vigilantes. ABC News 2020.
Bales RF, Strodtbeck FL, Mills TM, Roseborough ME. Channels of
communication in small groups. Am. Sociol. Rev.
1951;16(4):461–8.
Bamford J. The most wanted man in the world. Wired Mag. 2014.
Bashir M, Lambert A, Wee JMC, Guo B. An examination of the
vocational and psychological characteristics of cybersecurity
competition participants. USENIX Summit Gaming, Games,
Gamifcation Secur. Educ. 2015:1–8.
BBC News. Margaret atwood says thieves targeted Handmaid’s
tale sequel. BBC News 2019.
Bernik I, Prislan K. Measuring information security performance
with 10 by 10 model for holistic state evaluation. PLoS ONE
2016;11(9):1–33. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0163050.
BeyondCorp, 2014. Beyondcorp : A new approach to enterprise
security. www.beyondcorp.com.
BizCover, 2019. Fact sheet cyber liability insurance.
https://www.bizcover.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/
BC1243_FactSheet_CyberLiability_Nov19_FINAL-5.pdf.
Boynton PM. Administering, analysing, and reporting your
questionnaire. BMJ(Clinical Res. Ed. 2004;328(7452):1372–5.
doi:10.1136/bmj.328.7452.1372.
Branicki LJ, Sullivan-Taylor B, Livschitz SR. How entrepreneurial
resilience generates resilient SMEs. Int. J. Entrep. Behav. Res.
2018;24(7):1244–63. doi:10.1108/IJEBR-11-2016-0396.
British Crown, 2015. Small business survey 2014: SME Employers.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/414963/
bis-15-151-small-business-survey-2014-sme-employers_v1.
pdf.
British Crown, 2019. Business population estimates for the UK
and regions 2019. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/254552/
13-92-business-population-estimates-2013-stats-release-4.
pdf.
Broadsheet, 2020. Live list: Melbourne restaurants pivoting to
takeaway due to coronavirus.
https://www.broadsheet.com.au/melbourne/guides/live-listmelbourne-restaurants-pivoting-takeaway-due-coronavirus.
Bryan LL. Effective information security strategies for small
business. Int. J. Cyber Criminol. 2020;14(1):341–60.
doi:10.5281/zenodo.3760328.
Business Victoria, 2019. Small business workshops and events.
https://www.business.vic.gov.au/events.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018. Health
insurance portability and accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).
https://www.cdc.gov/phlp/publications/topic/hipaa.html.
Chau D. Ticketmaster admits customer details may have been
stolen in hack. ABC News 2018.
Cheng L, Li Y, Li W, Holm E, Zhai Q. Understanding the violation
of IS security policy in organizations: an integrated model
based on social control and deterrence theory. Comput. Secur.
2013;39(PART B):447–59. doi:10.1016/j.cose.2013.09.009.
Chiappetta M. Uber eats demand soars due to COVID-19 crisis.
Forbes 2020.
Cisco, 2020. Snort intrusion detection system.
https://www.snort.org/.
Cittadini L, Spear B, Beyer B, Saltonstall M. Beyondcorp part III:
the access proxy. login Mag. USENIX SAGE 2016:28–33.
Coertze J, Von Solms R. A software gateway to affordable and
effective information security governance in SMMEs. In: 2013
Inf. Secur. South Africa - Proc. ISSA 2013 Conf.. IEEE; 2013.
p. 1–8. doi:10.1109/ISSA.2013.6641035.
Commonwealth of Australia, 2017. Cyber security: The small
business best practice guide.
https://www.asbfeo.gov.au/sites/default/fles/documents/
ASBFEO-cyber-security-research-report.pdf.
Commonwealth of Australia, Australian Small Business and
Family Enterprise Ombudsman, 2019. Small Business Counts,
Small Business in the Australian Economy.
http://www.asbfeo.gov.au/sites/default/fles/
Small_Business_Statistical_Report-Final.pdf.
Council of The European Union, 2016. GDPR Legislative Act.
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=
CELEX:32016R0679&from=EN.
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 17
Creative Commons, 2020. Creative Commons.
https://creativecommons.org/.
Cross, C., Smith, R. G., Richards, K., 2014. Challenges of
responding to online fraud victimisation in Australia. https:
//www.aic.gov.au/sites/default/fles/2020-05/tandi474.pdf.
Crozier R. DLA Piper paid 15000 hours of IT overtime after
notpetya attack. ITNews 2018.
Cruz M, Boster F, Rodriguez J. The impact of group size and
proportion of shared information on the exchange and
integration of information in groups. Communic. Res.
1997;24(3):291–313.
Curran J. Chaffetz urges ’zero-Trust Model’ for network security.
Cybersecurity Policy Rep. 2016.
Cyber Insurance Australia, 2020. Cyber insurance Australia quote
form. https://www.cyberinsuranceaustralia.com.au/.
CyberX, 2018. Free cyberSecurity tools : The ultimate list (2018).
https://cyberx.tech/free-cybersecurity-tools/.
Cynch Security, Deakin University, RMIT University, AustCyber,
2021. Big cyber security questions for small business The state
of cyber ftness in Australian small businesses.
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/
576a6006f5e23175ba4e41d8/t/601b2bcc8724d11f1c78b95c/
1612393427067/Cynch+-+Big+cyber+security+questions+for+
small+business+-+White+paper.pdf.
D’Arcy J, Hovav A. Does one size ft all? examining the differential
effects of is security countermeasures. J. Bus. Ethics
2009;89(SUPPL. 1):59–71. doi:10.1007/s10551-008-9909-7.
Davenport A. Is cyber insurance really worth it? CRN Mag. 2017.
De Vries H, Shields M. Towards a theory of entrepreneurial
resilience : acase study analysis of new zealand SME owner
operators. Appl. Res. J. 2006;5(1):33–44.
Deloitte, 2019a. The economic value of cloud services in
Australia. https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/
au/Documents/Economics/deloitte-au-economicsvalue-cloud-services-australia-230719.pdf.
Deloitte, 2019b. The future of cyber survey 2019.
https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/pages/advisory/articles/
future-of-cyber-survey.html.
Deloitte Australia, 2016. SMBs in the digital race for the customer.
http://www2.deloitte.com/au/en/pages/economics/articles/
SMBs-race-digital-customer.html.
Department of Parliamentary Services, 2018. Small Business
Sector Contribution to the Australian Economy.
https://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/library/prspub/
6272043/upload_binary/6272043.pdf.
Detken KO, Jahnke M, Birkholz H, Dwertmann C. Design and
implementation of virtual security appliances (VSA) for SME.
In: Proc. 2013 IEEE 7th Int. Conf. Intell. Data Acquis. Adv.
Comput. Syst. IDAACS 2013. IEEE; 2013. p. 30–5.
doi:10.1109/IDAACS.2013.6662634.
Digital Transformation Agency,. Simple, clear and fast public
services. https://www.dta.gov.au/help-and-advice/
digital-service-standard/digital-service-standard-criteria.
Dignan L. Uber vs. lyft: how the rivals approach cloud, AI, and
machine learning. ZDNet 2019.
Dimopoulos V, Furnell S, Jennex M, Kritharas I. Approaches to IT
security in small and medium enterprises. In: Proc. 2nd Aust.
Inf. Secur. Manag. Conf. Secur. Futur. Perth, West. Aust.
Novemb. 26th, 2004; 2004. p. 73–82.
https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/221148270_Approaches_to_IT_Security_in_Small_
and_Medium_Enterprises.
Dojkovski S, Lichenstein S, Warren M. Fostering information
security culture in small and medium size enterprises: An
interpretive study in Australia. In: Eur. Conf. Inf. Syst..
Association for Information Systems Electronic Library
(AISeL); 2007. p. 1560–71. http://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2007/120.
Dojkovski S, Lichenstein S, Warren M. Enabling information
security culture: Infuences and challenges for Australian
SMEs. Australas. Conf. Inf. Syst.. Association for information
systems (AISeL), 2010. http://aisel.aisnet.org/acis2010/61.
Dojkovski S, Lichtenstein S, Warren M. Challenges in fostering an
information security culture in australian small and medium
sized enterprises. 5th Eur. Conf. Inf. Warf. Secur. 2006, ECIW
2006 2006:31–40.
Donaldson SI, Grant-Vallone EJ. Understanding self-Report bias in
organizational behavior research. J. Bus. Psychol.
2002;17(2):245–60. doi:10.1023/A:1019637632584.
Ebart C. Open source software in industry. IEEE Softw.
2008;25(3):52–3.
Emami, C., Smith, R. G., Jorna, P., 2019. Online fraud victimisation
in Australia: Risks and protective factors.
https://www.aic.gov.au/sites/default/fles/2020-05/
rr16_online_fraud_victimisation_in_australia-v3.pdf.
Escobedo V, Beyer B, Saltonstall M, Zyzniewski F. Beyondcorp 5:
the user experience. login Mag. USENIX SAGE 2017;42(3):38–43.
Eshet-Alkalai Y, Chajut E. You can teach old dogs new tricks: the
factors that affect changes over time in digital literacy. J. Inf.
Technol. Educ. Res. 2010;9:173–81. doi:10.28945/1186.
Eurostat, 2020a. ICT security in enterprises. https://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/statistics-explained/pdfscache/9132.pdf.
Eurostat, 2020b. Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
https:
//ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/structural-business-statistics/
structural-business-statistics/sme.
Fisher R, Katz J. Social-Desirability bias and the validity of
self-Reported values. Psychol. Mark. 2000;17(2):105–20.
Free Software Foundation, 2007. GNU general public license.
https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html.
10.1007/3-540-28623-3_23
Freed SE. Examination of personality characteristics among
cybersecurity and information technology professionals.
University of Tennessee at Chattanoog; 2014. Masters.
Gallagher N. One of KC’s best craft cocktail bars adapts with
bottled drinks and kits during coronavirus quarantine. Kansas
City Mag. 2020.
Gartner Inc, 2020. Gartner forecasts worldwide public cloud
end-user spending to grow 18% in 2021.
https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/
2020-11-17-gartner-forecasts-worldwide-public-cloudend-user-spending-to-grow-18-percent-in-2021.
Glassdoor, 2019. Average IT administrator salaries.
https://www.glassdoor.com.au/Salaries/
it-administrator-salary-SRCH_KO0,16.htm.
Google, 2020a. Cloud Security FAQ.
https://support.google.com/cloud/answer/6262505?hl=en.
Google, 2020b. GSuite by google cloud endpoint management.
https://gsuite.google.com/products/admin/endpoint/.
Google, 2020c. Overview : Manage devices with google endpoint
management tailor your basic mobile device management.
https://support.google.com/a/answer/1734200?hl=en-AU.
Gray D. Craft brewer pivots to hand sanitiser as frms rise to virus
challenge. Age (Omaha). 2020.
Greenberg A. The untold story of notpetya, the most devastating
cyberattack in history. Wired 2018.
Gupta A, Hammond R. Information systems security issues and
decisions for small businesses: an empirical examination. Inf.
Manag. Comput. Secur. 2005;13(4):297–310.
doi:10.1108/09685220510614425.
Hall JL, Rao A. Non-Technical skills needed by cyber security
graduates. In: IEEE Educ. Conf.. Porto, Portugal: IEEE Education
Society; 2020. p. 14–18.
Harris MA, Patten KP. Mobile device security considerations for
small- and medium-Sized enterprise business mobility. Inf.
Manag. Comput. Secur. 2014;22(1):97–114.
doi:10.1108/IMCS-03-2013-0019.
18 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
Heidt M, Gerlach JP, Buxmann P. Investigating the security divide
between SME and large companies: how SME characteristics
infuence organizational IT security investments. Inf. Syst.
Front. 2019;21(6):1285–305. doi:10.1007/s10796-019-09959-1.
Hiscox, 2019. Hiscox cyber readiness report 2019.
https://www.hiscox.co.uk/sites/uk/fles/documents/2019-04/
Hiscox_Cyber_Readiness_Report_2019.PDF.
Hofstede GH. Culture’S consequences : Comparing values,
behaviors, institutions, and organizations across nations. 2nd
ed. Thousand Oaks, Calif: Sage Publications; 2001.
IDC, 2019. Worldwide spending on security solutions forecast to
reach $103.1 billion in 2019, according to new IDC spending
guide.
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS44150518.
IDCare, 2019. IDCare. https://www.idcare.org.
Insurance Business Australia, 2020. Cyber insurance products.
https://www.insurancebusinessmag.com/au/
commercial-insurance-coverage-area/cyber-12/.
Intruder, 2020. External vulnerability scanner.
https://www.intruder.io/.
ISACA. COBIT 2019 : Design guide designing an information and
technology governance solution. Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA;
2019.
ISACA. COBIT 2019 framework: Introduction and methodology;
2019. doi:10.4337/9781786431936.00008.
ISACA, 2019c. COBIT 2019 Publications & Resources.
http://www.isaca.org/COBIT/Pages/
COBIT-2019-Publications-Resources.aspx.
Iyamuremye B, Shima H. Network Security Testing Tools for SMEs
(Small and Medium Enterprises). In: Proc. 4th IEEE Int. Conf.
Appl. Syst. Innov. 2018, ICASI 2018. IEEE; 2018. p. 414–17.
doi:10.1109/ICASI.2018.8394272.
Kam CD, Wilking JR, Zechmeister EJ. Beyond the ”narrow data
base”: another convenience sample for experimental research.
Polit. Behav. 2007;29(4):415–40. doi:10.1007/s11109-007-9037-6.
Kaur J, Mustafa N. Examining the effects of knowledge, attitude
and behaviour on information security awareness: A case on
SME. In: Int. Conf. Res. Innov. Inf. Syst. ICRIIS. IEEE; 2013.
p. 286–90. doi:10.1109/ICRIIS.2013.6716723.
Kelkar A, Rao A. Co-designing compliance to the anti-Money
laundering act within the small and medium enterprise
sector. J. Financ. Regul. Compliance 2013;21(1):84–101.
doi:10.1108/13581981311297849.
Khadem N. Coronavirus wreaks havoc on wedding industry as
chinese factories remain closed and workers quarantined.
ABC News 2020.
Kickul J, Gundry L. Prospecting for strategic advantage: the
proactive entrepreneurial personality and small frm
innovation. J. Small Bus. Manag. 2002;40(2):85–97.
doi:10.1111/1540-627x.00042.
Kindervag, J., 2010. Build security into your network’s DNA: The
zero trust network architecture. http://www.virtualstarmedia.
com/downloads/Forrester_zero_trust_DNA.pdf.
Kindervag, J., 2016. No more chewy centers: The zero trust model
of information security vision: The security architecture and
operations playbook.
http://crystaltechnologies.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/
forrester-zero-trust-model-information-security.pdf.
Kwak N, Radler B. A comparison between mail and web surveys:
response pattern, respondent profle, and data quality. J. Off.
Stat. 2002;18(2):257.
Laleh E, Masoudi Y, Fathy F, Ghorbani S. Infuencing factors of
information security management in small- and mediumsized enterprises and organizations. In: Proc. - 2013 Int. Conf.
Commun. Syst. Netw. Technol. CSNT 2013. IEEE; 2013. p. 445–9.
doi:10.1109/CSNT.2013.99.
Linux Australia, Linux Australia. https://linux.org.au/.
Lloyds of London, 2017. Counting the cost: cyber exposure
eecoded. https://www.lloyds.com/news-and-insight/
risk-insight/library/technology/countingthecost.
Longbottom J. Coronavirus forces businesses to adapt to survive
the COVID-19 pandemic. ABC News 2020.
Luque, A., Bhaskar, R., Noon, J., Rinz, K., Victoria Udalova, 2019.
Nonemployer statistics by demographics (NES-D): Using
administrative and census records data in business statistics.
https://www2.census.gov/ces/wp/2019/CES-WP-19-01.pdf.
Lyon, G., 2019. NMap Tool. https://nmap.org/.
Maddux JE, Rogers RW. Protection motivation and self-Effcacy: A
Revised theory of fear appeals and attitude change. J. Exp. Soc.
Psychol. 1983;19(5):469–79. doi:10.1016/0022-1031(83)90023-9.
McDonald, C., 2019. A whopping 78% of small business are being
targeted by cyber criminals. Here’s How to Stay Ahead.
https://www.smartcompany.com.au/fnance/fraud/
cyber-crime-stay-ahead/.
Microsoft, 2017a. Planning the development, testing, staging, and
production environments.
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/biztalk/technical-guides/
planning-the-development-testing-staging-and-productionenvironments.
Microsoft, 2017b. Technology decisions for BYOD with EMS |
Microsoft Docs. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-gb/intune/
fundamentals/byod-technology-decisions.
Microsoft, 2020. Microsoft cloud penetration testing rules of
engagement. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/msrc/
pentest-rules-of-engagement?rtc=1.
Moran P. Personality characteristics and growth-orientation of
the small business owner-manager. Int. Small Bus. J. Res.
Entrepeursh. 1998;16(3):17–38. doi:10.1177/07399863870092005.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2018. NIST
framework for improving critical infrastructure cybersecurity.
10.6028/NIST.CSWP.04162018
Newbury M. Designated non-fnancial businesses and
professions: the weak link in Australia’s AML/CTF regime. J.
Money Laund. Control 2017;20(3):247–61.
doi:10.1108/JMLC-08-2016-0038.
NSW Government, 2017. Cyber aware.
https://www.smallbusiness.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/fles/
2019-07/Cyber-Aware-key-fndings.pdf,
https://www.smallbusiness.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/fles/
2019-07/Cyber-Aware-full-report.pdf.
Offce of Parliarmentary Counsel, 2019. Privacy act 1988.
https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2019C00241.
Organisation for economic Co-operation and development
(OECD), 2017. Enhancing the Role of Insurance in Cyber Risk
Management. 10.1787/9789264282148-en
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD), 2018. Key Facts Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC): Full
Selection of Indicator - UK, US, Australia and OECD Data
Table. https://gpseducation.oecd.org/IndicatorExplorer.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD), 2019. Survey of adult skills (PIAAC): Full selection of
indicators. https://gpseducation.oecd.org/IndicatorExplorer,
https://doi-org.ezproxy.lib.rmit.edu.au/10.1787/
eco_surveys-aus-2018-graph60-en
Osborn E, Simpson A. On small-scale IT users’ system
architectures and cyber security: a UK case study. Comput.
Secur. 2017;70:27–50. doi:10.1016/j.cose.2017.05.001.
Osborn E, Simpson A. Risk and the small-Scale cyber security
decision making dialogue - A UK case study. Comput. J.
2018;61(4):472–95. doi:10.1093/comjnl/bxx093.
Panjwani M, Jantti M, Sormunen J. IT service management from a
perspective of small and medium sized companies. In: Proc. -
2016 10th Int. Conf. Qual. Inf. Commun. Technol. QUATIC 2016.
IEEE; 2017. p. 210–15. doi:10.1109/QUATIC.2016.053.
Perez S. Apple is making corporate BYOD’ programs less invasive
to user privacy. TechCrunch 2019.
computers & security 109 (2021) 102385 19
Ponemon Institute, IBM Security. In: Technical Report. Cost of a
Data Breach Report. Ponemon Institute, IBM; 2019.
PyCon AU, 2021. Pyconlineau. https://2021.pycon.org.au/.
Queensland Government, 2020. Open source software guideline
Guideline. https://www.qgcio.qld.gov.au/documents/
open-source-software-guideline.
Rapid7, 2019. Metasploit Framework.
https://metasploit.help.rapid7.com/docs/msf-overview.
Raul, H., 2020. Setting up Systems for a Staged Upgrade.
https://docs.bmc.com/docs/brid91/en/
setting-up-systems-for-a-staged-upgrade-825210729.html.
RedHat, 2020. What’s the difference between Fedora and Red Hat
Enterprise Linux?https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/linux/
fedora-vs-red-hat-enterprise-linux.
Redscan, 2019. Most ICO Data Breach Reports Late and
Incomplete Prior to GDPR, Reveals Redscan FOI. https://www.
redscan.com/press-release/most-ico-data-breach-reportslate-and-incomplete-prior-to-gdpr-reveals-redscan-foi/.
Reitano T, Oerting T, Hunter M. Innovations in international
cooperation to counter cybercrime: the joint cybercrime
action taskforce. Eur. Rev. Organ. Crime 2015;2(2):142–54.
Renaud K. How smaller businesses struggle with security advice.
Comput. Fraud Secur. 2016;2016(8):10–18.
doi:10.1016/S1361-3723(16)30062-8.
Rose, S., Borchert, O., Mitchell, S., Connelly, S., 2020. Zero trust
architecture - NIST special publication 800-207.
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.
800-207-draft2.pdf.
Ruhwanya Z, Ophoff J, Vol. 551. Springer International Publishing;
2019. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-18400-1_63.
Salleh NA, Hussin H, Suhaimi MA, Md Ali A. A systematic
literature review of cloud computing adoption and impacts
among small medium enterprises (SMEs). Proc. - Int. Conf. Inf.
Commun. Technol. Muslim World 2018, ICT4M 2018
2018:278–84. doi:10.1109/ICT4M.2018.00058.
Satariano A, Perlroth N. Big companies thought insurance
covered a cyberattack. they may be wrong. - The new york
times. N.Y. Times 2019:3–5.
Sawaya Y, Sharif M, Christin N, Kubota A, Nakarai A, Yamada A.
Self-Confdence trumps knowledge : A cross-cultural study of
security behavior. In: Proc. 2017 CHI Conf. Hum. Factors
Comput. Syst.. Denver; 2017. p. 2202–14.
Scott M, Bruce R. Five stages of growth in small business. Long
Range Plann. 1987;20(3):45–52.
doi:10.1016/0024-6301(87)90071-9.
SE Radio, 2019. SE Radio: Episode 385: Evan gilman and doug
barth on zero-trust networks.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ES-6zAQo1WU.
Selznick L, LaMacchia C. Cybersecurity liability: how technically
savvy can we expect small business owners to be? J. Bus.
Technol. Law 2018;13(2):217.
Smith M. Huge rise in hack attacks as cyber-Criminals target
small businesses. Guard. 2016.
Sommestad T, Hallberg J, Lundholm K, Bengtsson J. Variables
infuencing information security policy compliance: A
Systematic review of quantitative studies. Inf. Manag.
Comput. Secur. 2014;22(1):42–75.
doi:10.1108/IMCS-08-2012-0045.
Spyse, 2020. Spyse subscriptions.
https://spyse.com/user/subscription.
Standards Australia limited, 2015. AS ISO/IEC 27001 Australian
standard information technology - security techniques -
information security management systems - requirements.
State Government of Victoria, 2020. Stage 4 restrictions.
https://www.dhhs.vic.gov.au/stage-4-restrictions-covid-19.
Steinheider B, Al-Hawamdeh S. Team coordination,
communication and knowledge sharing in smes and large
organisations. J. Inf. Knowl. Manag. 2004;3(3):223–32.
doi:10.1142/S0219649204000845.
Suryotrisongko H, Musashi Y. Review of cybersecurity research
topics, taxonomy and challenges: interdisciplinary
perspective. Proc. 2019 IEEE 12th Conf. Serv. Comput. Appl.
SOCA 2019 2019:162–7. doi:10.1109/SOCA.2019.00031.
Symantec, 2019. Internet security threat teport.
https://img03.en25.com/Web/Symantec/
%7B984e78e2-c9e5-43b8-a6ee-417a08608b60%
7D_ISTR_24_2019_April_en.pdf.
Szoldra P. This is everything edward snowden revealed in one
year of unprecedented top-Secret leaks. Bus. Insid. India 2016.
Taylor, A., 2018. Australian government attribution of the
’NotPetya’ cyber incident to Russia.
https://www.dfat.gov.au/sites/default/fles/
australia-attributes-cyber-incident-to-russia.pdf.
Taylor L. Happy 25 years of the internet, australia. SBS News 2014.
Tenable, 2020. Purchase tenable solutions.
https://www.tenable.com/buy.
United Nations Offce on Drugs and Crime, 2013. Comprehensive
study on cybercrime.
http://www.unodc.org/documents/organized-crime/
UNODC_CCPCJ_EG.4_2013/CYBERCRIME_STUDY_210213.pdf.
US Census, 2015. 2015 SUSB annual datasets by establishment
industry - data by enterprise employment size.
https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/susb/datasets/
2015/us_state_6digitnaics_2015.txt.
US Government. In: Technical Report. The Cost of Malicious
Cyber Activity to the U.S. Economy; 2018.
U.S. Small Business Administration, 2017. Table of small business
standards matched to morth American industry classifcation
system codes. https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/fles/fles/
Size_Standards_Table_2017.pdf.
US Small Business Administration, 2019. Participants sought for
survey on small and mid-size business cybersecurity issues.
https://advocacy.sba.gov/2019/10/21/
participants-sought-for-survey-on-small-and-mid-sizebusiness-cybersecurity-issues/.
Valli C, Martinus I, Johnstone M. Small to medium enterprise
cyber security awareness: an initial survey of western
Australian business. In: Valli C, editor. In: Proc. Int. Conf.
Secur. Manag.; 2014. p. 1.
Ven K, Verelst J, Mannaert H. Should you adopt open source
software? IEEE Softw. 2008;25(3):54–9. doi:10.1109/MS.2008.73.
Verizon, 2019. 2019 Data Breach Investigations Report.
https://enterprise.verizon.com/resources/reports/
2019-data-breach-investigations-report.pdf.
Victorian Government,. Vic Open Source Policy.pdf. https://www.
vic.gov.au/make-your-project-open-source-digital-standards.
Vistage, Cisco, National center for the middle market, 2018.
Cyberthreats and Solutions for Small and Midsize Businesses.
https://www.sap.com/uk/solution/sme-business-software/
analytics.html.
Von Solms B, Von Solms R. The 10 deadly sins of information
security management. Comput. Secur. 2004;23(5):371–6.
doi:10.1016/j.cose.2004.05.002.
Von Solms R, Van Niekerk J. From information security to cyber
security. Comput. Secur. 2013;38:97–102.
doi:10.1016/j.cose.2013.04.004.
Vroom C, Von Solms R. Towards information security behavioural
compliance. Comput. Secur. 2004;23(3):191–8.
doi:10.1016/j.cose.2004.01.012.
Walker E, Redmond J, Webster B, Le Clus M. Small business
owners: too busy to train? J. Small Bus. Enterp. Dev.
2007;14(2):294–306. doi:10.1108/14626000710746718.
Ward R, Beyer B. Beyondcorp : A New approach to enterprise
security. login Mag. USENIX SAGE 2014;39(6):6–11.
Watson C, Zaw T, Andriushchenko I, Justiniano GM, Tesauro M.
20 computers & security 109 (2021) 102385
OWASP Automated threat handbook web applications. Bel Air,
United States: OWASP; 2018.
Welte, H., Ayuso, P. N., 2014. The netflter.org Project.
https://netflter.org/.
Wesselius J. The bazaar inside the cathedral: business models for
internal markets. IEEE Softw. 2008;25(3):60–6.
doi:10.1109/MS.2008.79.
Woschke T, Haase H, Kratzer J. Resource scarcity in SMEs: effects
on incremental and radical innovations. Manag. Res. Rev.
2017;40(2):195–217. doi:10.1108/MRR-10-2015-0239.
Yanpiboon T, Schjoedt L. The effect of strategic alliance on small
business performance: A meta- analysis. ICSB World Conf.
Proc.. Washington, 2017.
Zhao H, Seibert SE. The big fve personality dimensions and
entrepreneurial status: A Meta-Analytical review. J. Appl.
Psychol. 2006;91(2):259–71. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.91.2.259.
Tracy Tam is a doctoral candidate (Mathematical Science) within
the School of Science at RMIT University. She holds a Bachelor degree (with Honours) in Telecommunications Engineering
from Monash University. She worked for a decade as an engineer
within the IT industry. She also has experience in managing her
own small business. Her research interests include cyber-security
within small business context, cyber-security human factors and
security risk management.
Prof. Asha Rao is Professor and Associate Dean (Mathematical
Sciences) within the School of Science at RMIT University, Australia. She is an Australian 2019–2020 Superstar of STEM. She has
won over AUD 3.5M in grants since 2007 from Government and
Industry to research a variety of issues including insider threat
and continuous authentication. As a trans-disciplinary researcher,
she works on a variety of problems, ranging from designing better codes for communication, exploring the mathematics behind
quantum cryptography, fnding links between various combinatorial structures, to cybersecurity problems such as risk management for SME, detecting insider threats, and money laundering.
Joanne Hall is a Senior Lecturer in mathematics and cybersecurity
at RMIT. With a background in abstract algebra, her research is on
quantum key distribution and post quantum cryptography. Dr Hall
completed her PhD at RMIT in 2011 on quantum key distribution.
She has held research and teaching positions at Charles University
in Prague and the Queensland University of Technology. As the
internships coordinator for the Master of Cybersecurity Degree, Dr
Hall has a keen interest in the cybersecurity needs of businesses.
African Journal of Business Management Vol. 6(21), pp. 6324-6330, 30 May, 2012
Available online at http://www.academicjournals.org/AJBM
DOI: 10.5897/AJBM11.2709
ISSN 1993-8233 ©2012 Academic Journals
Review
A literature review of small and medium enterprises
(SME) risk management practices in South Africa
Yolande Smit* and J. A. Watkins
Department of Internal Auditing and Management Accounting, Cape Peninsula University of Technology, South Africa.
Accepted 3 January, 2012
The inherent characteristics of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) afford these enterprises the
potential to absorb unskilled labour and to nurture and develop entrepreneurial skills. However, in the
South African economy, these benefits are not forthcoming due to the high failure rate of SMEs. The
impediments to SME success includes numerous and varied obstacles. Studies conducted confirmed
SME owner-managers ignorant pertaining to the risks their enterprise face with risk management
techniques deployed reactively and ineffectively. By embedding a structured approach to enterprise
risk management within SMEs, potential benefits such as reducing the over-management of risks and
organisational alignment towards the SME’s vision can be realised.
Key words: Small and medium enterprises (SMEs), risk, risk management, strategic risk management.
INTRODUCTION
Small and medium enterprises (SMEs) operate in the
same environment as their larger counterparts, but
without the associated benefits such as adequate capital
and extended human resources of the larger
organisations. SMEs encounter increasing competitive
pressure fuelled by globalisation, legislation and the
relaxing of trade barriers, as well as an increase in
market expansion due to emerging technologies and
innovation. Small and medium enterprises often flourish
on their adaptability and agility such as their close
proximity to their customers, their openness towards new
ways of working, and their risk taking approach, but many
micro, small and medium enterprise are susceptible to
major external shocks (Berry, 2002; Laforet and Tann,
2006). Although SMEs experience difficulties in
absorbing and coping with these obstacles, they need to
develop an ability to deal with the ever increasing
challenges, that is, risks faced by the organisation
(Leopoulos, 2006).
SME owner-managers need to escalate the importance
of risk identification and minimisation in their
*Corresponding author. E-mail: smity@cput.ac.za. Tel: +27 (0)
21 864 5264, +27 (0) 84 423 275. Fax: +27 (0) 21 864 5262.
organisations or they can suffer catastrophic
consequences if they are ill prepared for the outcome of a
possible risk. This entails that entrepreneurs in SMEs
need to be conversant with risk identification and analysis
to manage risks from a diverse range of sources
(Schultz, 2001). By incorporating risk management into
SMEs operations, SMEs are better equipped to exploit
their resources, thereby enabling organisations to
transform an expenditure activity into an activity that can
yield a positive return (Kirytopoulos et al., 2001; Banham,
2004).
DEFINING SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
(SMEs)
Although the term SME or SMME is used interchangeably worldwide, there is no common definition of
these terms. The geographical placement of SMEs as
well as country specific legislation influences the
numerous SME definitions (Leopoulos, 2006). In South
Africa, the National Small Business Act 102 of 1996
(South Africa, 1996) amended by Act 29 of 2004 (South
Africa, 2004) categorise small organisations into four
categories namely micro enterprises, including survivalist
 enterprises; very small enterprises; small enterprises; 
and medium enterprises. The differentiating factor
between these categories, excluding micro enterprises, is
the number of employees. For micro enterprises, the
criterion is turnover level (South Africa, 1996, 2004; Von
Broembsen, 2003).
Importance of small and medium enterprises (SMEs)
to the economy
The importance of small businesses is recognised in
numerous African countries such as Togo, Uganda,
Ghana, Cote d’Lvoire, Nigeria, Kenya, Malawi, Burkina
Faso, as well as others. According to Rwigema and
Karungu (1999), SMEs are dominant in numbers in most
economies. In First World countries like the United States
of America and the United Kingdom, small enterprises
play an important role in the economy, accounting for an
estimated one third of industrial employment and a lower
percentage of output. In Third World countries where
SMEs dominate economically active enterprises, the
SMEs prosperity is considered far more important than in
First World countries (Rwigema and Karungu, 1999).
The activities of SME enterprises in Africa (Rogerson,
2001a), is of vital importance for the promotion of
economic growth, job creation and the mitigation of
poverty. However, research conducted on SMEs in Africa
by Mead and Liedholm (1998) confirmed that on average,
there are more SME closures than expansions, with
approximately only 1% of micro enterprises growing from
five or less employees to ten or more. It has long been
debated that SMEs are pivotal to employment creation
and economic growth, particularly in countries such as
South Africa that has a high unemployment rate,
estimated at up to 40% (Friedrich, 2004; Watson, 2004).
Upgrading the roles of the SME sector in the South
African economy to improve economic growth through
increasing competitiveness, and by generating employment and redistributing income (Rogerson, 2004, 2006),
has been the focus of new development policies since
the democratic transition (Berry et al., 2002; GCIS, 2002).
In order to aid in the facilitation of the SME environment,
the South African government tabled the National Small
Business Act of 1996 amended with Act 29 of 2004 to
provide equal standing to SME enterprises (Rwigema
and Venter, 2004; Ntsika, 2001) in South Africa’s
economy. The vital role the SME sector plays in the
South African economy in addressing sustainable
development, was highlighted by the 2003 Human
Development Report (UNDP, 2003) for South Africa
(Rogerson, 2004).
In South Africa, it is estimated that 90% of all formal
businesses are small, medium or micro enterprises
(Rwigema and Karungu, 1999). The SME sector is one of
the largest contributors to the South African economy.
The SME is not only seen as an employment creator, but
this sector also acts as an absorbent of retrenched
people coming from the private and public sector
Smit and Watkins 6325
(Ntsika, 2001).
Although the SME sector is responsible for 75% of new
jobs, largely due to the emergence of new micro
enterprise formations, it compares poorly to Asian
countries where SME employment contribution is
estimated at 80% (Friedrich, 2004; Watson and Godfrey,
1999). Even in countries less developed than South
Africa, their SME sector contributes a much higher
proportion to the GDP and employment (UNDP, 2003;
OECD, 19971
 cited by Watson and Godfrey, 1999). It is
noted that the majority of South African SMEs are micro
and survivalist enterprises which show no signs of
enterprise growth due to inadequate firm dynamics,
resulting in SMEs conservative contribution to employment compared to other countries. Even in dynamic
South African SMEs, it seems that a ‘jobless growth’
strategy (Kesper, 2000) is employed.
The South African government has identified the SME
sector as the means to achieve accelerated economic
growth. However, this objective was not achieved partly
due to the high failure rate of 80% of enterprises
(Watson, 2004; Van Niekerk, 2005) in the SME sector. As
SMEs growth depends to a larger extent on the macro
economic growth, it can be said that the slack micro
economic growth of the past few years has inhibited
entrepreneurial performance and therefore SMEs to grow
to their full potential (Watson, 2004; Berry et al., 2002).
SME failure can further be partly ascribed to the lack of
management skills. South African SMEs do not aspire to
corporate governance best practices such as the noncompulsory implementation of King III (King, 2009). Risk
management, a component of King III, is therefore, also
regarded as an optional organisational activity, and not
as a vital component to organisational success.
Critical success factors for small and medium
enterprises (SMEs)
Caution should be levied against viewing SMEs as
smaller versions of larger enterprises as SMEs do not in
any regard resemble large organisations. Generally,
SMEs experience a scarcity of resources (Wong, 2005;
Jun and Cai, 2003) such as time, financial and human
resources.
Studies have identified a number of factors that
influence enterprise expansion and success. A
fundamental element (McGrath and King, 1996;
Rogerson, 2001a) that has a positive impact on an
organisation’s growth is the depth of “human capital” or
“brain power”. The importance of human capital as a
critical success factor was also confirmed in a study
conducted on African enterprises where it was
determined that successful entrepreneurs more likely

1
 Small Business Research and Policy 1997b, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). Retrieved August 10,2004 from
http://strategic.ic.gc.ca/epic/internet/insbrp-rppe.nsf/en/rd00259e.html 
6326 Afr. J. Bus. Manage.
have education and training beyond the primary school
level (Rogerson, 2001a).The merit of this finding is based
on the argument that entrepreneurs with a greater level of
education and training are more able to adapt their
business to the ever changing business environment. In a
study conducted on enterprise success factors in SMEs
Gauteng, South Africa, it was concluded that a lack of
technical and managerial skills (Brink et al., 2003;
Rogerson, 2008) impedes on business development.
Research conducted on SME failures in South Africa
revealed that failure was primarily caused by a lack of
management skill and training. This finding is confirmed
(Rogerson, 2008) by 90% of a sample of 1000
entrepreneurs who believe that SME failure is due to a
lack of managerial skills. However, taking the importance
of training and skill into account, it is cautioned by
Rogerson (2008) that skills are not the only or even
primary answer to the challenges facing SME
development.
It can be gleaned from various literature sources
(Berger and Udell, 2001; Reynolds and Lancaster, 2006;
Bank of England, 2001) that a high percentage of small
organizations fail in the first five years of trading, often as
a result of over trading and financial strain. Access to
finance has therefore featured prominently in a number of
studies as a constraint on SME development. According
to Rogerson (2001b) and Skinner (2005), a lack of credit
is a major constrained experienced by emerging African
SME entrepreneurs, who is depended on personal
savings or loans from relatives and friends, as the source
of their start-up capital. Finance, skills, business training
and less rigid regulations are the key elements to
promote entrepreneurship, to enhance the enterprise
environment, to improve competitiveness and capacity in
the SME enterprise (Rogerson, 2008).
Problems experienced by small and medium
enterprises (SMEs)
SME owner-managers are most conversant with their
enterprises, but are frequently not able to identify all the
factors impacting on their enterprise activities and/or
overrate the significance of external factors, while
underrating internal weaknesses (Kesper, 2000).
According to Naicker (2006), problems experienced by
SMEs can be categorised as follows:
i. Economic based problems: SMEs success is tied in
with the local economic conditions as the SME sectors
market growth is usually at the same rate as the macro
economy as a whole, therefore, if there is an economic
downturn, SMEs will usually also experience difficulty
(Berry et al., 2002).
ii. Enterprise based problems: Internal factors such as
human resource problems encompassing poor staff
planning, multi-functional management, high employee
turnover rate, inadequate trained employees, low
productivity and difficulties in recruiting quality staff
 (Rogerson, 2004; Beaver, 2002; Williamson, 2000;
Lighthelm et al., 2002; Watt, 2007) are impediments to
SME success. It is argued that the role of labour, labour
markets and skills levels are the most important factors
contributing to small enterprise growth (Berry et al.,
2002).
Managerial skills not only influence owners perceptions
regarding their business, but various literature sources
(Watson, 2004) acknowledge that a lack of managerial
skills and training is an important cause of enterprise
failure (Naicker, 2006) complimented by lack of
experience and lack of organisational culture acting as an
impediment to the establishment of SMEs. The ownermanagers characteristics (O’Gorman, 2001) can also act
as a barrier to growth in that the personality, managerial
skills and style including the entrepreneur’s and/or
management’s negative attitude towards change can
negatively influence an enterprise (Leopoulos, 2006;
Naicker, 2006).
South African bankers are less inclined to finance
SMEs (Pretorius and Shaw, 2004), due to their perceived
high level of risk and a weak expected return (St-Pierre
and Bahri, 2006) and this is emphasised by the South
African micro enterprise surveys, with the inaccessibility
to finance listed as one of the primary external constrains
faced by SMEs. Some of the factors that contribute to the
complex financing problem are the insufficient knowledge
of the SME entrepreneur, for example, their inability to
draw up a business plan; the lenders inability to
determine the SMEs credit risk attributed to their lack of
enterprise information; and general communications
issues (Berry et al., 2002) leading to low levels of
entrepreneurship and a high failure rate (Kotze and Smit,
2008) of South African SMEs (Rajaram, 2008).
It is therefore important to develop an effective and
efficient process whereby all SME dimensions is
evaluated when measuring the borrower’s risk. The
development of a more inclusive SME risk measurement
framework will enable lenders to make rapid and
objective decisions based on the actual business
environment, while SME management cannot criticise the
banking environment of over-valuating the risk. At
present, few risk evaluation models exists that allows for
an overall evaluation of SME risk. The lack of suitable
risk models is emphasised by the banking sectors
continued reliance on financial models where information
is derived by way of financial statements, as this
information is considered more objectives than
information obtained from other sources.
iii. Industry related problems: According to Naicker (2006)
and Haung and Brown (1999), market related factors that
exerts the most negative influence on enterprise success
are increase competition, limited market size, low
demand, inefficient marketing, poor competitor
understanding, poor location and market understanding 
and the inability to identify the target market (Naicker,
2006; Watt, 2007). South African SMEs are hampered by
a structural problem, in that, South African SMEs,
contrary to SMEs in other developing countries, do not
complement larger organisations with specialised
products or services, but they compete with larger
enterprises in the same product markets (Rogerson,
2004), albeit for different consumer segments. For SME
owner-managers it is important to identify the most
problematic areas in managing their small enterprise. By
identifying the problem areas, owner-managers can
address problems through education, training and
information gathering activities (Huang and Brown, 1999).
EXPLOITING RISK
According to Plourd (2009), the importance of risk
management is now escalated above issues such as
long-term and short-term financing constrains. Proclaiming the existence of a risk management strategy is
insufficient, enterprises need to actively engage in risk
management practices to address the convergence of
major risks as experienced in the current economic
climate where the credit crisis risk, fluctuating commodity
prices, increased government debt, rising unemployment
and declining consumer spending are impacting
individually and combined, on enterprises.
The use of enterprise risk management (ERM) can be
viewed as a business competency enabling managers to
optimise opportunities associated with risks (Hofmann,
2009). ERM should apply basic risk management
activities, embedding the risk champion’s knowledge of
exposures, across the entire scope of an enterprise’s
risks such as strategic risks, operational risks, financial
risks and regulatory compliance risks (Engle, 2009), and
should not be reduced to a process based solely on risk
formula’s (Bradford, 2009).
A structured risk management approach enables an
enterprise to pursue its strategies aggressively and
efficiently as management can anticipate the risk
exposure of each activity engaged in, thus achieving
more acceptable results at a reduced cost (Ntlhane,
1995).
Risk management for small business
Risk and risk management is a major concern for all
companies, especially small and medium sized
enterprises which are particularly sensitive to business
risk and competition (Alquier and Lagasse, 2006). In
SMEs, the risk management function usually resides with
the owner’s assessment of threats and opportunities
pertaining to the enterprise (Watt, 2007). Although risk
management principles are common to all types of
enterprises, the owner-manager’s risk perception and his
Smit and Watkins 6327
attitude towards risk management influences the
adequacy of the enterprise’s risk management actions
deployed (Ntlhane, 1995).
Implied in SME, risk management is the core principle
that entrepreneurial or management focus should be
focussed at recognising future uncertainty, deliberating
risks, possible manifestations and effects, and formulating plans to address these risks and reduce or
eliminate its impact on the enterprise (Ntlhane, 1995).
One of the skills required of entrepreneurs is the ability to
identify and analyse risks to ensure that advantage is
taken of calculated risks (Watson, 2004). According to
Watt (2007), SME owner-managers should take regard of
the following steps in their risk management process:
i. Establishing the SMEs risk strategy
ii. Determining the SMEs risk appetite
iii. Identification and assessment of risk
iv. Prioritising and managing risks
The fact that a risk is beyond the control of the ownermanager, does not absolve the owner-manager from the
need to anticipate the risk, and reducing the impact of the
risk occurrence to achieve organisational goals. Ownermanagers should furthermore take cognisance of
managerial risks that arise as a result of the ownermanagers own actions when planning and executing
business strategies (Berkeley et al., 1991). South African
SMEs owner managers should be educated in risk
management principles, risk handling techniques
available and risk control programmes that can be used,
but care should be taken in the application of risk
management principles, as although risk principles are
common to all types of enterprises, the application
thereof differs substantially between small and larger
enterprises. However, many SMEs practice intuitive risk
management when they assess the risk involved in
decisions (Ntlhane, 1995; Dupre, 2009).
Components of risk in small and medium enterprises
(SMEs)
Determining the components of total risk in SMEs is
complex due to SMEs great heterogeneity as well as
difficulty in separating property from management (StPierre and Bahri, 2006). Entrepreneurs have implied (StPierre and Bahri, 2006), inconsistent (LeCornu et al.,
1996), and in certain instances, unique (Naffziger et al.,
1994) objectives that exerts both direct and indirect
influences on management practices, rendering
comparisons between SMEs difficult. Information derived
by way of financial data analysis cannot yield all the
dimensions of enterprise performance, as emphasised by
St-Pierre and Bahri (2006). Strategic information such as
quality, client satisfaction, and innovation reflects the
enterprise’s competitiveness and performance, but are 
6328 Afr. J. Bus. Manage.
not forthcoming in the income earned. Cumby and
Conrod (2001) emphasises that long term sustainable
financial performance is attributable to non-financial
factors like client loyalty, employee satisfaction
and internal processes. This view is affirmed by Ittner
and Larcker (1998) who states that the investment in
intangible assets, that is, client satisfaction, is not
accommodated in the accounting data. The same
argument applies to the risk of an enterprise that is
difficult to understand if attention is solely directed at the
financial statements. Through the incorporation of nonfinancial data, the problems associated with the
manipulation of financial statements are reduced. By
following a systematic approach and by taking into
account both financial and non-financial information
related to the organisation, an enhanced understanding
of SME risks can be achieved (St-Pierre and Bahri,
2006).
Small and medium enterprises inadequately manage
their risk
Few SME owners and managers are risk aware and they
focus their risk actions on “loss control” programmes in
areas of fire, safety, security, health, and quality
assurance. These “loss control” programmes are
overseen either by the entrepreneur or other
management along with their other duties; therefore,
increasing the chance of mismanagement as adequate
time is not spent on the risk function. As no structured
risk identification is undertaken by SMEs, SMEs assume
unaware or unplanned risk exposure to their limited
financial resources. Control measures implemented to
counter risk are ineffective as controls are reactive and
non-automated (Ntlhane, 1995).
To limit the effect of risks on the enterprise, risks need
to managed/controlled once it has been identified. In
SMEs, the control of risk exposure is construeded
reactively, holding disastrous consequences for the
enterprise as losses are taken on while the enterprise is
ill prepared to finance the loss. In most SMEs, risks are
left unmanaged till it realise, only then spurring on action
to address it (Ntlhane, 1995).
Through interviewing, Ntlhane (1995) confirms that
SME owners and managers are not versed in the
availability and use of risk reduction techniques (that is,
risk elimination/avoidance, reduction, transfer or
acceptance) to reduce the adverse effects of risks on the
enterprise. It can be gleaned from the interviewee results
that entrepreneurs prefer avoiding risks, but they fail to
take into account that every risk action undertaken by
them has an effect on the risk pattern. Thereby, although
a specific risk is avoided, the probability or impact of
other risks may change and new and potentially serious
risks can be created. The study identified that entrepreneurial actions are centred on avoiding risk, rather
than devising risk control methods. This impedes on the
economic progress of a country as every business can be
defined by its ability to take on greater risks. Apart from
risk avoidance, the study identified risk transfer as the
alternative risk technique used by SMEs, whereby
insurance brokers were contracted to undertake all risk
actions, that is, risk identification, risk assessment, risk
control and risk financing. Risk retention techniques
whereby risks are financed by internal reserves such as
current income are little known and rarely applied in
SMEs (Ntlhane, 1995).
CONCLUSION
The impediments to SME success are numerous and
varied, and include inherent organisational obstacles
such as poor managerial skills and education and
training; industry-related problems such as the
entrepreneur’s inability to understand market expectations, and poor market access; and economy-based
obstacles such as interest rate fluctuations.
SME owner-managers are primarily responsible for the
management of their enterprises’ activities. Studies
conducted confirmed SME owner-managers’ ignorance
pertaining to the risks their enterprises face from internal
and external sources, including risks emanating from
entrepreneurial actions. SME risk management techniques are primarily limited to risk avoidance actions, and
to a lesser extent, risk transfer through insurance
activities. Most risk activities tend to be construed
reactively, thereby affecting the availability of enterprise
resources in addressing these risks.
By embedding a structured approach to enterprise risk
management within SMEs, potential benefits such as
cost reductions, reducing the over-management of risks
and organisational alignment towards the SME’s mission
and objectives can be realised.
Rationale for developing a strategic risk management
strategy
Entrepreneurs operate in a macro, micro and market
environment that is affected by numerous internal and
external influences which continuously change. These
‘change factors’ enable an entrepreneur to identify
opportunities and threats (Watson, 2004). It is therefore
essential that an entrepreneur has the capability to
evaluate decisions to determine the enterprise’s future
strategy (Watson, 2004). Strategic risk management
enables SME owner-managers to objectively evaluate
their actions. One of the difficulties encountered in risk
management is that most risk assessments are linked to
a specific discipline which is not necessarily known by
owner-managers. Furthermore, owner-managers may be
able to identify the obvious risk, but their depth of risk 
knowledge may impede on their activities to identify
indirect risks, or to take cognisance of the interconnectness of risks (Watt, 2007).
Watson (2004) emphasizes that owner-managers
should develop a risk strategy to avoid, reduce or
respond to potential risks. It is therefore essential that
owner-managers are equipped with the necessary skills
to compare risks and to identify appropriate risk
strategies in adequately addressing these risks. Depending on the specific circumstances, owner-managers
should engage in actions limiting the probability of risk
occurrence, or if need be, to plan strategies that
maximise the probability of recovery (Watt, 2007).
By embedding a strategic risk management strategy in
the SMEs processes, significant advantages can be
achieved, such as (Watt, 2007):
i. It ensures that the SMEs activities are aligned to its
mission and objectives, and not diverted by external
influences.
ii. It ensures that organisational activities comply with
industry best practices and that regulative compliance is
achieved.
iii. It may provide legal protection if difficulties occurs.
iv. It may result in cost savings by reducing insurance
expenses.
Strategic risk management facilitates an effective risk
approach by prioritising risks, thereby reducing surprises,
and directing the focus on important risks. This has the
effect of reducing the possible over-management of
insignificant risks. In the risk management process,
management should be aware that risk actions should be
tailored to the specific needs of the enterprise taking into
account its resources, needs and opportunities that
prevail. Although risk assessment should be a comprehensive function, guard should be taken into devising an
excessive risk strategy (Watt, 2007). Given the size and
managerial structure of SMEs, the process of
establishing and using a strategic risk management
function is relatively simple given the close relationship
between owners, managers and operators of the
enterprise. Compared to larger enterprises, it is easier for
SME executive management to embed a risk
management policy and to be routinely and actively
involved in the application of the strategic risk
management policy, especially if these activities is seen
as a performance enhancing processes (Watt, 2007).
In a study conducted by Friedrich (2004) on South
African SMEs, it is emphasised that personal initiative
consisting of the owner’s characteristics such as being a
self-starter, having a proactive approach, specifically
regarding risk management, and persistent actions, is a
vital key to enterprise success. In addition to a proactive
business approach, innovation and learning, goal setting
and achievement orientation was linked to enterprise
success. Where SME owners follow a reactive business
approach including reactive risk management practices,
Smit and Watkins 6329
the enterprise was more likely to fail.
SME owner managers need to be aware that through
joint discussion of risk with SME employees, which
include an effective feedback process and a risk
valuation process, organisational trust is established. The
way of conducting risk management, that is, the shape of
the risk management process will depend on all the
participants risk propensity as well as the situational
control that is exercised at present. Therefore, risk
tolerant participants may prefer an informal risk review
process, while risk adverse participants will favour
comprehensive contractual arrangements (Beckett,
2005). Through experience, it has been gleaned that:
i. The creation of a positive organisational risk culture
whereby all participants concerns are understood and
experiences are shared, is facilitated through a constant
evolving process of risk identification and the planning of
containment strategies.
ii. Through joint proactive identification of risks, and by
employing holistic risk management practices,
management can establish a positive environment to deal
with all issues.
Regardless of the risk propensity of the participants, a
structured approach to risk management will assist in
providing a goal orientated and consistent risk
management process (Beckett, 2005).
REFERENCES
Banham R (2004). Enterprising View of Risk Management. J. Account.,
197(6): 65-71.
Bank of England (2001). Quarterly Report on Small Business Statistics.
Bank of England, London, January: pp 1-46.
Beaver G (2002). Small Business, Entrepreneurship and Enterprise
Development. Harlow: Pearson Education.
Beckett RC (2005). Collaboration now a strategic necessity. Handb.
Bus. Strategy, 6(1): 327-332.
Berger AN, Udell G (2001). Small business credit availability and
relationship lending: the importance of bank organisational structures.
FEDS Working Paper No 2001–36. [Online].
http://ssrn.com/abstact=285937 [10/4/2010].
Berkeley D, Humphreys PC, Thomas RD (1991). Project risk action
management. Constr. Manag. Econ., 9: 3-17.
Berry A (2002). The role of the small and medium enterprise sector in
Latin America: implications for South Africa. Unisa Latin American
Report, 18(1): 4-14.
Berry A, Von Blottnitz M, Cassim R, Kesper A, Rajaratnam B, Van
Seventer DE (2002). The Economics of SMMES in South Africa. T. &
I. Policy Strategy, December, 2002.
Alquier BAM, Lagasse TMH (2006). Risk management in small- and
medium-sized enterprises. Prod. P. & C., 17(3): 273-282.
Bradford M (2009). Sovay turns risk into opportunity. Bus. Ins., 43(20):
4-28.
Brink A, Cant M, Ligthelm A (2003). Problems experienced by small
business in South Africa. [Online].
http://sbaer.uca.edu/research/icsb/2003/230.doc [13/4/2010]
Cumby J, Conrod J (2001). Non-financial performance measures in the
Canadian biotechnology industry. J. Intel. Cap., 2(3): 261-272.
Engle P (2009). Enterprise risk management time. Ind. Eng., 41(5): 20.
Friedrich C (2004). Taking it personally: The crucial success factor for
small businesses is its entrepreneurs. Finance. Week, 51, December.
GCIS (2002). Government Communications South Africa Yearbook 
6330 Afr. J. Bus. Manage.
2001/2002. [Online]. http://www.govza/yearbook/2001/economy
 [3/3/2010]
Hofmann MA (2009). Interest in enterprise risk management is growing.
Bus. Ins., 43(18): 14-16.
Huang X, Brown A (1999). An analysis and classification of problems in
small business. Int. Small Bus. J., 18(1): 73-85.
Ittner CD, Larcker DF (1998). Are nonfinancial measures leading
indicators of financial performance? An analysis of customer
satisfaction. J. Account. Res., 36(3): 1-35.
Jun M, Cai S (2003). Key obstacles to Edi success: from the US small
manufacturing companies’ perspective. Ind. Manag. Data Sys.,
103(3): 192-203.
Kesper A (2000). Failing or not aiming to grow? Manufacturing SMMEs
and their contribution to employment growth in South Africa. T. & I.
Policy Sect. Working Paper. 15: 1-36.
King K (2009) refer to the Institute of Directors Southern Africa.
Kirytopoulos K, Leopoulos V, Malandrakis C (2001). Risk management:
A powerful tool for improving efficiency of project oriented SMEs.
Proceedings of the 4th SME International Conference. 2001.
Denmark.
Kotze L, Smit A (2008). Personal Financial Literacy and Personal Debt
Management: The Potential Relationship With New Venture Creation.
SAJESBM, 1(1): 35-50.
Laforet S, Tann J (2006). Innovative Characteristics of Small
Manufacturing Firms. J. Small Bus. Entrep. Dev., 13(3): 363-380.
LeCornu MR, McMahon RGP, Forsaith DM, Stanger AMJ (1996). The
small enterprise financial objective function. J. Small Bus. Manag.,
34(3): 1-14.
Leopoulos V (2006). Editorial. Prod. Plan Cont., 17(3): 225-228.
Ligthelm AA, Cant MC (2002). Business Success Factors of SMEs in
Gauteng: A proactive entrepreneurial approach. Research Report
311, Faculty of Economic and Management Science, UNISA Bureau
of Market Research.
McGrath S, King K (1996). Learning to Compete: African Education,
Training and Small Enterprise Development in the Era of
Globalisation. Int. J. Urban Lab. Leis., 2(2): 1976-96. [Online].
http://www.ijull.co.uk/vol2/2/000016.htm [26/3/2010]
Mead DC, Liedholm C (1998). The Dynamics of Micro and Small
Enterprises in Developing Countries. World Dev., 26(1): 61-74.
Naffziger DW, Hornsby JS, Kuratko DF (1994). A proposed research
model of entrepreneurial motivation. Entrep. Theor. Pract., 18(3): 29-
42.
Naicker NI (2006). Factors contributing to women being successful in
the SMME sector. A mini dissertation submitted in partial fulfilment of
the requirements for the degree Masters in Business Administration
in the Faculty of Management at the University of Johannesburg.
Ntlhane KE (1995). The application of risk management principles to
smaller enterprises. A research report submitted in partial fulfilment of
the requirements for the degree of Masters of Business
Administration in the Faculty of Management at the University of the
Witwatersrand.
Ntsika Enterprise Promotion Agency (Ntsika) (2001). State of Small
Business Development in South Africa. Annual Review 2001 [Online].
http://www.transformationaudit.org.za/researchdatabase/government-1/other-government-output/2000-
2006/2001ntsika/ [3/3/2010].
O’Gorman C (2001). The sustainability of growth in small and mediumsized enterprises. Int. J. Entrep. Behav. Res, 7(2): 60-75.
Plourd K (2009). Rethinking risk. CFO. January: 66-69.
Pretorius M, Shaw G (2004). Business plans in bank decision-making
when financing new ventures in South Africa. South Afr. J. Econ.
Manage. Sci., 7(2): 221-241. [Online].
http://www.journals.co.za/ej/ejour_ecoman.html [3/3/2010]
Rajaram R (2008). A need analysis of financial management and
accounting skills in the SME sector in KwaZulu-Natal. A research
report submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Commerce in the School of Management at the University
of KwaZulu-Natal.
Reynolds PL, Lancaster G (2006). A scheme to increase profitability in
entrepreneurial SMEs. J. Small Bus. Entrep. Dev., 13(3): 395-410.
Rogerson CM (2001a). Growing the SMME Manufacturing Economy of
South Africa: Evidence from Gauteng Province. J. Contemp. Afr.
Stud., 19(2): 267-291.
Rogerson CM (2001b). In search of the African miracle – debate on
successful small enterprise development in Africa. Habit Int., 25: 115-
142.
Rogerson CM (2004). The impact of the South African government’s
SMME programmes: a ten year review (1994-2003). Dev. South. Afr.,
21(5): 765-784.
Rogerson CM (2006). The Market Development Approach to SMME
Development: Implications for Local Government in South Africa.
Urban Forum, 17(1): 54-78.
Rogerson CM (2008). Tracking SMME Development in South Africa:
Issues of Finance, Training and the Regulatory Environment. Urban
Forum, 19(1): 61-81.
Rwigema H, Karungu P (1999). SMME development in Johannesburg’s
Southern Metropolitan Local Council: an assessment. Dev. South.
Afr., 16(1): 101-124.
Rwigema H, Venter R (2004). Advanced Entrepreneurship. Cape Town:
Oxford University Press.
Schultz AG (2001). Risk assurance model for the small medium and
micro enterprise sector. A dissertation submitted in partial fulfilment
of the requirements for the degree of Master Technologiae in the
Faculty of Management at the Cape Technikon.
Skinner C (2005). Constraints to Growth and Employment in Durban:
Evidence from the Informal Economy. Research Report No. 65,
School of Development Studies, University of KwaZulu-Natal,
Durban.
South Africa (1996). National Small Business Act, No. 102 of 1996.
Notice No. 1901, 27 November. [Online].
http://www.info.gov.za/view/DownloadFileAction?id=70848
[2/10/2009]
South Africa (2004). National Small Business Amendment Act, No. 29
of 2004. Government Gazette, 461 (25763), November. [Online].
http://www.acts.co.za/national_small_business_act_1996.htm
[27/1/2010]
St-Pierre J, Bahri M (2006). The use of the accounting beta as an
overall risk indicator for unlisted companies. J. Small Bus. Entrep.
Dev., 13(4): 546-561.
UNDP see United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) (2003). The
challenge of sustainable development in South Africa: unlocking
people’s creativity. South African Development Report, 2003. Cape
Town: Oxford University Press.
Van Niekerk L (2005). Information security risk management in the
South African Small, Medium and Micro Enterprise Environment: The
Peculium Model. A dissertation submitted in fulfilment of the
requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Informatics in the
Faculty of Science of the University of Johannesburg.
Watt J (2007). Strategic risk management for small businesses. [In:
Reuvid, J. (ed.). Managing Business Risk 2nd Edition – a practical
guide to protecting your business. London – Philadelphia: Kogan
Page].
Watson GEH (2004). A situational analysis of entrepreneurship mentors
in South Africa. A dissertation submitted in fulfilment of the
requirements for the degree Masters of Commerce in Business
Management at the University of South Africa.
Watson LM, Godfrey NF (1999). Entrepreneurial Support for Rural
Small, Medium and Micro Enterprises (SMMEs) in South Africa.
University of South Africa (UNISA) & Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR), South Africa. [Online]
http://161.31.108.27/research/icsb/2005/119pdf [23/7/2008]
Williamson IO (2000). Employer legitimacy and recruitment success in
small business. Entrep.: Theory Pract., 25(1): 27.
Wong KY (2005). Critical success factors for implementing knowledge
management in small and medium enterprises. Ind. Manag. Data
Syst., 105(3): 261-279. 
Volume 9 - Issue 28 / April 2020
 65
http:// www.amazoniainvestiga.info ISSN 2322 - 6307
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.34069/AI/2020.28.04.8
Cyber insurance: the current situation and prospects of development
Received: January 25, 2020 Accepted: March 16, 2020
Written by:
Kurmaiev Petro29
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9464-0380
Seliverstova Liudmyla30
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2231-0558
Bondarenko Olena31
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5990-2522
Husarevych Nataliia32
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8266-8498
Abstract
The aim of the article is to analyze current trends
in the development of cyber insurance. The
following methods of scientific research were
used in the preparation of the article:
generalization, correlation analysis, comparative
analysis. The authors analyze in detail the main
trends in the spread of cybercrime. The
correlation analysis between the number of
registered cybercrimes in a particular country
and its GDP, the number of business entities,
indicated the lack of correlation between the
studied indicators. It states that the most
common types of cybercrime are: hacking,
unauthorized access, accidental exposure,
insider and physical theft. The sectoral analysis
of the distribution of cybercrime has revealed a
decrease in the share of financial companies
while increasing the share of health care
companies. It is noted that cyber insurance is one
of the effective preventive measures that
minimize the negative effects of cybercrime
intervention. The article presents segmentation
of the cyber insurance market by geography and
size of insurance companies. The results of the
analysis showed the dominance of US
companies in the cyber insurance market. It is
stated that the sectoral distribution of
cybersecurity policy purchasers in general
follows the trends of the sectoral distribution of
cybercrime. The volume of cyber insurance,
:gghlpby
PevxklZlvbyeylkyZgZebakhjfgguo
lggpbcjZablbydb jkljZohZgby Ijb
ihhlhd klZlvb bkihevahZgu flhu
gZmqghh bkkehZgby hhsgb
dhjjeypbhgguc ZgZeba dhfiZjZlbguc
ZgZeba:lhjZfb ihjhghijhZgZebabjhZgu
hkghgu lggpbb jZkijhkljZggby
dbjijklmiegbc Ijhgguc
dhjjeypbhggucZgZ ebaaZbkbfhklbfm
dhebqklhf aZjbkljbjhZgguo
dbjijklmiegbcdhgdjlghckljZgb
I dhebqkl hf kmtdlh
ijijbgbfZlevklZmd ZaZegZhlkmlklb
kyabfmbkkemfufbihdZaZleyfb
MdZauZlky qlh gZbhe
jZkijhkljZgggufb bZfb
dbjijklmiegbc yeyxlky oZdjklh
gZlhjbabjhZgguc hklmi
gijgZfjgghhacklbbgkZcj
66
www.amazoniainvestiga.info ISSN 2322 - 6307
expenses of insured legal entities is analyzed.
The main trends in the development of cyber
insurance have been identified. The factors that
hold back the development of cyber risk
insurance have been identified. The main ones
include the following: high level of information
entropy in the process of cyber risk assessment,
lack of a single standard for filling insurance
services in the field of cyber insurance. It is
noted that in the medium term the cyber
insurance market is prospective for insurance
companies. This is caused by the increasing
scale of cyber threats and the costs associated
with cyberattacks.
Key Words: cybercrime, cyber insurance,
insurance market, cyber risk, sectoral analysis.
jZkohhkyaZgguokdbjZlZdZfb
Dexqu kehZ dbjijklmiegb
dbjkljZohZgb  kljZohhc jughd
dbjjbkdhljZkehcZgZeba .
Introduction
The development of information technology
creates the preconditions for virtualization of all
types of business activities. During the 2000s, the
use of information technology has come a
difficult way from performing functions related,
mainly, to communication and computational
processes to the use of artificial intelligence in
decision-making, modeling. The use of
information technology in business helps reduce
transaction costs due to the more efficient
organization of communication channels and
business processes. At the same time, along with
the obvious positive effect of the information
technologies use, there are accompanying
negative manifestations. We are talking about
cybercrime. That means the cases of national and
international legislation violation in the virtual
space and / or with the use of information
technologies. Given the further virtualization of
business activity, the relevance of finding tools
to minimize the negative effects of cybercrime
will increase. One such tool is cyber insurance.
The aim of the article is to analyze current trends
in the development of cyber insurance
Literature review
The general issues of digitization and innovation
to various sectors of the economy are discussed
in articles Kurmaiev & Bayramov (2017),
Razumova & Levina (2019).
The authors Böhme R. & Schwartz G. (2010)
analyzed the main modern models of cyber
insurance. The following specific characteristics
of cyber risk are identified: correlated risk,
interdependent security, information asymmetry.
The authors point to a discrepancy between the
arguments for cybersecurity as an online security
tool and analytical information about the current
state of the cyber insurance market to perform its
functions. The scenario of the negative impact of
the cyber insurance market on the incentives to
improve security is indicated.
The article (Shetty, Schwartz, Felegyhazi,
Walrand, 2010) examines the impact of cyber
insurers on information security. The authors
consider cybercrime protection at the individual
and global levels. It is noted that cyber insurance
has a positive impact on the security of specific
insured entities. At the 
Volume 9 - Issue 28 / April 2020
 67
http:// www.amazoniainvestiga.info ISSN 2322 - 6307
The authors (Marotta, Martinelli, Nanni, Orlando
& Yautsiukhin, 2017) summarized the basic
information about cyber insurance, highlighted
the unique characteristics of this type of
insurance. The algorithm of analysis of the
market of cyber insurance is offered. Prospective
areas of research have been identified. This will
allow to reveal the issues of cyber insurance
more fully.
Bolot J., Lelarge M. (2009) highlight the
feasibility of using cyber insurers. The focus is
on the individual cyber risks that insurance
companies do not work with. The influence of the
factors that determine the volume of investments
in cybersecurity is analyzed. The authors note
that insurance is an important component of
cyber risk management.
The study (Franke, 2017) focuses on the cyber
insurance market in Sweden. Using the interview
method, the author interviewed 15 subjects of the
insurance and reinsurance market. The obtained
information allowed us to cover the underwriting
process, to summarize the data on insurance
premiums. It is noted that one of the main reasons
for refusal in cyber insurance is the low level of
information security of the client. It is stated that
cyber insurance can be an effective tool to
minimize the negative effects of cyber risk.
The team of authors (Woods & Simpson, 2017)
examines the practice of cyber insurance from
public-private partnerships. The mutually
beneficial nature of the cooperation between
cyber insurers and public authorities is noted.
The authors analyze the nature of government
institutions impact on the functioning of the
cyber insurance market.
Hayel Y., Zhu Q. (2015) note that cyber
insurance is a promising tool for minimizing
cybercrime losses. The authors propose a cyber
insurance model that takes into account the
interaction between users, attackers and
insurance companies. The basic characteristics of
the optimal insurance policy are determined.
The work (Böhme & Kataria, 2006) proposes a
two-level classification of correlation properties
of cyber risks. According to the authors, the first
level is the in-house correlation of cyber risks; it
means the correlation of failures / threats in the
internal network (Intranet). The second level is
global-scale risk correlation. The authors found
that cyber risks are different in the first and
second levels of the proposed classification. It is
noted that the intrinsic correlation of cyber risks
has an impact on the insurance decision making,
and the global one - on the process of
determining the premium by insurers.
Methodology
The method of generalization was used in the
preparation of the article. Its application has
allowed us to identify common approaches to the
use of cyber insurance tools. The method of
correlation analysis allowed us to study the
degree of interdependence between the number
of registered cybercrime and GDP, the number of
business entities in individual countries. The
method of comparative analysis allowed to
compare the indicators that characterize
cybercrime and cyber insurance.
In addition, materials from the analytical studies
of Identity Theft Resource Center, Wipro
Limited, Kaspersky Lab and others were used.
Results and discussion
Development of information technologies,
virtualization of entrepreneurial activity is
important components of business processes
organization of modern companies. Today, it is
difficult to find a company that does not use
information technology in its activities. A similar
situation is observed for individuals for whom
online services have become a part of life.
Interesting are the results of the study (West,
2016), which showed that the losses of the
economy of 19 countries, in which in 2015-2016
the Internet disconnected, amounted to 2.4
billion USD. In particular, India's economy lost
0.96 billion USD as a result of 70 days of
shutdowns over the period. 2.75 days of Internet
shutdown caused 35.1 million USD loss in
Turkey's economy.
In turn, informatization of the economy has led
to the emergence and spread of illegal acts in this
area (cybercrime). Cybercrime has become an
integral part of today's information society.
Having started its history in the 1970s with
password and hacking programs, using the
advances of modern science, cybercrime has
become a global threat to the economic security
of legal businesses.
In our opinion, it is advisable to consider
cybercrime as a separate specific type of nonlegal (criminal) business.
The rapid development of new technologies has
contributed to the growth of quantitative and
value indicators of cybercrime. The financial
flows generated by cybercrime are the largest, 
68
www.amazoniainvestiga.info ISSN 2322 - 6307
compared to other types of illegal activity. Thus,
according to experts (Morgan, 2019), the volume
of the cybercrime market in 2015-2016 was 3
trillion USD, compared with 1.13 trillion USD
(maximum estimated value) for the pirated
products market, 0.65 trillion USD (maximum
estimated value) for drug trafficking (May,
2017).
Cybercrime is a universal concept that combines
many types of unlawful activity using
information technology and / or computer
technology.
Summarizing the above-mentioned information
allows us to distinguish the following major
cybercrime trends:
object-oriented - development of
software and algorithm of actions for a
specific object;
changing the focus of cyber-attacks -
less protected entities in the nonfinancial corporations sector are
preferred;
growth of the share of personal and
individuals accounting data and legal
entities in the overall structure of the
stolen information;
changing the attitude of companies to be
targeted by cybercrime.
An analysis of cybercrime geography has made
it possible to identify countries, companies and
individuals who are most often the target of
cybercrime. The first group of countries, where
more than 40% of all cybercrimes are recorded,
are: the USA and Canada. The second group of
countries consists of Great Britain, India,
Australia. Third group of countries includes
China, Germany, Norway, Sweden and South
Africa.
We conducted a correlation analysis of the
relationship between the number of reported
cybercrime and GDP (current USD) countries
(World Bank, 2019). The correlation coefficient
was 0.28, indicating that there is no correlation
between the studied indicators.
Similarly, there was no statistically significant
correlation between the number of cybercrime
reported and the number of business entities in
the above-mentioned countries.
To our point of view, the extension of the
offenses geography is indicative of the selective
nature of cybercrime.
At the same time, as it was mentioned above, the
leader of cybercrime attacks was the United
States. In the Table 1 the dynamics of indicators
that characterize cyber-attacks on US companies
is shown.
Table 1. Correlation of Cyber-Attacks and General Losses
Year Losses, USD Number of Cyber-Attacks Price of One Cyber-Attack, USD
2015 1070700000 288012 3717,55
2016 1450700000 298728 4856,26
2017 1418700000 301580 4704,22
2018 2706400000 351973 7689,23
Source: Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2019
Thus, according to Table 1, in the US,
cybercrime losses increased more than 2.5 times
during 2015-2018, although the number of cyberattacks increased by only 22%. The average cost
of losses from 1 cyber-attack during the analyzed
period increased from 3717,55 USD to 7689.23
USD. The losses from cyber-attacks in the other
countries listed above, especially the first and
second groups, are similar in terms of the amount
of losses.
The most common types of cybercrime are the
following: hacking, unauthorized access,
accidental exposure, insider and physical theft.
The structure of cybercrimes by their types is
shown in Fig. 1
Volume 9 - Issue 28 / April 2020
 69
http:// www.amazoniainvestiga.info ISSN 2322 - 6307
Source: Identity Theft Resource Center, 2019
Fig. 1. Breaches by type
Analysis of Fig. 1 shows that hacking accounts
for the largest share of cybercrime, with its share
accounting for 39% of cybercrimes in 2018.
Most often, hacking was done by sending a
phishing e-mail virus, activating which resulted
in the loss of control over the data. At the same
time, the share of this group of crimes decreased
by 20% during 2018. First of all, this is due to the
increased level of protection, due to the use of
letter filtering programs and to the improvement
of the functioning of cyber-threat centers. The
share of unauthorized access to devices and
information networks other than hacking
increased by 19 points during the period 2017-
2018, accounting for 30% at the end of the
period. The share of other types of cybercrime in
the overall structure did not fluctuate
significantly - about 3-9%.
Analysis of the distribution of cybercrime by
industry revealed the following trends.
First of all, there is a significant decrease in the
share of business companies operating in the
financial sector in the overall industry structure
of cybercrime. According to estimates (George,
2019), their share has dropped to 17% of total
cybercrime.
Secondly, the share of healthcare companies has
increased significantly. The increase was 17%
during 2016-2018 (George, 2019; Identity Theft
Resource Center, 2019).
This means that cybercriminals will refocus on
companies in those industries that satisfy three
conditions: low basic level of cyber defense, high
public resonance, and high level of financial
capacity.
According to a survey conducted by W. Schwab,
M. Poujol (2018), 77% of respondents rated the
likelihood of a cyber security incident at
companie
That is why the mechanisms of combating
cybercriminals and their activities are the most
relevant.
Among the preventive measures that minimize
the negative effects of cybercrime intervention, it
is advisable to single out cyber insurance.
With the development of cyber threats and cyberattacks, insurance has become a significant risk
management tool for both state and non-state
enterprises. This is a promising direction for the
development of insurance business, since the
creation of insurance protection programs, in
addition to the direct compensation of losses,
greatly contributes to improving the level of
information security of the company as a whole
or of individual business processes.
Cyber insurance is a dynamic segment of the
global insurance market. Undoubtedly, this type
of insurance is considered as a method of risk
management and protection against various
threats that arise in the implementation of ecommerce and the use of information
technology. The first cyber risk insurance
contracts were signed in 2010-2011. This topic
was actively discussed at the annual Davos
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
hacking unauthorized
access
accidental
exposure
insider theft physical theft other
2017 2018
70
www.amazoniainvestiga.info ISSN 2322 - 6307
Forum in 2012. But the active growth of this type
of insurance began several years later, following
massive cyber-attacks on corporate and
government resources in the USA. The dynamics
of cyber insurance in the world in 2016-2019 is
shown in Fig. 2.
Source: Marsh, 2017, Grand View Research, 2019; Mordor Intelligence, 2020
Fig. 2. Dynamics of Cyber Insurance in the World in 2016-2019, Billion USD
Throughout 2016-2019, there has been a steady
increase in cyber insurance in the world. Thus, in
2016, the amount of cyber insurance amounted to
2.5 billion USD, in 2017 this figure reached 3.5
billion USD (an increase of 40%), in 2018 - 4.3
billion USD (compared to the previous year)
23%), 7.36 billion USD in 2019, up 71% from
2018. In general, over the period 2016-2019, the
volume of cyber insurance in the world has
increased by 194.4%.
The geographical segmentation of the cyber
insurance market that we have conducted has
shown that 62% of the global cyber insurance
market is in the USA, 16% in the UK, 14% in the
global market belongs to the EU, 8% - in other
countries.
The 2018 FICO Country Cyber Insurance Market
Survey (FICO, 2019) shows that the largest
number of cyber risk insurers is in the UK. For
example, in the UK, in 2017, the number of
companies with specific cyber-risk coverage was
61%, in 2018, this figure increased by 29% to
90%. In the USA in 2018, 76% of companies had
specific coverage, up 41% from 2016.
Scandinavia has seen a slow spread in cyber
insurance: in Sweden, the percentage of
companies with cyber risk insurance has
increased by only 1%, and this is the country with
the lowest levels - only 57% has cyber risk
insurance.
The USA market is dominated by several major
insurers, including AIG, Chubb and XL Group,
which own 40% of the cyber insurance market.
Other insurance companies, such as Beazley,
CNA Financial, Liberty Mutual, BCS Insurance,
Axis Capital and Zurich American Insurance,
hold significantly smaller market shares.
According to a study (Snyder, 2019), 10 leading
companies accumulate more than 100 million
USD in annual insurance premiums, and about
10 others collect monthly insurance premiums of
25 million USD to 100 million USD.
The segmentation of the cyber insurance market
by size of insurance companies has demonstrated
the dominance of insurers with assets in excess
of 100 million USD. Yes, 69.5% of the cyber
insurance market was held by five leading cyber
insurers (Snyder, 2019): Chubb 325.8 million
USD (16% market share; 98% packaged), AXA
US 255.9 million USD (12.6% market share;
100% standalone), AIG 232.6 million USD
(11.4% market share; 99.9% standalone),
Travelers 146.2 million USD (7.2% market
share; 77.2% standalone), Beazley 110.9 million
USD (5.5% market share; 90.9% standalone).
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2016 2017 2018 2019
Volume 9 - Issue 28 / April 2020
 71
http:// www.amazoniainvestiga.info ISSN 2322 - 6307
The PartnerRe & Advisen 2018 survey
(PartnerRe & Advisen, 2018) showed an increase
in interest in cyber risk insurance among
medium-sized enterprises, although in 2014-
2017, the major buyers of cyber insurance
policies were mainly large enterprises. The
above-mentioned demonstrates the growing
awareness of the importance and need for cyberrisk protection.
The sectoral segmentation of the market for
buyers of cyber insurance policies is shown in
Fig. 3.
Source: PartnerRe & Advisen, 2018
Fig. 3. Industry segmentation of cybersecurity buyers in 2018, %
According to the data shown in Fig. 3, the largest
number of buyers of cyber insurance policies
belongs to the health sector (42%), the second
place belongs to the industry (40%), the third - to
the professional services, financial services,
insurance and information technologies (38%
each).
It is advisable to highlight the following major
problems of cyber insurance. They are:
high level of entropy of information in
the process of cyber risk assessment;
the individual nature of pricing for
insurance services;
lack of a single standard for filling
insurance services in the field of cyber
insurance;
limited coverage of cyber insurance
policies to cover risks;
availability of other risk coverage
policies;
lack of qualified cybersecurity experts;
the emergence of new cyber security
and cyber-attacks;
the indifference and illiteracy of
business owners and staff about the
need to protect against cyber-attacks.
Despite the fact that nowadays there are
sufficiently effective means of protection against
certain types of cybercrime (means of detecting
problems in the Software, SIEM solution,
network screening, anti-DDO services), in our
opinion, only cyber insurance can compensate
for possible losses from damage, destroying or
stealing corporate and customer data, and
overcoming a business crisis that may result from
cyber risk.
According to PartnerRe & Advisen (PartnerRe &
Advisen, 2018), the number of cyber insurance
policies will continue to grow, as the main
reasons for purchasing cyber coverage (in 2018,
as in previous years) were:
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45%
Healthcare
Manufacturing/Industrials
Professional Services
Financial Services/Insurance
Information Technology
Retail/Point of Sale
Government and Nonprofit
Energy/Utilities
Education
Other
72
www.amazoniainvestiga.info ISSN 2322 - 6307
reaction to perpetrators of cyberattacks;
experience of information and financial
losses associated with cyber risks.
In the medium term, the cyber insurance market
is prospective for insurance companies. This is
due to the fact that the scale, level of danger and
costs associated with cyber-attacks are
increasing, regardless of whether such attacks are
aimed at corrupting data and systems or stealing
confidential information, such as trade secrets or
personal data.
Thus, according to estimates, the amount of
cyber insurance in 2025 will be 27.83 billion
USD, with a CAGR of 24.3% over the period
2020-2025 (Grand View Research, 2019). This
will be linked to the growing number of digital
technologies created and implemented, including
in the areas of digital security and privacy
management, cyber threats.
Conclusions
The first quarter of the XXI century was marked
by rapid development and global spread of
information technologies. This process is
accompanied by actualization of cyber-risks,
including those caused by the activity of
cybercriminals. The study showed a trend
towards increasing cybercrime and damage. The
authors point to the prospect of cyber-risk
insurance, given the possibility of minimizing the
negative effects caused by cybercriminals.
During 2016-2019, the global cyber insurance
market has shown a growth trend, despite the
problematic aspects of its current functioning.
The growth of this market is primarily due to the
awareness of the need for cyber risk insurance
and the increasing number of cyber-attacks in the
world. The authors point out that the main
catalysts for the development of the cyber
insurance market in the medium term will be: an
increase in the technological level of cyber
threats, the need for further improvement of data
protection legislation.
Bibliographic references
Böhme, R. & Schwartz, G. (2010). Modeling
Cyber-Insurance: Towards A Unifying
Framework. Workshop on the Economics of
Information Security, June, 1-36
Böhme, R., & Kataria, G. (2006). Models and
Measures for Correlation in Cyber-Insurance.
Workshop on the Economics of Information
Security, June, 1-26
Bolot, J. & Lelarge, M. (2009). Cyber Insurance
as an Incentivefor Internet Security. In M. E.
Johnson (Ed.), Managing Information Risk and
the Economics of Security (p. 269-290). Boston:
Springer
Federal Bureau of Investigation (2019). IC3
Annual Report Released. Retrieved from
https://www.fbi.gov/news/stories/ic3-releases2018-internet-crime-report-042219/
FICO (2019). Who has cyber risk insurance
worldwide? Retrieved from
https://www.fico.com/blogs/who-has-cyberrisk-insurance-around-world
Franke, U. (2017). The cyber insurance market in
Sweden. Computers & Security, 68, 130-144
George, J.V. (Ed) (2019). State of Cybersecurity
Report. Bangalore: Wipro Limited
Grand View Research (2019). Cyber Insurance
Market Size, Share & Trends Analysis Report By
Organization. Retrieved from
https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industryanalysis/cyber-insurance-market
Hayel, Y., Zhu, Q. (2015). Attack-Aware Cyber
Insurance for Risk Sharing in Computer
Networks. In M. Khouzani, E. Panaousis, G.
Theodorakopoulos (Eds.), Decision and Game
Theory for Security. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science (p. 22-34). London: Springer
Identity Theft Resource Center (2019). End-OfYear Data Breach Report Identity. San Diego:
Theft Resource Center
Kurmaiev, P. Yu., Bayramov, E. A. (2017).
Current trends of financing of innovative activity
entities in Ukraine. Scientific Bulletin of
Polissia, 2(10), 55-62.
Marotta, A., Martinelli, F., Nanni, S., Orlando,
A. & Yautsiukhin, A. (2017). Cyber-insurance
survey. Computer Science Review, 24, 35-61.
doi.org/10.1016/j.cosrev.2017.01.001
Marsh (2017). Global Insurance Market Index
(Second Quarter 2017). New York: Marsh LLC
May, C. (2017). Transnational Crime and the
Developing World. Washington: Global
Financial Integrity
Mordor Intelligence (2020). Cyber Security
Insurance Market - Growth, Trends, Forecast
(2020 - 2025). Retrieved from
https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industryreports/cyber-security-insurance-market
Morgan, S. (2019). 2019 Official Annual
Cybercrime Report. Sausalito: Cybersecurity
Ventures
PartnerRe & Advisen (2018). Survey of Cyber
Insurance Market Trends. New York: PartnerRe
& Advisen
Razumova, Y. & Levina, E. (2019).
Digitalization of the transport and logistics
market: integration of information systems.
Russian experience in introducing digital 
Volume 9 - Issue 28 / April 2020
 73
http:// www.amazoniainvestiga.info ISSN 2322 - 6307
technologies in the organization of logistics
processes. Amazonia Investiga, 8(22), 269-279.
Retrieved from
https://www.amazoniainvestiga.info/index.php/a
mazonia/article/view/428
Schwab, W., Poujol, M. (2018). The State of
Industrial Cybersecurity 2018. Munich: CXP
Group Company
Shetty, N., Schwartz, G., Felegyhazi, M. &
Walrand, J. (2010). Competitive CyberInsurance and Internet Security. In T. Moore, D.
Pym, C. Ioannidis (Eds.), Economics of
Information Security and Privacy (p. 229-247).
Boston: Springer
Snyder, A. (Ed.) (2019). Cyber Insurers Are
Profitable Today, but Wary of
Oldwick: AM Best
West, D. M. (2016). Internet shutdowns cost
countries $2.4 billion last year. Washington:
Center for Technological Innovation at
Brookings
Woods, D. & Simpson, A. (2017). Policy
measures and cyber insurance: a framework.
Journal of Cyber Policy, 2, 209-226, DOI:
10.1080/23738871.2017.1360927
World Bank (2019). GDP (current US$).
Retrieved from
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.
MKTP.CD?type=shaded&view=map
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
1
Developing a cyber security culture: Current
practices and future needs
Betsy Uchendu 1, Jason R.C. Nurse 1, Maria Bada 2 and Steven Furnell 3
1 University of Kent, UK
2 University of Cambridge, UK
3 University of Nottingham, UK
Corresponding author: Jason R.C. Nurse, j.r.c.nurse@kent.ac.uk
Highlights
A systematic review of the last ten years of research on security culture, information
security culture and cyber security culture
Top management support, security policy, awareness/training key to building cyber security
culture
Developing a security culture requires in-depth knowledge of organisation and employees
Questionnaires and surveys often used to measure culture, but have several weaknesses
which should not be overlooked
Very few cyber security culture frameworks/approaches have been evaluated in the realworld
Abstract
While the creation of a strong security culture has been researched and discussed for decades, it
continues to elude many businesses. Part of the challenge faced is distilling pertinent, recent
academic findings and research into useful guidance. In this article, we aim to tackle this issue by
conducting a state-of-the-art study into organisational cyber security culture research. This work
investigates four questions, including how cyber security culture is defined, what factors are
essential to building and maintaining such a culture, the frameworks proposed to cultivate a
security culture and the metrics suggested to assess it. Through the application of the PRISMA
systematic literature review technique, we identify and analyse 58 research articles from the last 10
years (2010-2020). Our findings demonstrate that while there have been notable changes in the use
of terms (e.g., information security culture and cyber security culture), many of the most influential
factors across papers are similar. Top management support, policy and procedures, and awareness
for instance, are critical in engendering cyber security culture. Many of the frameworks reviewed
revealed common foundations, with organisational culture playing a substantial role in crafting
appropriate cyber security culture models. Questionnaires and surveys are the most used tool to
measure cyber security culture, but there are also concerns as to whether more dynamic measures
are needed. For practitioners, this article highlights factors and models essential to the creation and
management of a robust security culture. For research, we produce an up-to-date characterisation
of the field and also define open issues deserving of further attention such as the role of change
Keywords: Cybersecurity culture, information security culture, security awareness, organisational
culture, management, business, SMEs, behaviour, psychology. 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
2
1. Introduction
Over the last decade, the topic of security culture has featured heavily in practice and research as
organisations look to combat an increase in attacks that exploit human factors. Within this domain,
several terms have been used including security culture, information security culture and more
recently, cyber security culture. Although cyber security is often used synonymously with
information security more generally, the nature of the two terms arguably differs. For example, Von
Solms and Van Niekerk (2013) define cyber security as the aim to protect an additional set of assets,
particularly human and organisational assets, which can be regarded as more extensive. It therefore
may be seen to consider shared values, beliefs and expected behaviours regarding the protection of
this wide set of aspects (Ioannou et al., 2019; Da Veiga, 2016a).
In this paper, we contribute to the practitioner and academic communities by critically investigating
the state-of-the-art of cyber security culture research through a systematic review of ten years of
related literature. This work seeks to summarise key research developments within an area that still
proves challenging for businesses in their pursuit of building robust security cultures
(ComputerWeekly, 2019; Tripwire, 2020). Specifically, we apply a rigorous systematic review
process with the aim of examining how the use of terminology has changed, the factors central to
building a cyber security culture, and the frameworks and tools used to cultivate and measure it.
This research is novel as compared to other related security culture reviews (e.g., Glaspie &
Karwowski, 2017; Nasir et al., 2019a; Sas et al., 2020) through its combined coverage and analysis of
these three areas (instead of disparate studies), meta-analysis of pertinent, recent research (to
understand the origins and context of articles published and provide more general insight into the
direction of the field), and identification of current outstanding issues as we enter a new decade.
We also differentiate our work from other articles focused specifically on security policy compliance
(e.g., Bulgurcu, Cavusoglu & Benbasat, 2010; Moody, Siponen & Pahnila, 2018; Cram, D arcy &
Proudfoot, 2019; Paananen, Lapke & Siponen, 2020) as this study aims to be wider in scope, with
policies and compliance discussions primarily considered through articles that examine security
culture. This is a similar approach to existing culture studies (Nasir et al., 2019a; da Veiga et al.,
2020), and is beneficial as it guides our scope and contributions.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines and explains the PRISMA
protocol used to conduct the review. In Section 3, the results of the article selection process are
presented as well as a review of the articles both their details and contributions as it pertains to
our research aim. Next, Section 4 engages in an in-depth analysis of the results discovered, reflects
on open issues in security culture research, outlines practical implications, and considers our
findings in the context of related prior reviews. Section 5 concludes the article and summarises our
insights for research and practice.
2. Methodology
2.1 Protocol and registration
The present research used the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analysis
(PRISMA) guidelines (Moher et al. 2009). PRISMA outlines a robust protocol which has
demonstrated use in security research (Knight and Nurse, 2020). Such systematic review techniques
use carefully designed methods to select and review relevant research literature and analyse the 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
3
results that emerge from the research. The aim is to synthesise understanding using a valid and
reliable technique (Okoli and Schabram, 2010). checklist, as well as a
four-phase flow diagram, to help guide the analysis. The checklist defines the main sections and
topics that need to be presented and addressed in the review, while the flow diagram includes
protocols related to identification of sources and articles, screening of articles, determining
eligibility, and inclusion of relevant articles.
2.2 Eligibility criteria
This systematic review used the following eligibility criteria to help decide which research articles
were relevant. This inclusion criteria (IC) included:
IC1, which required only articles published in English.
IC2, if IC1 was met, involved articles pertaining to and extensively covering the broader
topic of cyber security culture (inclusive of related terms such as security culture and
information security culture).
IC3, if the article had met the first two criteria, included articles that were specific to
organisations; i.e. organisations in general or users in organisations, often employees. This
allowed our research to exclude articles that concentrated on national or the public
security culture.
2.3 Information sources
The search was applied to ACM Digital Library, IEEE Xplore, ScienceDirect, Web of Science, Scopus
and ProQuest libraries. ACM Digital Library, IEEE Xplore, Science Direct and Web of Science cover
the widest body of research on computer science and more specifically cyber security. Scopus and
ProQuest were useful databases in capturing research articles from non-computing domains. These
additional libraries helped increase the chances that all relevant articles were considered;
organisational culture, for instance, touches on a wider scope of topics such as psychology and
business management. The choice of these six article repositories and publisher databases was
preferred as compared to other options (such as Google Scholar, for instance), due to the higher
chances of finding relevant, peer-reviewed articles. Our search was run in August 2020 and covered
articles published from January 2010 to August 2020. This period would capture the most recent
research as well as allowing us to consider the emergence of cyber security culture as compared to
more dated terms including information/IT security culture.
2.4 Study selection
Using the four phases outlined in the PRISMA diagram, the study selection process followed these
steps:
1. Electronic databases were searched, focusing on literature that pertained to cyber security
in organisations. The keyword query was designed to use terms that related to the topic of
interest and would allow the widest capture of articles. Specifically, the following search
was used across the databases:
2. Duplicates both within and across databases were then removed following the collection of
results. The title, abstract and keyword listing of each research article was reviewed, and
articles were filtered manually and marked as appropriate if inclusion criteria were met. If
not, the relevant criteria were noted to record exclusion reason.
3. The remaining articles that were not excluded in step 2 were either partially or completely
reviewed and further refined based on the inclusion criteria. Once the relevant articles were 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
4
determined, these were further narrowed down to only include articles from 2010 and
onwards, limiting the review period to the last 10 years.
4. Reference lists of relevant literature were scanned to include any studies that may have
been missed. These were subject to the same actions in steps 2 and 3, and added if the
inclusion criteria and the publication year requirement was met.
These actions were performed and reviewed amongst authors. This allowed any disparities to be
discussed and agreed.
2.5 Data items collected
The review focused on extracting data from articles that were associated with examining how the
use of security culture terminology has changed, the factors central to building a cyber security
culture, and the frameworks and tools used to cultivate and measure it. These are further detailed
in Table 1.
Table 1. Data items
Data Item Description
Research foundation Definitions and characteristics of cyber security culture (inclusive
of security culture and information security culture)
 Factors that are regarded as important to build and maintain a
cyber security culture
 Approaches/tools/frameworks used or proposed to build a cyber
security culture
 Metrics used or proposed to assess cyber security culture
Key findings and
contributions
Key findings and contributions of the research into cyber security
culture
Study/experiment
details
Research instruments used to conduct the study/experiment, if
any (e.g., interviews, surveys, theory-based research)
 Type of participants and number of participants involved (e.g.,
employees, top-level management, IT departments)
 Sector or industry of focus (e.g., finance, healthcare)
Author(s) and
publication venue
details
Country author(s) is/are affiliated with
 Type of publication (conference or journal)
 Name of publication venue (i.e., title of conference or journal)
 Year of publication
3.Results
3.1 Study selection
In total, 58 research articles fulfilled the criteria outlined and thus were selected for review. The
keyword search across the databases resulted in 1931 articles. From these, 536 were removed as
they were duplicates. Following this, the first inclusion criteria (IC1) was applied, and 30 articles
were discarded. After assessing the title, abstracts and keywords of the remaining articles, 1110
articles were excluded as they did not meet the criteria (IC2) of referring to cyber 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
5
(which, as discussed in Section 1, we view as inclusive of information security culture). The full text
of the remaining 255 articles were reviewed against the final criteria (IC3), and a further 200 results
did not meet the criteria and thus were excluded. Three additional articles fit the criteria but were
excluded because we were unable to access the full text. The reference lists of the final 52 articles
were examined, and after checking the inclusion criteria, a further 6 papers were added to the final
set. Figure 1 illustrates a PRISMA flow diagram outlining the process used to achieve the final 58
articles.
Figure 1. PRISMA flow diagram presenting the inclusion process
3.2 Study characteristics
This section of the study summarises the results from the meta-analysis on the final set of articles. It
considers the distribution of papers across conferences and journals, and the prevalence of certain 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
6
publication venues, countries (of authors), research instruments and other article details. Firstly, we
present the full set of research articles in Table 2, and use paper identification numbers (IDs) (e.g.,
P1, P2) throughout our work to allow easier reference of review articles.
Table 2. Full list of research articles reviewed and respective paper IDs
Paper ID Study Paper ID Study
P1 Alfawaz et al. (2010) P30 Da Veiga (2016a)
P2 Da Veiga and Eloff (2010) P31 Da Veiga (2016b)
P3 Lacey (2010) P32 Hassan and Ismail (2016)
P4 Lim et al. (2010) P33 Santos-Olmo et al. (2016)
P5 Sánchez et al. (2010) P34 Tang et al. (2016)
P6 Van Niekerk and Von Solms (2010) P35 Da Veiga and Martins (2017)
P7 Batteau (2011) P36 Gcaza et al. (2017)
P8 Alnatheer et al. (2012) P37 Hassan et al. (2017)
P9 Hassan and Ismail (2012) P38 Masrek et al. (2017)
P10 Olivos (2012) P39 Da Veiga (2018)
P11 Shahibi et al. (2012) P40 Masrek et al. (2018a)
P12 AlHogail and Mirza (2014a) P41 Masrek et al. (2018b)
P13 AlHogail and Mirza (2014b) P42 Mokwetli and Zuva (2018)
P14 Astakhova (2014) P43 Nævestad et al. (2018)
P15 P44 Ioannou et al. (2019)
P16 Da Veiga and Martins (2014) P45 Marotta and Pearlson (2019)
P17 Lopes and Oliveira (2014) P46 Nasir et al. (2019b)
P18 Reid et al. (2014) P47 Nel and Drevin (2019)
P19 Reid and Van Niekerk (2014) P48
P20 AlHogail (2015a) P49 Ruhwanya and Ophoff (2019)
P21 AlHogail (2015b) P50 Tolah et al. (2019)
P22 Alnatheer (2015) P51
P23 AlKalbani et al. (2015) P52 Alshaikh (2020)
P24 Da Veiga (2015) P53 Blythe et al. (2020)
P25 Da Veiga and Martins (2015) P54 Da Veiga et al. (2020)
P26 Greig et al. (2015) P55 Govender et al. (2020)
P27 Lim et al. (2015) P56 Nasir et al. (2020)
P28 Martins and Da Veiga (2015) P57 Schneider et al. (2020)
P29 Sherif et al. (2015) P58 Wiley et al. (2020)
Paper distribution. Six out of 58 articles (~11%) were published in 2010, one in 2011 (~2%), and
four in 2012 (~7%). No articles were included from 2013. Eight out of 58 (~14%) were published in
2014, and the highest number of articles included were from 2015 at ten (~17%). Five articles (~8%)
were included from 2016, four from 2017 (7%), five from 2018 (~8%) and eight from 2019 (~14%).
At the time of our search in August 2020, seven articles (~12%) were included for review.
Publication type. Figure 2 displays a simplified visual of the number of studies and their publication
type (journal or conference) in each year. Of the 58 articles, 32 papers were published at
conferences, and 26 published in journals.
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
7
Figure 2. Years articles published and publication type
Publication venue. Table 3 was created to summarise the number of papers by source of
publication venue. A range of journals and conferences, including Computers & Security, Pacific Asia
Conference on Information Systems (PACIS), Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information
Technology (JATIT), International Symposium on Human Aspects of Information Security and
Assurance (HAISA), International Information Security for South Africa Conference, Information
Management & Computer Security, and Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS), had
two or more articles within this review. The two most frequently appearing journals, Computers &
Security, and Information and Computer Security, publish research in the field of security.
Computers & Security issue articles aimed at IT security professionals to provide expertise and
practical advice on management of systems. Information and Computer Security focuses on
organisational and business domains of information security. The ethos of both journals is
consistent with culture research and is likely the reason for the high total of published papers from
this review.
Table 3. Number of selected studies, by publisher
Source Total Studies
Computers & Security 7 P2, P6, P25, P35, P52, P54, P58
Information and Computer Security (formerly
Information Management & Computer Security)
6 P3, P15, P31, P36, P39, P47
Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems
(PACIS)
3 P4, P8, P23
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information
Technology (JATIT)
3 P11, P13, P32
International Symposium on Human Aspects of 3 P10, P24, P28
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
8
Information Security and Assurance (HAISA)
International Information Security for South
Africa Conference
2 P18, P19
Americas Conference on Information Systems
(AMCIS)
2 P45, P57
International Conference on ENTERprise
Information Systems
1 P5
International Journal of Business Anthropology 1 P7
International Conference on Information,
Communication Technology and System (ICTS)
1 P12
Australasian Conference on Information Security
(AISC)
1 P1
European Conference on Information
Management and Evaluation (ECIME)
1 P16
World Conference on Information Systems and
Technologies (WorldCIST)
1 P17
Scientific and Technical Information Processing 1 P14
International Conference on Information
Technology - New Generations (ITNG)
1 P22
Computers in Human Behavior (CHB) 1 P20
International Conference on Human Aspects of
Information Security, Privacy and Trust (HAS)
1 P29
International Journal of Security and its
Applications
1 P21
International Journal of Cyber Warfare and
Terrorism (IJCWT)
1 P27
Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 1 P9
Future Internet 1 P33
Science and Information Computing Conference
(SAI)
1 P30
International Conference on Research and
Innovation in Information Systems (ICRIIS)
1 P37
International Conference on Education and
Social Sciences (INTCESS)
1 P38
International Conference on Advances in Big
Data, Computing and Data Communication
Systems (icABCD)
1 P42
International Journal of Civil Engineering and
Technology
1 P40
International Journal of Mechanical Engineering
and Technology
1 P41
International European Safety and Reliability
Conference (ESREL)
1 P43
Information Security Journal: A Global
Perspective
1 P46
International Conference on Social Implications
of Computers in Developing Countries
1 P49
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
9
International Conference on Cyber Security and
Protection of Digital Services
1 P44
IFIP World Conference on Information Security
Education
1 P50
International Conference on Cyber Warfare and
Security (ICCWS)
1 P51
International Scientific Conference eLearning
and Software for Education
1 P48
World Congress on Internet Security (WorldCIS) 1 P26
Information Technology and Management 1 P34
International Conference on Information
Management (ICIM)
1 P56
Computer Science On-line Conference (CSOC) 1 P55
International Conference on HCI for
Cybersecurity, Privacy and Trust
1 P53
Author distribution. Figure 3 represents the geographical distribution of the author(s); where
authors are affiliated with different countries, all locations have been represented. 22 studies were
carried out by authors located in South Africa, over a third of the research in this review. From
reviewing the data, it is clear that there are certain prolific researchers in that country that have
found ways to work with organisations and industry to push forward security culture research and
practice. The remainder of the authors are located across Asia-Pacific, Europe, North and South
America and the Middle East. It is worth noting the relatively low number of articles from the US (3)
and Europe (e.g., UK, France, Spain, Portugal and Norway have a total of 12) who are typically
significant contributors to cyber security research.
Figure 3. Geographical distribution of research authors
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
10
Research instruments. Table 4 presents the research instruments used across the 58 papers. As
shown, a range of instruments were found spanning questionnaires and surveys, interviews, and
theory-based research (e.g., literature reviews); this is further discussed in Section 3.6.
Table 4. Research instruments used within the studies
Research instruments Studies
Interviews P1, P4, P10, P15, P21, P26, P27, P32, P34, P30, P37, P43, P50, P57
Questionnaires and
Surveys
P2, P3, P8, P11, P15, P16, P17, P20, P21, P23, P24, P25, P26, P27,
P28, P30, P31, P34, P35, P39, P40, P41, P42, P44, P46, P47, P53,
P54, P56, P58
Theory-based research P1, P2, P3, P4, P6, P7, P8, P9, P11, P10, P18, P12, P13, P17, P14,
P19, P20, P21, P22, P27, P28, P29, P30, P33, P35, P36, P38, P42,
P40, P41, P45, P46, P48, P49, P50, P51, P52, P54
Other(s) P5, P10, P33, P35, P45, P49, P55
Participants. Across the studies, most articles that incorporated employee participation used a
range of participants from top management to employees. One article solely included business
owners and managers (P42). Looking particularly at IT employees, eight articles included IT
specialists, experts or information security managers as participants (P1; P8; P17; P20; P21; P44) or
their departments (P10; P50). Two articles involved Human Resource (HR) managers (P4; P27).
Sector or industry of focus. There was no sector or industry predominant across the review. Where
mentioned, case studies within papers included a wide variety of organisations such as
manufacturing, higher education institutions (HEIs), and finance and insurance firms. Concentrating
on industries, there were three articles focused solely on the healthcare industry (P9; P32; P37),
two on banking and finance (P4; P45), one on retail (P26), and six on public organisations, i.e.,
governments and HEIs (P4; P21; P23; P36; P40; P46). The other selected papers did not concentrate
on a specific industry.
Security culture domain. Security culture domain explores the differing terms surrounding cyber
security culture and their respective applications. Figure 4 displays the proportion of articles that
exclusively discuss security culture, information security culture or cyber security culture. The
majority examine information security culture (42 in total), in comparison to only ten studies that
consider cyber security culture. Seven studies analyse security culture, with no direct reference to
information or cyber security. Cyber security culture articles have increased in the last 5 years, with
a rise in articles in 2019. Where a study reflects on multiple domains, the paper has been
represented in all appropriate categories.
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
11
Figure 4. Distribution of articles that discuss each security culture term and the year of publication
A majority of the articles state a definition of cyber security culture by which their research aligns
within the study. Additionally, not all studies aim to provide a method in which security culture can
be measured or assessed. Most articles do present a framework or approach in which a security
culture can be built and maintained. A majority (42 papers) focus on developing frameworks and
tools, and analysing approaches to build an information security culture. A total of ten articles (P9;
P11; P15; P22; P23; P29; P31; P34; P47, P58) present either multiple variables, or present findings
focusing on one factor that influences cyber security culture. When exploring cultural metrics, 32
articles include a measuring instrument or tool to assess security culture. However, only three
articles are focused primarily on defining security culture within their work. These points are
discussed in detail in the next section.
3.3 Definitions and characteristics of cyber security culture
In total, five of the articles reviewed (P14; P35; P52; P54; P58) were predominantly focused on
defining, characterising, or conceptualising cyber security culture (all-encompassing information
security culture and security culture). To present these, this work focuses on definitions of
information security culture, security culture and cyber security culture emerging from the
research.
Most of the papers (49 studies) had a general definition of security culture or described its
characteristics. Although not included in this review due to their publication date, two early
definitions of information security culture appear to have guided definitions throughout the last ten
behaviours, attitudes and values that contribute to the protection of all kinds of information in a
security culture. The second definition by Martins and Eloff (2002), re
about perceptions and attitudes that are accepted in order to incorporate information security
characteristics as the way in which things are done in an organisation, with the aim of protecting 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
12
alludes to the role employee behaviour plays in the safeguarding
of data.
Exploring information security culture definitions further, values appeared in 20 papers, such as
P17, P20, and P42. Protection also features in 14 papers; e.g., P5, P33, P54. The attitudes of
employees were referred to by 13 papers, including P10, P11 and P27. Assumptions appeared in the
definitions of 13 papers, for example P9, P35 and P58. Within 12 papers, beliefs surrounding the
characterisation of information security culture are mentioned, such as P15, P23, P34. The
perception of employees and their behaviour appeared in eight papers, including P21, P38, and P54.
It is notable that only seven papers (P7; P14; P30; P36; P44; P45; P48) specifically define cyber
security culture. Some cyber security culture definitions are similar to information security culture
definitions, such as those featured by P44 and P46. Ioannou et al. (P44) describes cyber security
down by an organization to all its employees, directing their course of
b) (P46) defines information
particularly in relation to data/information.
In other cases, however, cyber security culture definitions tend to be broader in scope, and are less
specific to the protection of information. Da Veiga (2016a) (P30), for example, characterised cyber
its the safety, security, privacy, and civil
security of data, but also includes keeping people and organisations secure in their entirety. The
same applies to the definition provided by Alshaikh (2020) (P52) who characterised cyber security
culture as
information processed by the organization through compliance with the information security policy
and an understanding of how to implement requirements in a cautious and attentive manner as
embedded through regular communication, awareness, training and education initiatives .
Astakhova (2014) (P14) posits that information security culture and cyber security culture are not
synonymous. This is because the core of information security culture is its protection of security and
data/information. However, the two concepts are intertwined and can be seen as separate parts of
a whole.
Several studies reviewed include a definition with a specific focus on organisations. Eight papers
(P2; P8; P43; P47; P49; P52; P54; P58) incorporate organisational culture within the definition of
security culture. P8, P47 and P58 describe security culture as a subculture of organisational culture.
The latter characterise information security culture as encompassing socio-cultural measures such
Zuva (2018) (P42) characterise the concept as interrelating with corporate systems and procedures.
These definitions all call attention to the organisational foundation that cyber security culture needs
to be built upon.
Another common theme in security culture definitions is security awareness, often viewed as an
aspect of security culture (P3; P47; P54). Security awareness is described as the conditions in which
users within an organisation are both committed to and aware of the security mission (Siponen,
2000). The interaction between security awareness and security culture appears often in
information security research and these factors will be picked up on in the next section. 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
13
3.4 Cyber security culture factors
Overall, ten papers (P9; P11; P15; P22; P23; P29; P31; P34; P47; P58) explicitly studied the factors,
or a particular factor, deemed as critical to building or maintaining a good, or positive, security
culture. Others included factors within their discussions. Table 5 displays the most frequently
occurring and pertinent factors appearing in the literature, and the related studies for further
reference. We also include general definitions and descriptions for each factor listed in the
Appendix; this assists in explaining how these terms are used.
Table 5. Factors most often regarded as important to build and maintain a cyber security
culture
Factors Total Studies
Top management support,
leadership or involvement
34 P1, P2, P3, P4, P7, P8, P12, P13, P15, P16, P20,
P21, P22, P23, P28, P24, P25, P29, P27, P30,
P35, P37, P38, P39, P40, P41, P42, P44, P46,
P47, P49, P50, P54, P57
Security policy 27 P1, P2, P3, P4, P8, P10, P16, P22, P24, P25, P27,
P28, P29, P30, P31, P32, P34, P35, P37, P38,
P39, P40, P41, P44, P47, P50, P54
Security awareness 24 P1, P4, P8, P9, P22, P23, P24, P25, P27, P28,
P29, P30, P31, P32, P35, P37, P38, P39, P40,
P41, P46, P47, P50, P54
Security training 21 P1, P4, P7, P8, P10, P13, P17, P22, P28, P25,
P24, P27, P30, P35, P38, P39, P43, P46, P47,
P50, P54
Change management 12 P2, P9, P13, P25, P24, P30, P35, P39, P45, P47,
P51, P54
Compliance 12 P10, P17, P22, P28, P34, P38, P40, P41, P46,
P47, P50, P54
Knowledge 11 P6, P7, P9, P10, P12, P33, P37, P35, P46, P51,
P54
Accountability and
responsibility
9 P12, P20, P21, P23, P34, P38, P45, P47, P48
Security risk 8 P22, P27, P35, P46, P47, P49, P50, P54
Commitment 8 P1, P15, P17, P23, P37, P38, P43, P46
Communication 8 P7, P12, P13, P15, P27, P34, P47, P44
User management 7 P17, P19, P24, P25, P29, P30, P39
Motivation 7 P12, P15, P17, P27, P38, P46, P47
Trust 6 P7, P25, P30, P39, P47, P54
National culture 5 P12, P35, P36, P49, P54
Ethical conduct 4 P12, P22, P47, P50
Regulations 4 P12, P20, P21, P42
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
14
Establishing a network of
champions
1 P52
Rewards and sanctions 1 P53
The most discussed factor, particularly in terms of maintaining a positive security culture, is the
support and leadership from top management. Thirty-four studies mentioned the importance of
management, or leadership expectations to ensure security culture is at the forefront of an
organisation and its culture. Notable examples of such studies include P1, P8, P12, P14, P23, P27,
P38, P47, P54 and P57. For instance, Masrek et al. (2017) (P38) includes management support as a
factor which is subdivided into two dimensions; information security importance and information
security commitment, exemplifying the need for full support and involvement from top
management.
A further 27 studies highlighted the importance of having clear policies and procedures for
employees to understand and abide by. P27, P31, P37, P38, P44, and P47 are examples of papers
that demonstrate the need for clear and well-communicated policy. Employee understanding often
relates to policies and procedures; knowledge of these requirements is a vital part of both building
and maintaining security culture, which is mentioned by 11 studies such as P7, P10, P12, P37 and
P51. Security awareness and training programs are often studied together in research. A total of 24
studies (including P1; P38; P46; P54) in some way consider security awareness and its effect on
security culture, and 21 studies (such as P1; P22; P27; P50) highlight that training is essential to
increase security awareness and thus to cultivate culture. Wiley et al. (2020) (P58) studied the
relationship between information security awareness and training; their findings support a positive
relationship between both security training and security awareness, and also security awareness
and security culture. These findings generally give evidence to support the often-assumed link
between these two concepts.
One of the more intriguing factors, mentioned by 12 studies, is the management of change.
AlHogail and Mirza (2014b) (P13) discussed that although many studies propose factors important
to security culture, few have mentioned the transition process towards cultivating information
security culture within an organisation. Arguably, previous studies have not provided concrete
advice as to how to make changes if security culture is not at the positive level needed to protect
information and systems. Change management is seen by Nel and Drevin (2019) (P47)
Wout (2019) (P51) as a critical factor for inciting actual change needed to build and maintain
security culture.
Along with understanding policies and procedures, compliance is a key aspect for employees in
ensuring the values of an organisation are maintained; a total of 12 studies include compliance as a
factor that influences security culture. For instance, P10, P17, P38, and P54 all discuss employees
actioning and complying with policies. Compliance here focused on the process of ensuring
employees and the organisation as a whole adheres to standards and regulations on security. Other
highly discussed factors are accountability and responsibility (P12; P20; P23; P34; P38; P45), and
user behaviour or management (P17; P19; P24; P25; P29; P30). Reid and Van Niekerk (2014) (P19)
introduce the role of the user, dividing this concept into the nature of the task, the behaviour of the
user and the psychology of the user. As these factors are frequently mentioned across multiple
papers, this demonstrates the importance of employee responsibility to their behaviour within an
organisation. This also lines up with the definitions of security culture covered in Section 3.3. 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
15
Commitment appears in eight papers (P1; P15; P17; P23; P37; P38; P43; P46) and generally pertains
to the activities needed to ensure policies to be adhered to and a strong culture
fostered. It is apparent that trust, acknowledged by six papers (P7; P25; P30; P39; P47), is also seen
as a factor important to building security culture. Trust is discussed in many ways across articles. P7
links trust to the confidence in employee actions and intentions. In addition, P25 relates to the
protection of the organisation s information from a human perspective, the safekeeping of private
information and trust in the communications of the organisation. Moreover, in some articles, trust
is not clearly defined (e.g., P30) and which makes it difficult to broadly appreciate who is trusting
whom (e.g., employee trusting the organisation or vice versa) and what the trust specifically relates
to. This highlights one of the challenges of drawing conclusive insights from the existing body of
work. Alongside trust, commitment across employees suggests that the relationship between an
organisation, its management and its users can determine the state of the security culture.
In order to accomplish behaviour change and therefore establish a cyber security culture, Blythe et
al. (2020) (P53) discuss the need for rewards and sanctions as part of a cyber security awareness
campaign. Rewards or sanctions are practiced to bridge the knowledge-practice gap in cyber
security awareness. This may also be considered as part of the motivation point above, depending
on how it is applied. Another factor that has been identified as important in developing cyber
security culture is that of establishing a network of champions (Alshaikh, 2020). As suggested, the
cyber security champion role is to support the team in amplifying the security awareness messages,
helping employees to adopt security behaviours identified from the policies as well as identifying
SETA needs (skills, knowledge, and behaviours) and finally reporting progress back to the security
team.
3.5 Cyber security culture approaches, tools and/or frameworks
A total of 37 studies explored approaches, tools, or frameworks regarding building or maintaining a
security culture. P11, P38 and P50 focus on theoretical frameworks to guide the development of
such security cultures. Conceptual information security culture models were developed by P9, P28,
P29, P42, and P40. Although these are predominantly theoretical, they provide a basis of
understanding for organisations to understand how a positive security culture can be cultivated and
strengthened. For instance, Masrek et al. (2017) (P38) proposes a conceptual framework that
decomposes such cultures into six dimensions, including management support, policy and
procedure, compliance, awareness, budget and technology. This is an example of a framework built
of dimensions that can be divided into factors that affect culture.
Niekerk and Von Solms (2010) (P6) and Reid and Van Niekerk (2014) (P19). The basis of this model is
that there are three levels of corporate culture; artifacts, espoused values and shared tacit
assumptions. P6 proposed that to create information security culture, an additional level of
information security knowledge should be added to support the other three levels, as knowledge is
a key part of a security culture. Therefore, according to this model, corporate culture is the basis of
corporate culture model with the
additional level of knowledge as a basis of understanding the structure of security culture; (P6)
The use of the STOPE framework by Bakry (2004) was also proposed by three studies to act as the
a framework could be built to guide the development 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
16
of a security culture (P12; P20; P21). AlHogail (2015b) (P21) combined the Information Security
Culture Framework from AlHogail (2015a) (P20) and the STOPE framework to create a new
approach to understanding information security culture. The combined framework consists of five
dimensions, which are Strategy, Technology, Organization, People, and Environment, and the aim is
to cover four domains of human behaviour factors; preparedness, responsibility, management, and
society and regulations (AlHogail and Mirza, 2014a). It also includes change management principles
to encourage and support the needed change within organisations.
Change management processes and models have been proposed by P18, P39 and P51. Change
management relates to persuading employees to change their behaviour to better align with what
the (P39) explores a holistic approach to
change management with the Information Security Culture Change Management (ISCCM) approach.
This aims to move organisations towards a positive security culture by managing the risks presented
by human factors in the safeguarding of information. It is constructed of four phases to manage and
implement behaviour change. Additionally, the Information Security Culture Change Framework by
AlHogail and Mirza (2014a) (P12) focuses on cultivating information security culture through
modifying behaviour, by integrating change management principles and examining human
elements.
The ARCS framework by Govender et al. (2020) (P55) suggests that the key drivers to
understanding, managing, supporting and changing information security culture are driven by
understanding the current state of information security, investing in specific initiatives that help to
reduce cost while also reducing information security risk, and creating a sustainable approach to
managing and improving information security culture. The framework uses a set of questions on the
quality and efficacy of the state of information security assessments, cost reduction and culture
within the organisation.
Within the papers reviewed, a small subset (P5; P33; P42; P49) target Small and Medium
Enterprises (SMEs) and Small, Medium and Micro Enterprises (SMMEs). SMEs are organisations that
often struggle with limited resources, therefore tools developed for larger firms are not always
usable due to affordability or complexity (de Araújo Lima, Crema and Verbano, 2020). Supported in
the research, Santos-Olmo et al. (2016) (P33) explain that many frameworks created to improve
information security culture are oriented towards larger organisations and lack factors necessary
for smaller enterprises. Mokwetli and Zuva (2018) (P42) proposed a conceptual information
communication and technology (ICT) security culture model made up of three categories;
organisational, environmental and technological. The aforementioned study suggests that the
adoption of the ICT model helps to minimise human error in SMMEs.
While there are no articles that appear to outwardly state that the approach has been developed
solely towards large organisations, studies such as Lacey (2010) (P3) and Tang et al. (2016) (P34) do
specify that the projects undertaken have been carried out in larger organisations. Da Veiga et al.
(2020) (P54)
Lacey (2010) (P3) reiterates that even large organisations often have low budgets and resources to
direct towards developing effective change campaigns, which would be even more so the case for
SMEs. More generally however, this does raise questions regarding the applicability of approaches
for enterprises of varying sizes. 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
17
3.6 Cyber security culture metrics
A total of 36 studies attempted to assess cyber security culture. Examples of these include P26, P30,
P40, P45 and P49. Questionnaires and surveys were the most frequently used tool to allow for
some level of measurement. Lacey (2010) (P3) provides some reasoning behind the use of
questionnaires, explaining that these instruments can provide useful metrics, allowing organisations
to measure understanding and consider which areas of employee knowledge need intervention.
Across the review, 17 studies used individual questionnaires or surveys to assess employees within
organisations, primarily concentrating on their knowledge of policy. Pertinent studies span P8, P15,
P44, P57 and P53. Questionnaire items can be constructed in
(2014) (P15) utilised previously validated items from existing measures, while Alnatheer et al.
(2012) (P8) extracted questionnaire items utilising both expert feedback and responses from
interviews to develop the instrument. Notable examples of questionnaire items in the latter
include,
mentioned above, used a five-point Likert scale to measure responses; 1 as strongly disagree and 5
as strongly agree. One study (P23) used a seven-point Likert scale.
The Information Security Culture Assessment (ISCA) instrument developed by Da Veiga and Eloff
(2010) (P2) aims to both assess and monitor information security culture within an organisation. It
is constructed from the Information Security Culture Framework (Da Veiga and Eloff, 2010) with
seven information security component categories; these include leadership and governance,
security management and operations, security policies, security program management, user
security management, technology protection and operations, and change. The instrument consists
of 85 statements, such as, and how information security is managed in ABC to protect
Veiga and Eloff, 2010), all of which were measured on a five-point Likert scale. This demonstrates
the type of questions that assess awareness and perception regarding protection of information.
Da Veiga and Martins (2015) (P25) also used the ISCA questionnaire instrument, relying on items
which focused on the human aspects of information security culture. An example item is,
have a responsibility regarding the protection of ABC s information assets (e.g., information and
cyber security culture is considered as
when employees are protecting and governing data at all times. The assessment focuses on
understanding where employee knowledge, behaviour and attitudes lie; this is what is perceived to
shape the security culture.
One instrument proposed by Da Veiga (2016a) (P30) is the cyber security culture research
methodology (CseCRM). At the time of their study, a reliable tool was needed to measure cyber
security culture and understand the level of risk due to human aspects. In this methodology, one of
the key stages is the cyber security culture measuring instrument. The questionnaire used consisted
of 11 dimensions, some of which included change, privacy perception, user management and
cybersecurity in practice. Two example items cover,
from unkn -mail address on
-point Likert scale.
Other types of tools were also used to assess security culture; for example, short tests can be seen
in two studies (P5; P33). These were developed for SMEs with the aim to help create and cultivate a 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
18
positive security culture within smaller companies, without leading to high costs to maintain over
time. Santos-Olmo et al. (2016) (P33) used a testing process which included security-related
questionnaires. The user had to answer 50% or more of the questions correctly for the level of
knowledge to be deemed as adequate. A 50% threshold in itself, being a potentially debatable
approach to judgement.
Training sessions in combination with surveys are also used to assess information security culture,
as seen in Olivos (2012) (P10). To assess knowledge, the study used a questionnaire to examine
each individual s learning style to ensure each type was taken into account during the session. They
proceeded to utilise training groups which involved employees taking a pre-test, engaging in a
presentation, and taking a post-test to test for new knowledge. For instance, at the beginning of the
session, only three out of ten employees agreed that they,
provide their password.
Table 6 documents the various types of metrics and some of the respective assessment instrument
used to assess cyber security culture generally. We note here that in some cases assessment types
(e.g., specific questionnaires) have been reused by some authors, such as P31 and P35.
Table 6. Metric area of focus, assessment type and the relevant articles
Metric focus generally Assessment type(s) Studies
Awareness Questionnaires P31, P35, P39, P58
Behaviour Questionnaires P2, P3, P53
Knowledge Questionnaires P16, P21, P24, P25, P28, P30,
P43
Tests P5, P33
Organisational/
environmental dimensions
Process/Questionnaires P2, P35, P58
Organisational performance Process/Observation/
Management tools
P45
Knowledge/behaviour Questionnaire/Observation/
Interview
P26
Training session P10
Interviews P1, P57
Questionnaire/Roundtable P49
Security culture
constructs/factors generally
Questionnaires/Surveys P2, P8, P11, P15, P17, P20,
P23, P31, P34, P35, P40, P41,
P42, P44, P46, P47, P54, P56,
P58
3.7 Key findings and contributions of prior research
Upon reviewing the selected studies, the majority aim to contribute or extend on existing
knowledge in the field. A recent study by Da Veiga et al. (2020) (P54) aimed to consolidate the
existing perspectives on information security culture to try and inform a single definition of the 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
19
topic. The paper states that it is a guide to future work; it is cognisant of the issue of no universally
agreed upon definition and the need to bring together approaches, frameworks and measurement
tools present up to this point to standardise information security culture.
For other studies (P4; P7; P23; P40), highlighting the importance of top management leadership and
support was critical; the number of papers that mention this as a factor of security culture
demonstrates this. Lim et al. (2010) (P4) concluded as with most articles that implementing and
managing a healthy information security culture is difficult without the engaged involvement of top
management.
In addition, Batteau (2011) (P7) proposed that without creating a community and environment of
trust, upon which cyber security culture can be built effectively, it is difficult to implement and
cultivate it. Ioannou et al. (2019) (P44) also identifies the importance of building a feeling of trust,
team. Organisational aspects are also focused on by Sherif et al. (2015) (P29) and Lopes and Oliveira
(2014) (P17), who suggest that all aspects, from organisational, human and even to social, need to
be considered when it comes to maintaining a cyber security culture. Key findings were also found
in change management by three studies (P13; P39; P50). AlHogail and Mirza (2014b) (P13) findings
suggest there is a crucial need for organisations to incorporate change management principles if a
secure information security culture is to be built, due to the fact that actively seeing the correct
behaviours in employees is a key part of positive change.
Marotta and Pearlson (2019) (P45) concluded that it is vital to influence employees and cultivate a
claims that the field must move away from typical security culture procedures and processes and
towards observing and engaging with users. Van t Wout (2019) (P51) extends this idea, proposing a
holistic approach towards developing and maintaining an organisational cyber security culture to
design, develop and implement effective training and education programmes to ensure an
improved cyber security culture. Another study (P58) found a positive relationship between
organisational culture, security culture and security awareness. These findings all support the need
for a broader approach.
Another noteworthy area within this review was SMEs. Four studies (P5; P33; P42; P49) focused on
these types of companies and how to assess their security culture. These act to acknowledge that
SMEs may be different and require more tailored approaches. To add to this, it was intriguing that
the discussion on rewards and punishments is presented only by one recent study (P53). The study
identified that even if some kind of rewards (e.g., gifts and public recognition) or punishments (e.g.,
disciplinary warning, restriction of privileged access) are provided as part of an awareness
campaign, they might not be used or applied by employees. Therefore, an effective culture
campaign might not be effective with just the provision of these as incentives.
4. Discussion
The purpose of this research is to examine the domain of cyber security culture, the factors
essential to building and maintaining such a culture, the frameworks proposed to cultivate a
security culture and the metrics suggested to measure it. Having presented the most pertinent
works in the last decade, this section discusses these with the intention of providing key insights for
practitioners and researchers. 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
20
4.1 Definitions and characteristics of cyber security culture
From analysing the studies discussing the definitions and characteristics of security culture, it
becomes clear that there is no widely used definition. Although, when exploring the delineation
between cyber security culture, information security culture and security culture, patterns emerge.
Upon analysis of the descriptions, there are parallels in the various culture definitions identified and
the broader organisational culture definitions. Nævestad et al. (2018) (P43) states that security
culture can be seen simply as the security aspects of a wider organisational culture. Examining
recent organisational culture literature, Oh and Han (2020) characterise organisational culture as
whether employees are,
corroborates Nel and (2019) conclusion that information security culture is not only a
subculture of organisational culture but should eventually become a part of organisational
functions. From this perspective it is clear to recognise why so many definitions are referential to
organisational culture, and the important role it plays. A takeaway point therefore is that security
cultures need to be grounded in, and complementary of, wider enterprise culture efforts.
Further regarding the characterisation of cyber security culture, we find that organisational
expectations are the same across industries. This often relates to the way employees behave within
the workplace and is reflected within the definitions and across security culture domains. For
example, Hassan and Ismail (2016) (P32) characterised information security culture as employees
making information security a natural part of the way they execute daily tasks within the
organisation, when pertaining to healthcare environments. Masrek et al. (2018a) (P40) conducted
their work in a public sector context, stating that employees must be skilful regarding information
security, alongside organisations having policies in place to safeguard protected information.
Marotta and Pearlson (2019) (P45) explore cyber security culture in the context of a large bank,
characterising culture as the attitudes and values that encourage cyber-secure behaviours in
employees in the organisation. Another definition (P58) describes cyber security culture as a subculture of organisational culture, incorporating attitudes, beliefs, values and knowledge that
individuals use to interact with the organisations systems, and conduct relevant procedures, daily
tasks and activities. Mainly this definition describes culture as a habitual behaviour within
organisations. The similarities between these definitions across industries and domains suggests
that regardless of context, organisations and their employees are expected to conduct certain
safeguarding behaviours and follow the procedures in place to fulfil security culture expectations.
It is critical to mention that the emergence of cyber security culture is relatively recent; information
security culture has been studied for significantly longer and dominates the review period as can be
seen in Figure 4. Cyber security culture has become a more established terminology in the last
decade in industry and the media (along with terms such as cyber-attack, cyber-threat, cyberespionage) but its prevalence in academic research is limited. This was a surprising finding and
raises questions about the research view (or indeed, resear of the term.
Despite this, as the cyber security culture articles increase, it is vital to understand where the
differences lie between terms. Although information security culture and cyber security culture
have been defined as different concepts that can overlap, these terms are often used
interchangeably within the literature. Gcaza, von Solms and van Vuuren (2015) agreed that there
lacks a clearly articulated definition of the cyber-security culture domain, and this needs to be
addressed by removing ambiguity that surrounds the vocabulary used in regard to cyber security 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
21
culture; however few studies in this review considered any differences between information and
cyber security culture.
With more investigation on how the aforementioned terms relate, we may be able to gather further
insight on whether cyber security culture research should garner more focus than information
security culture, though the literature may already be slowly moving in this direction. With cyber
security culture articles on the increase, this could eventually replace information security culture
research; this may, for instance, form part of legacy cyber security culture research. The wider field
of research is also pertinent to this discussion as we have seen a rise in the number of journals using
and considering interdisciplinary research (thus encompassing work on security
culture), such as the Journal of Cybersecurity and the Journal of Cyber Security Technology.
4.2 Cyber security culture factors
To support practitioners in implementing a cyber security culture, distilling years of academic work
into key factors and frameworks is essential. This paper explored the factors considered important
to both building and maintaining cyber security culture. From examining the literature, the most
commonly mentioned factor is top management support, and this factor appeared consistently
over the ten-year period reviewed. There could be several reasons for this; without the support of
management, cyber security initiatives may not appear significant to employees in comparison to
their day-to-day tasks. It is with the support of management that cyber security culture can be given
the attention it requires, i.e., resources will be provided and directed where needed. Therefore,
management must not only guide employee attention to cyber security culture efforts but also
ensure resources are managed correctly.
This need for senior support for security has challenged organisations for decades as security is
often viewed as an inhibitor rather than an enabler of business. In itself, this highlights the need for
a mindset change in the industry on how cyber security is perceived. We may already be witnessing
a push for this change due to regulations/legislations such as the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) and California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) (considering the significant fines for
organisations found to be lacking in their security) (Sirur et al., 2018; Forbes, 2020) and the growth
in cyber insurance (with insurance acting as a financial backstop in cases of cyber-incidents) (Nurse
et al., 2020). Both of these points have nudged cyber security towards a board-level topic that can
impact the longevity of an organisation.
The research also demonstrates the need for clearer and more easily accessed policies and
procedures. Greig et al. (2015) (P26) found that some employees of the retail organisation studied
had never seen the company policies. Similarly, for Olivos (2012) (P10), the security policies had not
been shared with employees because they were divided across multiple documents. For these
studies, this demonstrated a significant issue with the extent of a security culture. It is up to both
management and IT departments to ensure that employee knowledge of policy is at the required
level, and individuals are exposed to up-to-date and relevant security information policies needed
for their domain.
It is pertinent to note that the significance of these factors could shift due to other aspects
becoming more noteworthy. Research indicates that the behavioural tendencies of employees are
important as well, and potentially overlooked. Examining human aspects specifically, Van t Wout
(2019) (P51) proposes that organisations should take a more customised approach to cyber security
culture, and suggests that employees within the company be assessed from a more psychological 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
22
perspective, looking at concepts such as personality, interests, and needs and motivations.
Personality is discussed in three papers (P50; P54). All three of these articles were released in the
last two years, demonstrating that taking personality into account is increasing in the literature.
This is also in line with the increasing cyber security culture research in the last five years. A
potential concern with this direction is regarding the privacy of employees themselves. For
instance, gathering personality information could be useful in creating more customised cyber
security culture programmes in organisations, but privacy concerns from employees could result in
individuals not wanting to share such personal information with their employer.
Apart from personality, other factors have been discussed as important to both building and
maintaining cyber security culture. Blythe et al. (2020) (P53) discuss the factor of rewards and
sanctions as part of a cyber security awareness programme. A difficult question that can arise is to
what extent should sanctions go for employees who fail to assimilate. And, if an employee is a high
or consistently
performs poorly in awareness or behaviour), what should the organisation do in response? In
addition, the importance of establishing a network of champions (Alshaikh, 2020) has been
identified as crucial. The main role of champions would be amplifying the security awareness
messages and supporting the implementation of policies as well as the needs of employees. Overall,
this approach aims to promote the development of norms within an organisation with champions
acting as the role models. Work external to academia has also pointed to the importance of security
champions and further supports this perspective (Infosec Institute, 2018).
Additionally, a somewhat unique factor included in four papers is national culture (P12; P35; P49;
P54). The appearance of this factor, particularly in recent articles, could suggest that the cyber
security culture at a national level also plays a key part of building a corporate cyber security
culture. This is suggested in Gcaza, von Solms and van Vuuren (2015) where an ontology of national
cyber security culture is developed, which includes concepts such as workforce education and
SMMEs. Bada, Von Solms and Agrafiotis (2018) examined national cyber security awareness in
African countries, and concluded that after areas of national needs for awareness campaigns are
identified, different stakeholders from various sectors should become involved, and the audience
therefore should include executive board members and employees of SMEs. This arguably has a
trickle-down effect when cyber security is regarded at a national level, this in turn helps establish
these efforts in organisations; this can be applied to cyber security culture also. A future study could
explore a similar idea by examining how national cyber security culture could be cultivated,
however it is also imperative to note that building the culture of a nation would be significantly
more of a challenge in comparison to an organisation.
4.3 Cyber security culture approaches, tools and/or frameworks
This section reflects on the approaches, tools and frameworks that have been identified in the
literature. As mentioned in Section 4.1, it is difficult not to take into account the role that
orate
Culture Model (P6; P10; P19) and those that suggest that security culture is a subculture of
organisational culture. These studies demonstrate that there is validity in viewing cyber security
culture as a subculture, however Whelan (2017) postulates that to really understand subcultures
within and between organisations, there is much more research to be done in this field. For
instance, only five articles in this review had explicit mention of organisational culture in their
approaches, including P29 and P34. 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
23
In addition, another frequently referenced model is the STOPE framework proposed by Bakry
(2004); three articles also form their foundation and expand this (P12; P20; P21). It is meaningful to
note that the STOPE framework and the Corporate Culture model have features in common;
AlHogail and Mirza (2014a) (P12) propose that their organisational dimension consists of four layers
Corporate Culture Model and the additional fourth level from Van Niekerk and Von Solms (2010)
(P6). This suggests that even across frameworks, the key aspects that build these models are often
the same. For those seeking to develop security cultures therefore, this is advantageous as
conflicting base models may not need to be navigated to plan an approach.
Change management is an approach that has appeared more recently in research over the last ten
years, with papers such as P13, P39 and P51 which highlight the more holistic manner of cultivating
and maintaining a more positive security culture. The implementation of change management
frameworks is often complicated in nature because it can affect all activity in an organisation. While
this approach has benefits, it must be taken into account that organisations have to be aware of the
impacts of change, such as resistance to change, especially if the change is considered to disrupt the
working environment (Stavros et al., 2016), as well as potential incompetence of change agents
(Jalagat, 2016). Change management must be paired with knowledge from the employees and
management to be able to implement and maintain change.
Arguably change management can play a role in SMEs, and how they are often overlooked in cyber
security culture frameworks. Smaller organisations have a different organisational culture, down to
structure, size and resources. For instance, Ling (2017) determined that SMEs find it more useful to
have access to information from different departments for a more integrated and consolidated
view; this potentially makes information security even more important in these smaller
organisations. We should also note that research has found that only 15% of small businesses have
a formal cyber incident management process (Lloyd, 2020); thus, further stressing the little
emphasis that many SMEs place on security. Approaches geared towards SMEs are essential within
cyber security culture research as one framework is unlikely to work for all types of organisations; a
broad range of approaches and tools are crucial. These organisations often constitute a significant
portion of businesses in the UK for instance, 99.9% of businesses are SMEs (BEIS, 2020).
Considering change in these enterprises, a study conducted by Stavros et al. (2016) found that
employees of the SME were open to change as long as a number of factors were involved, some of
which were communication, involvement and training. This further highlights the importance of
organisational culture, and how despite the approach taken to building security culture, managing
employees is hugely important.
We also must note the fact that many of these frameworks have not been tested in real
organisations. It is essential for the conceptual models that have not been tested in organisations to
conduct future studies whereby these approaches are tested in corporate companies for external
validity; theory-based models do not always provide guidance on how these can be applied in an
organisation. This will help with another challenging issue, which is how organisations choose which
framework or tool will work best for them. Many of the tools are general and not specific to a type
of firm or industry, which makes it even more difficult for companies to narrow down the best
approach for their organisation. This issue highlights the importance of frameworks such as those
for SMEs or for specific industries like healthcare or banking, as companies can pick a suitable
approach for fostering cyber security culture in their organisations.
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
24
4.4 Cyber security culture metrics
When examining the metrics used to assess cyber security culture, the most apparent detail is that
questionnaires and surveys are the main instrument to either assess knowledge or awareness of
security policy. While these techniques cannot be undervalued (Rantos, Fysarakis and Manifavas,
2012), and despite their dominance in the literature, the use of these methods do present
challenges for organisations.
Firstly, measuring knowledge can be useful in some cases but as Fertig et al. (2020) discuss in regard
to security awareness, it cannot be assumed that knowledge influences behaviour. Employees may
be aware of the policy, but this does not always correlate to displayed behaviour; for some
organisations, we actually note that policy is instead used to identify areas of focus. This has been
discussed in depth before by Bada et al. (2015), who also concluded that individuals often do not
comply with defined policies or behaviours which may be expected of them. Furthermore, as we
have seen in more targeted compliance-oriented research, there are a range of complex
antecedents to security policy compliance (Cram, D arcy and Proudfoot, 2019) and several theories
and behaviour models to explain compliance (or the lack of it) (Moody, Siponen and Pahnila, 2018).
These are ongoing deliberations and highlight the challenges around understanding and assessing
actions of employees most notably, as a platform for behaviour change.
Fertig et al. (2020) concludes that questionnaires alone to assess knowledge is not enough to
measure information security awareness; it is the combination of acquiring metrics on both
behaviour and knowledge that produces a sufficient measurement for security awareness, and
plausibly this conclusion can be applied to cyber security culture. As an effort to include the
behaviour component, for example, studies (P52; P56) have used compliance to policies and
reporting to managers/compliance officers as metrics to assess employee behaviour and therefore
develop a cybersecurity culture.
Arguably, studies that only use questionnaires are sufficiently measuring knowledge, but not
behaviour. Nevertheless, studies such as P10, P26 and P49 that include training sessions,
observation methods and roundtables, may consist of more reliable data on whether employees
are truly displaying security aware behaviour in day-to-day situations. We stress that this does not
mean questionnaires are not useful; Rantos, Fysarakis and Manifavas (2012) explain that it is crucial
to prioritise sessions that refresh employee knowledge, because this is where the necessary
security behaviour is learned. It is necessary that organisations take into account that both
knowledge and behaviour need to be tested and observed where resources allow, as this will give
the most accurate assessment of the state of cyber security culture.
A challenge that is faced particularly in theory-based literature is identifying metrics. Choosing a
method of assessment can appear vague when metrics are not exhaustive, as seen in Reid et al.
(2014) (P18) which details the General Living Systems theory. One of the processes mentioned is,
would be fit for measuring an information security culture system. It is important to mention that
the previous step requires defining small actions that will encourage and motivate employees to
create culture change, but the type of measure required for this process is unclear from the
research. Despite the theory being well-developed and innovative, this demonstrates how complex
it is to measure information security culture from any perspective.
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
25
Exploring whether the domains of cyber security culture are measured any differently in
comparison to information security culture, there are no clear differences in terms of the metrics
used. However, the differences appear in the items used in questionnaires. For example, Da Veiga
(2016b) (P31) used the Information Security Culture Assessment to measure cyber security culture;
the primary difference was the incorporation of elements that were related to the protection of the
individual, rather than solely the protection of data and information systems. This is a useful way to
demonstrate that information security culture can be incorporated into cyber security culture; as
we have demonstrated earlier, the two domains possess similarities.
It is possible that the most significant issue to mention is measuring cyber security culture over
time. Measuring only one point in time is a challenge that is faced with using tools such as
single moment, and unless they are completed at regular intervals there is a risk of not providing
sufficient measurement of improvement or maintenance. One study by Da Veiga and Martins
(2014) (P16)
over eight years, which provided a longitudinal
with evidence of recommendations and improvement. When examining a corporation over time,
this allows trends to be identified, and provides better evidence of whether security culture is being
cultivated and maintained.
It is essential to appreciate that organisational environments (and threat landscapes) often change
and as such, security cultures may need to be constantly nurtured (European Union Agency for
Cybersecurity, 2018); thus, also suggesting that cyber security culture must be measured regularly.
This raises a related question for practitioners and researchers about the need for more dynamic
metrics and measurement tools. Organisational monitoring tools are commonplace especially for
protection against both external and internal threats (e.g., Security information and event
management (SEIM) software). There are, however, important considerations about the use of
these tools for supporting nurturing of security cultures as opposed to detecting threats. This
quickly relates to the balance between enterprise security and employee privacy.
4.5 Open issues in cyber security culture research
When reviewing the research, one of the challenges discussed by Marotta and Pearlson (2019)
(P45) is change. This has become a widely regarded issue, evident in the increasing research on
change management. Senior management teams must deal with the issue of not only fostering
security culture, but discovering procedures outside of organisational frameworks that will
appreciate the need and use for new policies on security (Marotta and Pearlson, 2019). Most
notably, while security policies and related research has existed for decades, there are still
ambiguities on how such policies are best developed (Paananen, Lapke and Siponen, 2020). Lacey
(2010) (P3) takes this point further, stating that security culture research needs more focus on soft
psychology ideals such as change management and education. While Section 3 has shown that
training has been considered a highly essential factor to building and maintaining security culture,
(P48) illustrates that educating on cyber security culture is much more of a nontrivial process. Research has shown that regular training sessions often do not have the desired
results; statistics show that as much as 50% of information from training sessions to improve
security understanding are lost in an hour, 70% lost in 24 hours and 90% within a week (Ghafir et
al., 2018).
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
26
It is also prudent to acknowledge that every organisation is different; P48 explains that corporations
have their peculiarities as well as personal information and IT infrastructures, and this presents a
challenge when allocating approaches for use in organisations. Each organisation needs to apply an
approach or framework in a way that fits the systems and structures already in place. As Govender
et al. (2020) (P55) suggest, the key drivers to understanding, managing, supporting and changing
information security culture are driven by understanding the current state of information security,
investing in specific initiatives that help reduce cost while also reducing information security risk,
and creating a sustainable approach to managing and improving information security culture .
However, the individuality of each organisation and every employee can be viewed as an issue that
needs to be addressed alongside cyber security culture research; the application of approaches is
arguably as important as the approach itself. Use, testing and in-situ validation of proposed
approaches is also crucial. From our review, it is apparent that few security culture approaches are
evaluated (or evaluated over a notable length of time) and thus, it is challenging to understand their
real value to practitioners or to the research field. Future work is desperately needed here if we are
to truly address the challenges to security in organisations.
The STOPE framework by AlHogail (2015b) (P21) proposed a more complex model that allows
human aspects to be considered in a more effective way. Going forward, more combinational,
multidimensional frameworks that address various domains may be needed to expand on existing
perspectives. There is a need to further examine personalities and individual differences such as the
learning styles and individual metrics, briefly explored in Olivos (2012) (P10). Employees are
different and therefore will have preferences (innate and explicit) in the training and education
programmes they engage with; this also impacts any metrics used to assess behaviour. According to
Fertig et al. (2020), metrics should meet the individuality of every employee, so all employees need
to be considered by the metrics. Da Veiga and Martins (2015) (P25) express that there are benefits
to having robust items to be applied in questionnaires across the research field to benchmark cyber
security culture postures across enterprises. This difference in perspectives is noteworthy but there
may be a balance that can be reached to the advantage of the entire field of research and practice.
Future research should therefore explore a balanced approach between the individuality of
employees and organisations and creating a standardised set of questions (which may also be open
to tailoring depending on business/sector context) to assess cyber security culture.
4.6 Practical implications
Developing and maintaining a robust security culture has challenged businesses for decades. This
has been made more complex by the abrupt move to remote working and increasing set of cyberattacks, linked to the Covid-19 pandemic (Lallie et al., 2021). Having discussed the open research
issues in Section 4.5, this section considers the implications of our work to practice and industry.
The first area in which we add value is in the up-to-date aggregation of factors and metrics core to
the advancement and preservation ; also including recent
discussions on cyber security culture. As has been shown, there are an increasing number of articles
published on security culture, each focusing on different components (e.g., on factors, metrics or
case studies). This research can help to provide a reference point for businesses which highlights
primary factors witnessed over the last ten years such as top management support, accountability
and trust. Moreover, we call attention to other less well-known factors including the need for a
network of security culture champions or ambassadors (that can encourage and promote good
security behaviour) and the
culture. These seem underrepresented in current literature, and at least require more study. This 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
27
can make a difference in security culture strategies being planned for the next
decade in terms of where organisations may focus or where they may look to explore new factors.
Another important finding pertains to the fact that organisations
culture approaches from elsewhere and expect them to work. Instead, to create a strong positive
culture, businesses can begin with their current organisational culture, consider the security aspects
important to them as well as the many factors identified in Section 3, and plan as appropriate.
Short-term, one-off training and education campaigns have limited success in changing behaviour
or engendering culture, and it is crucial that technical (e.g., types of threats) as well as softer (e.g.,
personality types and change management) aspects are incorporated in culture planning.
Furthermore, to
metrics is essential. Surveys and questionnaires are easy to execute but have notable weaknesses
(e.g., focus on quantitative data, may suffer from self-report biases, and are at a single point in
time). The reality therefore is that there are no clear recommended metrics and more research is
required in this domain. It would also be helpful for academics to work towards clearly defined
factors as factors instead
, as they can then provide a better basis for the creation of specific, more
granular metrics.
To follow on from the various points above, it would also be ideal for the field if practitioners and
researchers worked closer together on cyber security culture approaches, frameworks and metrics.
We found an abundance of theoretical works and multiple articles which outline proposals to build
or measure culture but fail to evaluate them in-situ in medium-to-long-term studies. This makes it
difficult to ascertain the true value of the work and its ability to positively impact culture in
organisations. If practitioners and researchers collaborate, researchers will have access to real
organisations to apply, adapt, evaluate and refine their new research, and practitioners will gain
access to research expertise not always accessible on topics from psychology and computing to
sociology and organisational behaviour. This would ultimately lead to the design and development
of robust set of approaches and metrics suitable for those organisations. Moreover, considering the
academic impetus to publish articles and share anonymised datasets, these collaborations would
also result in contributions that can advance the field for all parties involved (e.g., researchers could
analyse datasets to experiment with new proposals, and companies could gain insights into how
researchers and practitioners could work better together).
4.7 Related research reviews
As mentioned in Section 1, there have been other systematic literature reviews which have
investigated the topic of security culture. It is important, therefore, to reflect on how our research
contributions compare and contrast to their findings, and ultimately, what is the novelty of our
research given such reviews. Three of the most recent and relevant given their specific focus on
security culture of these articles are Glaspie & Karwowski (2017), Nasir et al. (2019a) and Sas et al.
(2020).
Glaspie & Karwowski (2017) engage in a study to identify the human factors that contribute to an
In this domain, they define and discuss five overarching areas,
information security policy, deterrence and incentives, attitudes and involvement, training and
awareness and management support. Our work has identified these areas as well, and therefore
acts to further validate that research. We have also identified a range of additional factors including
communication, trust, user management and national culture; all of which are increasingly 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
28
pertinent to building a corporate culture of security. The topic of metrics is also not considered in
, even though there is mention of the importance of varying training
primary way in which culture can be firstly assessed and then, improved.
In Nasir et al. (2019a), a PRIMSA-informed systematic review of the dimensions of an information
security culture is presented. Their work assesses dimensions across articles and deliberates these
in the context of the theories and approaches that articles ground information security culture in.
There are several commonalities in dimensions (or factors, as we refer to them) across our two
articles, and as to be expected considering the overlap in the date ranges (2000-2017, 2010-2020)
used for article inclusion, many key references reoccur. An interesting point raised by Nasir et al. is
the variation in dimensions in the literature and even disparity in the meaning of words used for
what might be perceived as the same dimension/factor (e.g., trust). This is not an area that we have
considered but is certainly one that deserves further research; though efforts to standardise
language and terminology, even within the security field, are notoriously difficult (ENISA, 2019).
notable use of organisational
culture as a basis for many proposed security culture models. In many ways, we view our research
as complementary to Nasir et al. as we explore areas not considered in their work. For instance, we
examine the changing use of terminology from security culture to information security culture and
cyber security culture, and its implications for ongoing work (with cyber clearly focused beyond
information security alone). Moreover, we investigate the approaches/metrics (e.g., questionnaires,
surveys, interviews) used to assess security culture, and identify weaknesses in current practice and
thus avenues for further work (i.e., more dynamic and holistic techniques for measurement).
Sas et al. (2020) study the security culture from the perspective of measurement tools. From their
search, 16 tools are identified with six then examined in detail. A key finding from their work is the
attention paid to quantitative (as compared to qualitative) tools in the literature this is
comparable to the results of our study which found that surveys and questionnaires were
predominately used to assess security culture. The solution to this concern is a range of metrics and
tools. Sas et al. (2020) suggest a mix-methods approach. Our work, as shown in earlier sections,
extends this and suggests more rounded, but also more dynamic methods of assessment. Such
methods would allow a wider analysis of culture as well as reducing the
burden on employees to actively participate excessive active participation can also draw
employees away from work which may impact job satisfaction and productivity.
Lastly, we believe there is value in the descriptive analysis that was conducted in our work which
was largely absent in the other review articles covered above. From our analysis, we identified
primary venues where research into security culture is published; this could serve as a guide for
future authors. The examination into the use of terms, from security culture to cyber security
culture, is unique to our work, as we aim to demystify such terminology, including the most
noteworthy commonalities and differences. Furthermore, this study highlights the more prolific
geographic centres of security culture research, with South Africa featuring prominently and a
somewhat surprising lack of representation from the US, UK and Europe more broadly. Our finding
would suggest the need for more research from these regions, particularly considering their role in
global cyber security affairs (as superpowers, but also as countries that face significant cyberattacks on organisations on a daily basis (CSIS, 2020)).
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
29
4.8 Limitations
Due to the nature of the research field, the articles were primarily dominated by information
security culture (instead of security culture or cyber security culture) research. While these are all
extremely relevant, looking at security culture from a wider perspective, or specifically cyber
security culture, was limited and may be biased towards information security. However, within the
realms of this study, information security culture still falls under cyber security culture.
Many measures were taken to ensure that all of the relevant papers within the ten-year period
review were included in this study, but there exists a possibility that not all papers relating to
information security culture, cyber security culture or security culture were included. Also, as
mentioned, three studies were not included as they could not be accessed; therefore, it is possible
that some conclusions about recent research may be missed. Considering the capture of articles
across the period however, and the similarity of our findings to existing reviews, we expect that this
would have had a minimal impact on our findings.
5. Conclusion
Cyber security culture by its nature needs to be cultivated rather than rigidly designed and this is
apparent in the research. Despite the wide scope of theories and approaches covered, similar
aspects and characteristics of continuously fostering culture reappear across the literature.
Exploring cyber security culture (inclusive of information security culture and security culture) has
allowed us to uncover the advancements as well as challenges that are currently faced in the field.
This systematic review has covered multiple research areas within cyber security culture, and from
the 58 selected articles we have drawn the following conclusions:
Definitions and characteristics. There are patterns between cyber and information security
culture definitions. There is also a clear relationship between cyber security and
organisational culture definitions. Despite these parallels, there is no universally agreed
upon description. As industry moves further towards the use of the term cyber security
culture , it will be worth monitoring how research uptake changes if at all as
demonstrated by articles in the field. Furthermore, organisations should note that cyber
security culture often focuses broader than the protection of data/information.
Factors. There are multiple aspects that reappear across articles and the domains of cyber
security culture. These work together; despite the frequency of top management elements,
this does not cultivate good culture without other factors such as responsibility and trust,
which are more personal features. Change management and national culture are more
recent factors that require additional research in the future.
Approaches and frameworks. Theoretical frameworks on cyber security culture dominate
the research. The approaches used vary, but some struggle to be applicable across
organisations sizes who do not have the same resources (e.g., SMEs versus large
corporates), and industries who must manage different issues. This raises questions about
the pursuit of multiple approaches which can be further tailored to a sector or company as
needed. It is also apparent that the proposal of frameworks at a conceptual / theoretical
level significantly outweighs the extent of assessment in practice. There is also a clear need
for in-situ use, testing and evaluation of proposed security culture approaches and
frameworks to provide real-world evidence of their efficacy.
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
30
Metrics. Using questionnaires and surveys to measure knowledge of cyber security culture
is mostly commonplace but does not always equate to measuring behaviour in day-to-day
tasks. The only way that effective metrics will be created is through close interaction
between practitioners and researchers, where practitioners can provide real-world
environments for study and researchers can provide their expertise on metric design and
evaluation. Such interactions will also allow medium- and long-term application and
refinement of metrics, that can benefit organisations and advance the field more generally.
Overall, the overriding gap in the literature is the opportunity to consider more than one type of
factor, whether it be human or technical. Case studies work well for cyber security culture research
as this allows for an ethnographic environment where employees can be witnessed doing day-today roles and activities and provide more suitable metrics than solely tested knowledge. Therefore,
next steps in research could be assessing an organisation and amalgamation of the multiple
perspectives. It would also be beneficial to conduct studies on the role of psychology in employee
behaviour and the protection of not only data, but cyberspace in general. Exploring whether models
the STOPE framework, which share similar dimensions. It would also be beneficial to explore change
management programmes in organisations. Exploring national culture should also be considered for
future studies.
Author biographies
Betsy Uchendu is a postgraduate student in Computer Science at the University of Kent, UK, with an
undergraduate degree in Psychology. Her research interests include cyber security culture and
awareness. Betsy also has marketing experience in industry covering governance, risk, compliance
and technology.
Jason R.C. Nurse is an Associate Professor in Cyber Security in the School of Computing at the
University of Kent, UK. He also holds the role of Visiting Academic at the University of Oxford, UK.
He received his PhD from the University of Warwick, UK in 2010. His research interests include
cyber security culture and awareness, security risk management, corporate communications and
cyber security, cyber resilience, and insider threat. Jason was selected as a Rising Star for his
He is a
professional member of the British Computing Society and an Associate Fellow of the Royal United
Services Institute (RUSI).
Maria Bada is a Senior Research Associate at the Cambridge Cybercrime Centre of Cambridge
University and a RISCS Fellow on cybercrime. She received her PhD from Panteion University of
Athens, in 2013. Her research focuses on the human aspects of cybercrime and cybersecurity, as
well as the effectiveness of cyber security awareness campaigns and their impact in changing online
behaviour. She has collaborated with governments and International Organisations to assess
national level cybersecurity capacity. She has a background in cyberpsychology, and she is a
member of the British Psychological Society and the National Counselling Society.
Steven Furnell is a Professor of cyber security at the University of Nottingham. He is also an
Honorary Professor with Nelson Mandela University in South Africa and an Adjunct Professor with
Edith Cowan University in Western Australia. His research interests include usability of security and 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
31
privacy, security management and culture, and technologies for user authentication and intrusion
detection. He has authored over 340 papers in refereed international journals and conference
proceedings, as well as various books and book chapters. Prof. Furnell is the Chair of Technical
Committee 11 (security and privacy) within the International Federation for Information Processing,
and a board member of the Chartered Institute of Information Security.
Declaration of competing interest
None.
Appendix
The table below provides a short definition of each factor regarded as important to cyber security
culture. This complements the information in Table 5. We provide definitions that capture the
essence of the points made across the research articles reviewed.
Factor Definition
Top management support,
leadership or involvement
The support and engagement of C-suite executives, senior
managers, department managers, in creating, practicing
and maintaining a security culture.
Security policy A set of guidelines and processes which are defined by an
organisation in relation to security.
Security awareness The understanding that employees of an organisation
possess regarding security generally.
Security training The provision of security education materials to, and
general upskilling of, employees that would make them
V;p;EEV;;x?;;
and procedures.
Change management The process that guides and supports employees towards
the change necessary to develop a security culture within
an organisation.
Compliance The process of ensuring employees and the organisation as
a whole adhere to standards and regulations on security.
Knowledge Employee understanding of security hygiene practices as
??V;;x?;;)
Accountability and
responsibility
Accountability refers to an employee owning the outcome
of an action/behaviour, while responsibility refers to the
?x?;V;~E;
to security.
Security risk This factor refers to the security threats and 
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
32
Communication The means utilised to share information between the
organisation and its employees, for instance, means
through which employees find out about security policies
and practices and what is expected of them.
User management The procedures that are in place to manage and monitor
employee behaviour and compliance.
Motivation Incentives provided to encourage employee adherence to
security policies, practices and advice.
Trust Employees and the organisation need to have confidence in
each other both generally and as it relates to security
activities. This confidence is two-way and can relate to any
activities within or about the organisation (e.g., trust in the
organisation generally, trust that its policies are well
considered, employees trusting their employer, etc.)
National culture This relates to the norms, values, beliefs and customs of
the nation or region that an organisation or employee are
based in; these can influencV;;x;
culture.
Ethical conduct Behaviour and decision making within an organisation
follow a moral code of right and wrong. Such code can
impact how people adopt or engage with a security culture
(especially if that culture is perceived as unethical or
harmful).
Regulations The legal provisions/directives in relation to safeguarding
information technology and computer systems, which
organisations and their employees need to abide by.
Establishing a network of
champions
Champions are members of an organisation who support
activities in raising security awareness and act as a point of
contact. Champions within different sections, departments
or offices of an organisation create a network.
Rewards and sanctions Utilising an approach of rewarding employee behaviour
which is security compliant, or penalising non-compliance
which may result in a potential compromise of the
organisation.
References
Alfawaz, S., Nelson, K., & Mohannak, K. (2010). Information security culture: a behaviour
compliance conceptual framework. In Proceedings of the Eighth Australasian Conference on
Information Security (AISC), 51-60. Australian Computer Society.
AlHogail, A., & Mirza, A. (2014a). A proposal of an organizational information security culture
framework. In Proceedings of International Conference on Information, Communication
Technology and System (ICTS), 243-250. IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICTS.2014.7010591
AlHogail, A., & Mirza, A. (2014b). A Framework of Information Security Culture Change. Journal of
Theoreti
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
33
AlHogail, A. (2015a). Design and validation of information security culture framework. Computers in
Human Behavior, 49, 567-575. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.03.054
AlHogail, A. (2015b). Cultivating and Assessing an Organizational Information Security Culture; an
Empirical Study. International Journal of Security and Its Applications, 9(7), 163-178.
AlKalbani, A., Deng, H., & Kam, B. (2015). Organisational Security Culture and Information Security
Compliance for E-Government Development: The Moderating Effect of Social Pressure. In
Proceedings of the Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems (PACIS), 65-75.
Alnatheer, M., Chan, T., & Nelson, K. (2012). Understanding and measuring information security
culture. Proceedings of the Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems (PACIS), 1-15.
Alnatheer, M. A. (2015). Information security culture critical success factors. In 12th International
Conference on Information Technology-New Generations, 731-735. IEEE.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ITNG.2015.124
Alshaikh, M. (2020). Developing cybersecurity culture to influence employee behavior: A practice
perspective. Computers & Security, 98, 102003. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2020.102003
Astakhova, L. V. (2014). The concept of the information-security culture. Scientific and Technical
Information Processing, 41(1), 22-28.
Bada, M., Sasse, A., & Nurse, J. R. C. (2015). Cyber security awareness campaigns: Why do they fail
to change behaviour? International Conference on Cyber Security for Sustainable Society.
Bada, M., Von Solms, B., & Agrafiotis, I. (2018). Reviewing national cybersecurity awareness in
Africa: an empirical study. In International Conference on CyberTechnologies and Cyber-Systems.
Management, 14(5), 339-350.
Batteau, A. W. (2011). Creating a culture of enterprise cybersecurity. International Journal of
Business Anthropology, 2(2), 36 47.
Blythe J.M., Gray A., & Collins E. (2020). Human Cyber Risk Management by Security Awareness
Professionals: Carrots or Sticks to Drive Behaviour Change?. In: Moallem A. (eds) International
Conference on HCI for Cybersecurity, Privacy and Trust. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol
12210.
Bulgurcu, B., Cavusoglu, H., & Benbasat, I. (2010). Information security policy compliance: an
empirical study of rationality-based beliefs and information security awareness. MIS quarterly,
34(3), 523-548.
ComputerWeekly (2019). What changes are needed to create a cyber-savvy culture? Retrieved from
https://www.computerweekly.com/opinion/What-changes-are-needed-to-create-a-cyber-savvyculture (Accessed 18 April 2021)
Cram, W. A., D'arcy, J., & Proudfoot, J. G. (2019). Seeing the forest and the trees: a meta-analysis of
the antecedents to information security policy compliance. MIS Quarterly, 43(2), 525-554.
https://doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/2019/15117
Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS). (2020). Significant Cyber Incidents
https://www.csis.org/programs/strategic-technologies-program/significant-cyber-incidents
(Accessed 18 April 2021)
D Arcy, J., & Greene, G. (2014). Security culture and the employment relationship as drivers of
-489.
Da Veiga, A. (2015). The Influence of Information Security Policies on Information Security Culture:
Illustrated through a Case Study. In International Symposium on Human Aspects of Information
Security & Assurance (HAISA), 22-33.
Da Veiga, A. (2016a). A cybersecurity culture research philosophy and approach to develop a valid
and reliable measuring instrument. In SAI Computing Conference, 1006-1015. IEEE.
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
34
Da Veiga, A. (2016b). Comparing the information security culture of employees who had read the
information security policy and those who had not. Information & Computer Security, 24(2), 139-
151.
Da Veiga, A. (2018). An approach to information security culture change combining ADKAR and the
ISCA questionnaire to aid transition to the desired culture. Information & Computer Security,
26(5), 584-612. https://doi.org/10.1108/ICS-08-2017-0056
Da Veiga, A., & Eloff, J. H. (2010). A framework and assessment instrument for information security
culture. Computers & Security, 29(2), 196-207.
Da Veiga, A., & Martins, N. (2014). Information security culture: A comparative analysis of four
assessments. In Proceedings of the 8th European Conference on IS Management and Evaluation,
49-57.
Da Veiga, A., & Martins, N. (2015). Improving the information security culture through monitoring
and implementation actions illustrated through a case study. Computers & Security, 49, 162-176.
Da Veiga, A., & Martins, N. (2017). Defining and identifying dominant information security cultures
and subcultures. Computers & Security, 70, 72-94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2017.05.002
Da Veiga, A., Astakhova, L. V., Botha, A., & Herselman, M. (2020). Defining organisational
information security culture Perspectives from academia and industry. Computers & Security,
92, 101713.
de Araújo Lima, P. F., Crema, M., & Verbano, C. (2020). Risk management in SMEs: A systematic
literature review and future directions. European Management Journal, 38(1), 78-94.
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS). (2020). Business population
estimates for the UK and regions: 2019 statistical release (HTML)
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/business-population-estimates-2019/businesspopulation-estimates-for-the-uk-and-regions-2019-statistical-release-html (Accessed 18 April
2021)
Dhillon, G. (1997). Managing information system security. Macmillan International Higher
Education.
European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) (2018). Cyber Security Culture in organisations.
Retrieved from https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/cyber-security-culture-inorganisations (Accessed 18 April 2021).
European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) (2019). Standardisation in support of the
Cybersecurity Certification. Retrieved from
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/recommendations-for-european-standardisation-inrelation-to-csa-i (Accessed 18 April 2021).
Fertig, T., Schütz, A. E., & Weber, K. (2020). Current Issues of Metrics For Information Security
Awareness. In European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS).
Forbes. (2020). CCPA Fines, Fraud And Fragmented Data
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2020/05/28/ccpa-fines-fraud-and-fragmenteddata/ (Accessed 18 April 2021).
Gcaza, N., von Solms, R., Grobler, M. M., & van Vuuren, J. J. (2017). A general morphological
analysis: delineating a cyber-security culture. Information & Computer Security, 25(3), 259-278.
Gcaza, N., von Solms, R., & van Vuuren, J. J. (2015). An Ontology for a National Cyber-Security
Culture Environment. In International Symposium on Human Aspects of Information Security &
Assurance (HAISA), 1-10.
Ghafir, I., Saleem, J., Hammoudeh, M., Faour, H., Prenosil, V., Jaf, S., Jabbar, S., & Baker, T. (2018).
Security threats to critical infrastructure: the human factor. The Journal of Supercomputing,
74(10), 4986-5002.
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
35
Glaspie, H. W., & Karwowski, W. (2017). Human factors in information security culture: A literature
review. In International Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics, 269-280.
Springer, Cham.
Govender S.G., Kritzinger E., & Loock M. (2020). A Framework for the Assessment of Information
Security Risk, the Reduction of Information Security Cost and the Sustainability of Information
Security Culture. In: Silhavy R. (eds) Computer Science On-line Conference (Applied Informatics
and Cybernetics in Intelligent Systems) CSOC 2020., vol 1226. Springer, Cham.
Greig, A., Renaud, K., & Flowerday, S. (2015). An ethnographic study to assess the enactment of
information security culture in a retail store. In World Congress on Internet Security (WorldCIS),
61-66. IEEE.
Hassan, N. H., & Ismail, Z. (2012). A conceptual model for investigating factors influencing
information security culture in healthcare environment. Procedia - Social and Behavioral
Sciences, 65, 1007-1012. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.11.234
Hassan, N. H., & Ismail, Z. (2016). Information security culture in healthcare informatics: A
preliminary investigation. Journal of Theoretical & Applied Information Technology, 88(2), 202-
209.
Hassan, N. H., Maarop, N., Ismail, Z., & Abidin, W. Z. (2017). Information security culture in health
informatics environment: A qualitative approach. In International Conference on Research and
Innovation in Information Systems (ICRIIS), 1-6. IEEE.
Infosec Institute (2018). Why an Effective Security Awareness Program Needs Security Champions in
Your Organization. Retrieved from: https://resources.infosecinstitute.com/why-an-effectivesecurity-awareness-program-needs-security-champions-in-your-organization/ (Accessed 18 April
2021)
Ioannou, M., Stavrou, E., & Bada, M. (2019). Cybersecurity Culture in Computer Security Incident
Response Teams: Investigating difficulties in communication and coordination. In 2019
International Conference on Cyber Security and Protection of Digital Services (Cyber Security), 1-
4. IEEE.
Jalagat, R. (2016). The impact of change and change management in achieving corporate goals and
objectives: Organizational perspective. International Journal of Science and Research, 5(11),
1233-1239.
Knight, R., & Nurse, J. R. C. (2020). A framework for effective corporate communication after cyber
security incidents. Computers & Security, 99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2020.102036
Korpela, K. (2015). Improving cyber security awareness and training programs with data analytics.
Information Security Journal: A Global Perspective, 24(1-3), 72-77.
Lacey, D. (2010). Understanding and transforming organizational security culture. Information
Management & Computer Security, 18(1), 4-13. https://doi.org/10.1108/09685221011035223
Lallie, H.S., Shepherd, L.A., Nurse, J.R.C., Erola, A., Epiphaniou, G., Maple, C., & Bellekens, X. (2020).
Cyber Security in the Age of COVID-19: A Timeline and Analysis of Cyber-Crime and CyberAttacks During the Pandemic. Computers & Security. 105. 102248.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2021.102248
Lebek, B., Uffen, J., Neumann, M., Hohler, B., & Breitner, M. H. (2014). Information security
awareness and behavior: a theory-based literature review. Management Research Review,
37(12), 1049-1092.
Lim, J. S., Ahmad, A., Chang, S., & Maynard, S. B. (2010). Embedding Information Security Culture
Emerging Concerns and Challenges. In Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems (PACIS),
463-474.
Lim, J. S., Maynard, S. B., Ahmad, A., & Chang, S. (2015). Information security culture: Towards an
instrument for assessing security management practices. International Journal of Cyber Warfare
and Terrorism (IJCWT), 5(2), 31-52.
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
36
Ling, L. S. (2017). Impacts of information technology capabilities on small and medium enterprises
(SMEs) and Large Enterprises. Journal of Innovation Management in Small and Medium
Enterprise, 2017.
Lloyd, G. (2020). The business benefits of cyber security for SMEs. Computer Fraud &
Security, 2020(2), 14-17. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1361-3723(20)30019-1
Lopes, I., & Oliveira, P. (2014). Understanding information security culture: a survey in small and
medium sized enterprises. In World Conference on Information Systems and Technologies (New
Perspectives in Information Systems and Technologies, Volume 1), 277-286. Springer, Cham.
Martins, A., & Eloff, J. (2002). Assessing Information Security Culture. In ISSA, 1-14.
Martins, N., & Da Veiga, A. (2015). An Information Security Culture Model Validated with Structural
Equation Modelling. In Human Aspects of Information Security & Assurance (HAISA), 11-21.
Marotta, A., & Pearlson, K. (2019). A Culture of Cybersecurity at Banca Popolare di Sondrio. In
Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS).
Masrek, M. N., Harun, Q. N., & Zaini, M. K. (2017). Information security culture for Malaysian Public
Organization: a conceptual framework. In Proceedings of INTCESS 2017 4th international
conference on education and social sciences, 156-166.
Masrek, M., Harun, Q., & Zaidi, N. (2018a). Assessing the information security culture in a
government context: The case of a developing country. International Journal of Civil Engineering
and Technology, 9, 96-112.
Masrek, M. N., Harun, Q. N., & Zaini, M. K. (2018b) The Development of an Information Security
Culture Scale for the Malaysian Public Organization. International Journal of Mechanical
Engineering and Technology (IJMET), 9(7), 1255 1267.
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., Altman, D. G., & Prisma Group. (2009). Preferred reporting items
for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. PLoS med, 6(7), e1000097.
Mokwetli, M., & Zuva, T. (2018, August). Adoption of the ICT Security Culture in SMME's in the
Gauteng Province, South Africa. In 2018 International Conference on Advances in Big Data,
Computing and Data Communication Systems (icABCD), 1-7. IEEE.
Moody, G. D., Siponen, M., & Pahnila, S. (2018). Toward a unified model of information security
policy compliance. MIS quarterly, 42(1).
Nasir, A., & Arshah, R. A. (2018). Information security culture dimensions in information security
policy compliance study: A review. Advanced Science Letters, 24(2), 943-946.
Nasir, A., Arshah, R. A., Ab Hamid, M. R., & Fahmy, S. (2019a). An analysis on the dimensions of
information security culture concept: A review. Journal of Information Security and Applications,
44, 12-22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jisa.2018.11.003
Nasir, A., Arshah, R. A., & Ab Hamid, M. R. (2019b). A dimension-based information security culture
educational institutions. Information Security Journal: A Global Perspective, 28(3), 55-80.
Nasir, A., Arshah, R. A., & Ab Hamid, M. R. (2020). Information Security Culture for Guiding
Management (ICIM), pp. 205-209.
Nævestad, T. O., Meyer, S. F., & Honerud, J. H. (2018). Organizational information security culture in
critical infrastructure: Developing and testing a scale and its relationships to other measures of
information security. Proceedings of ESREL, 3021-3029.
Nel, F., & Drevin, L. (2019). Key elements of an information security culture in organisations.
Information & Computer Security, 27(2), 146-164.
Nurse, J.R.C., Axon, L., Erola, A., Agrafiotis, I., Goldsmith, M., & Creese, S. (2020). The Data that
Drives Cyber Insurance: A Study into the Underwriting and Claims Processes. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Cyber Situational Awareness, Data Analytics and Assessment
(CyberSA). pp. 1-8. https://doi.org/10.1109/CyberSA49311.2020.9139703
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
37
Oh, S. Y., & Han, H. S. (2020). Facilitating organisational learning activities: Types of organisational
culture and their influence on organisational learning and performance. Knowledge
Management Research & Practice, 18(1), 1-15.
Okoli, C., & Schabram, K. (2010). A Guide to Conducting a Systematic Literature Review of
Information Systems Research. Sprouts: Working Papers on Information Systems, 10(26), 1-49.
Olivos, O. (2012). Creating a Security Culture Development Plan and a case study. In Human Aspects
of Information Security & Assurance (HAISA), 13-32.
cu, P. (2019). Promoting cybersecurity culture through education. In Conference proceedings
of eLearning and Software for Education, 2(15), 273-279. National Defence University Publishing
House.
Paananen, H., Lapke, M., & Siponen, M. (2020). State of the art in information security policy
development. Computers & Security, 88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2019.101608
Rantos, K., Fysarakis, K., & Manifavas, C. (2012). How effective is your security awareness program?
An evaluation methodology. Information Security Journal: A Global Perspective, 21(6), 328-345.
Reid, R., & Van Niekerk, J. (2014). From information security to cyber security cultures. In
Information Security for South Africa, 1-7. IEEE.
Reid, R., Van Niekerk, J., & Renaud, K. (2014). Information security culture: A general living systems
theory perspective. In 2014 Information Security for South Africa, 1-8. IEEE.
Ruhwanya, Z., & Ophoff, J. (2019). Information security culture assessment of small and mediumsized enterprises in Tanzania. In International Conference on Social Implications of Computers in
Developing Countries, 776-788. Springer, Cham.
Sánchez, L. E., Santos-Olmo, A., Fernández-Medina, E., & Piattini, M. (2010). Security culture in
small and medium-size enterprise. In International Conference on ENTERprise Information
Systems, 315-324. Springer.
Santos-Olmo, A., Sánchez, L. E., Caballero, I., Camacho, S., & Fernandez-Medina, E. (2016). The
importance of the security culture in SMEs as regards the correct management of the security of
their assets. Future Internet, 8(3), 30-56. https://doi.org/10.3390/fi8030030
Sas, M., Hardyns, W., van Nunen, K., Reniers, G., & Ponnet, K. (2020). Measuring the security culture
in organizations: a systematic overview of existing tools. Security Journal, 1-18.
Schein, E. H. (1999). The corporate culture survival guide: sense and nonsense about culture
change. San Francisco. Jossey-Bass.
Schneider, B., Asprion, P.M., Androvicsova, S. & Azan, W. (2020). A Practical Guideline for
Developing a Managerial Information Security Awareness Program. Americas Conference on
Information Systems (AMCIS).
Shahibi, M. S., Rashid, R. M., Fakeh, S. K. W., Dollah, W. A. K. W., & Ali, J. (2012). Determining
factors influencing information security culture among ICT librarians. Journal of Theoretical and
Applied Information Technology, 37(1), 132-140.
Sherif, E., Furnell, S., & Clarke, N. (2015). An identification of variables influencing the establishment
of information security culture. In International Conference on Human Aspects of Information
Security, Privacy, and Trust (HAS), 436-448. Springer, Cham.
Siponen, M. T. (2000). A conceptual foundation for organizational information security awareness.
Information Management & Computer Security, 8(1), 31-41.
https://doi.org/10.1108/09685220010371394
Sirur, S., Nurse, J.R.C., & Webb, H. (2018). Are we there yet? Understanding the challenges faced in
complying with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). In Proceedings of the 2nd
International Workshop on Multimedia Privacy and Security (pp. 88-95). ACM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3267357.3267368
This paper is a preprint of an article submitted to Computers & Security Journal (2021)
38
Stavros, D., Nikolaos, B., George, A., & Apostolos, V. (2016). Organizational change management:
delineating employee reaction to change in SMEs located in Magnesia. Academic Journal of
Interdisciplinary Studies, 5(1), 309-309.
The impacts of organizational culture on information
security culture: a case study. Information Technology and Management, 17(2), 179-186.
Tolah, A., Furnell, S. M., & Papadaki, M. (2019). A Comprehensive Framework for Understanding
Security Culture in Organizations. In IFIP World Conference on Information Security Education,
143-156. Springer, Cham.
Tripwire (2019). How CISOs Can Foster Effective Comms and Build a Cybersecurity Program.
Retrieved from https://www.tripwire.com/state-of-security/featured/cisos-effective-commscyber-security-program/ (Accessed 18 April 2021)
Van Niekerk, J. F., & Von Solms, R. (2010). Information security culture: A management perspective.
Computers & Security, 29(4), 476-486. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2009.10.005
Van t Wout, C. (2019). Develop and maintain a cybersecurity organisational culture. In ICCWS 2019
14th International Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security, 457-466. Academic Conferences
and publishing limited.
Von Solms, R., & Van Niekerk, J. (2013). From information security to cyber security. Computers &
Security, 38, 97-102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2013.04.004
Whelan, C. (2017). Security networks and occupational culture: understanding culture within and
between organisations. Policing and society, 27(2), 113-135.
Wiley, A., McCormac, A., & Calic, D. (2020). More than the individual: Examining the relationship
between culture and Information Security Awareness. Computers & Security, 88, 101640.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2019.101640
A Proposed: Integration of the Monte Carlo model and the Bayes network to Propose Cyber Security
Risk Assessment Tool for Small and Medium Enterprises in South Africa
Tabisa Ncubukezi
Information Technology Department
Cape Peninsula University of
Technology
Cape Town, South Africa
Ncubukezit@cput.ac.za
Laban Mwansa
Electrical Engineering Department
Cape Peninsula University of
Technology
Cape Town, South Africa
Mwansal@cput.ac.za
Francois Rocaries
Electrical Engineering Department
Cape Peninsula University of
Technology
Cape Town, South Africa
Rocariesf@cput.ac.za
Abstract—Cyber-risks have become a serious concern and a
considered perspective in enterprise risk management configuration
and reporting. Cyber-risks has the potential to harm information
assets in this era of the internet of things, which ultimately
quantifies cybersecurity crimes. For big corporations, it is now a
legal requirement to report cyber-security preparedness to
corporate shareholders as part of good governance. It is not clear
whether small and medium-sized enterprises (SME) have a clear
framework in place to combat cyber risks potential to harm
information assets. There is minimal research done on the
integration of the Monte Carlo simulation tool and artificial
intelligence to recommend a proactive cybersecurity risk response
plan. So, this paper proposes a cyber-risk assessment tool for small
and medium-sized enterprises (SME's) in South Africa. Also, the
article forms part of the on-going doctoral research about the
analysis and design of cybersecurity risks framework within the
SME's in South Africa. The proposed cybersecurity risk assessment
tool aims to predict the risk cause, impact, cyber-risk likelihood,
and the systematic trends within small businesses in South Africa.
Keywords— Bayesian network, cyberattacks, cybercrimes,
cyber threats, Monte Carlo model, risk impact; risk
probability; cyber risk assessment; risk response plan
I. INTRODUCTION
Small businesses are vulnerable to sorts of risks, which could
be planned or unplanned exposure to harm or put in danger the
organization's assets. The risks are often associated with the
loss of valuable assets or resources. However, the literature
explains risk as a planned event, which leads to uncertain
results [13]. The term risk relates to possible exposure to harm,
danger, or uncertainty. However, various industries interpret
and use the term differently and loosely. Within the business
sector, it is impossible to separate the risk from the business
cycle. Also, one cannot separate cyber threats from the
internetworked world [2, 13]. Cyber risks are commonly
interpreted as the lack of privacy, confidentiality on the
personal or organizational data due triggered by cyber threats,
and ransomware [15]. The term cyber risk is interchangeably
used as the cyber-attack or cyber-crimes.
As the world becomes smart by connecting through smart
devices to keep up with the technology, cyber risks also
increase in number through innovative ways [3,14]. The cyber
threats aim and penetrate all sorts of interconnected businesses
regardless of the size, number of employees, and the annual
turnover [16]. The primary focus for cyber attackers is mainly
on the lucrative benefits than the size of the business sector. As
a result, SMEs' has become the primary target for cyber threats.
As cited by [1], the Federation of Small Businesses (FSB)
announced the monetary value amounting to £5.26 billion to
the U.K. economy caused by cybercrimes. [4] says 8.8 Million
South Africans have fallen victims to cybercrimes. The
Minister of Telecommunications and Postal Services (TPS),
Siyabonga Cwele, said in Cape Town Parliament that an
estimated 32 percent of small and medium enterprises in South
Africa are affected by the cyber threats and phishing attacks
[9]. At the moment, the country currently does not have the
public or national document that records cyber risks affecting
the SMEs'.
[16] says that the study conducted by Ponemon Institute in the
U.K. and U.S.; the main cyber-attacks which have hit the
SME's were the use of weak passwords by employees,
ransomware, data breaches, phishing. Asian Pacific SME's
explained that the primary sources of the cyber-attacks are the
malfunctioning of the SME systems, which affects the business
continuity and eventually loses data. However, at this stage, it
is not whether the loss of data is through the system itself or the
human error. The human error could either be through the loss
of the company devices with information or an employee
unintentionally divulging due to the lack of skill [10].
Due to the high cybercrimes which SME's experience, the
proposed work aims to develop a cybersecurity framework
tool that will integrate Monte Carlo and the Bayesian network
to combat cyber risks.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
This proposed paper will look and focus on SME in South
Africa. The study will look at SMEs' from all business sectors.
The research suggests the design, development, and evaluation
of cyber-risk assessment tool to proactively mitigate the cyber
risks within the South African SME's. The main aim of the
proposed structure is to reduce the time spent on cybersecurity
risk management.
International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security (IJCSIS),
Vol. 18, No. 3, March 2020
152 https://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/
ISSN 1947-5500 
A. Cyber threats, attacks, targets, and impact
The following section addresses cyber threats,
cyberattacks, cyberattack platforms, as well as the ultimate
cybercrimes, as shown in table 1. Cyber threats are possible
malicious attempts that could damage or disrupt a computer
network or SMB systems. Cyber threats are mostly caused by
cyberattacks such as malware, data breaches, denial of service,
and network exploitation. All these cyberattacks could happen
through a standalone computer, or the connection to the
cyberspace on a networked computer, or use of external
storages.
 Tab 1. Initiation of cybercrimes (Source: [14], Unpublished)
B. Cyber Risk Management
All adverse cyber-security risks exist to harm, interruption,
damage, dent, and affect business growth and day-to-day
operation [2]. Cybercrimes come in various forms of attacks in
business with the primary goal that is to benefit in every
possible way, for as long as they will get a lucrative portion of
the company [7].
C. Application of NIST Framework for risk mitigation
The NIST cybersecurity framework represents the U.S.
policy framework that provides the computer security
guidance, best practices, and standard practices for helping all
organizations to evaluate and improve the capacity to prevent,
detect and respond to all cyber-attacks (NIST, 2014). The
framework focuses on defining the standard methodology for
managing cyber risks. NIST provides a broader and balanced
cybersecurity that suits all business sectors.
The framework works around a sound set of five concurrent
and continuous functions addressing different steps to process
cyber threats: Identity, Protect, Detect, and Respond, Recover.
III. PROPOSED APPROACH
This paper will involve a detailed process of carrying out the
research to offer specific answers for every problem provided
through supporting literature and the data collection [6]. The
research process will include the discussions of the research
methodology, data collection methods, a sampling of the
informants. The proposed method of inquiry will be carried
out in five phases, as shown in Error! Reference source not
found. to find answers to the research questions posed in this
study.
Phase one reviews the relevant sources of literature, and
conduct both the qualitative and quantitative study, one after
the other. Qualitative research will be performed to gather
common cybercrimes within the South African SME sectors.
The quantitative research will be done to categories the
dependent and independent variables. The data collection to
form the knowledge base for the following phases.
Phase two will develop a knowledge base for the Monte Carlo
model using the collected data to determine dependent and
independent variables.
Phase three will use the Monte Carlo simulation model to
determine the probability and what-if's situations.
Stage four will develop the cybersecurity risk framework by
integrating the Monte Carlo model with the Bayesian network
to generate conditional outcomes to combat cyber risks.
Stage five will evaluate the proposed structure and come up
with five sample case studies that will test the effectiveness.
Fig. 1: Methodology Phases (Own work, 2020)
A. Data collection methods
The qualitative interviews with SME stakeholders will
help to identify and describe critical themes. The study will use
the focus groups to gather information from a group of
participants within the same business. The questionnaires will
be deployed on Google forms to collect qualitative and
quantitative data about the existing cybersecurity risks, risk
cause, effect of risk, risk likelihood, and risk probability. The
questionnaire will also be the guideline for interviews.
B. Sampling
Fig. 2. Elements of selecting strata (Own work, 2019)
C. Adoption of the Monte Carlo Model
Monte Carlo, risk simulation model, will analyze the
likelihood, impact, and the proximity of cyber-security risks
within the small-medium enterprises in S.A. It will further
investigate the systematic trends of the dangers. Monte Carlo,
the risk simulation model, is selected among others based on its
high sensitivity in the domain of enterprise. Secondly, it
extremely grounded in the sense that it highly supports privacy
and confidentiality security features.
International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security (IJCSIS),
Vol. 18, No. 3, March 2020
153 https://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/
ISSN 1947-5500 
D. Integration of Bayesian Network
In the proposed study, the Bayes' model will evaluate the risk
and updates predicted probabilities of the risk event by
incorporating new information through mathematical formulas
to calculate the conditional probability of the possible cyber
risk cause for a given observed outcome [8]. The conditional
likelihood computed from knowledge of the likelihood of each
cyber risk cause and the probability of the outcome of each
cause [5]. Thomas Bayes's model predicts to determine the
likelihood and its conditions. In this study, the Bayes theorem
will evaluate the risk probability of an event based on the prior
knowledge of the terms that relate to the event.
E. Link to existing research
This research links to a significant Ph.D. research work on
the design and development of cybersecurity. The researcher
produces papers that report about various phases from the first
to the last stage. Each article will address how the ultimate
cybersecurity risk response framework has been planned,
designed, developed, and evaluated.
F. Ethical considerations
 The university's ethics committee issued an ethical
clearance certificate which explained the rules and
regulations. Every participant on the research project will
receive the consent letter requesting their voluntary
participation. The signed consent letter will represent legal
practice. Research participants will receive the assurance
that their details and the data collected would remain
private and confidential.
IV. RESEARCH OUTCOMES
The proposed study will draw and contribute to the
literature on cyber-security risks within the SMEs. Use the
Monte Carlo model to analyze quantitative cyber threats within
the SMEs. Develop the knowledge base for the Bayesian
approach.
V. CONCLUSION
This position paper links to the main doctoral research
project. Outcomes of each framework development phase will
be shared in the form of research papers. Cybercrime has
become the main risk within SME's business cycle. The
probability of cybercrimes could disrupt the businesses and
eventually discontinue the business progress and performance.
One of the outcomes of this study will identify the common
cyber crimes and their impact on SME's. Another report will
look at the dependent and independent cyber risks, which will
involve the probabilities of cyber threats. Lastly, the study will
develop a cyber-framework which SME's could use to combat
risks using the Bayesian model.
AUTHORS
Tabisa Ncubukezi is a lecturer and a Ph.D. candidate at
the Cape Peninsula University of Technology in South Africa.
She has more than ten years of teaching experience at the
University of Technology and colleges. Her primary teaching
focus is on communication networks and security. Her
research focus is on cybersecurity.
Laban Mwansa
Senior Lecturer in the department of electrical, electronic and
computer engineering. Laban obtained his Ph.D. in computer
engineering from the Czech Technical University in Prague.
He currently lectures and supervises postgraduate students in
the department. He was also a visiting professor at the
University of Paris (UPEC) in 209
Francois Rocaries
Professor Francois is a scientific director at the French South
Africa Institute for Space studies. (FSATI). He has published
and graduated many postgraduate students in France and
South Africa
REFERENCES
[1] A. Sword, "SMEs hit with 7 million cybercrime attacks per year in £5.26
billion blow to U.K. economy," Computer Business Review, 2018.
Available in:
http://www.cbronline.com/news/cybersecurity/business/smes-hit-with-7-
million-cyber-crime-attacks-per-year-in-526-billion-blow-to-ukeconomy-4919992/ [Accessed on 2 February 2020)
[2] B. Van Niekerk, "An analysis of cyber-incidents in South Africa". The
African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC), 2017, Vol.
20, pp. 113-132.
[3] C. Fripp, "Cybercrime costs South Africa about R5.5 billion a year".
Available from https://www.htxt.co.za/2014/11/11/cybercrime-costssouth-africa-about-r5-8-billion-a-year/ 2015, [Accessed: on 06
September 2019]
[4] D. Linington, "8.8 Million South Africans have fallen victims to
cybercrime". Retrieved on 15 February 2020.
http://www.itnewsafrica.com/tag/cybercrime-stats/, 2016
[5] D.S. Gupta, "Introduction to Conditional Probability and Bayes theorem
for data science professionals" available from
https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2017/03/conditional-probabilitybayes-theorem/ 2017, [Accessed: 11 February 2020]
[6] E. Barbie, J. Mouton, "The practice of social research. South African
edition Oxford University Press", Cape Town, South Africa, ISBN 0 19
571854 2, 2001
[7] F. Almeida, I. Carvalho, F. Cruz, "Structure and Challenges of a
Security Policy on Small and Medium Enterprises." KSII
TRANSACTIONS ON INTERNET AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS
VOL. 12, NO. 2, Feb. 2018. Page 747-763.
[8] F.X. Aguessy, O. Bettan, G. Blanc, V. Conan, H. Debar, "Hybrid Risk
Assessment Model Based on Bayesian Networks." 11th International
Workshop on Security, IWSEC 2016, Sep 2016, Tokyo, Japan. pp.21 -
40,
[9] L. Peyper, "32% of SMEs in S.A. at risk of cyber-attacks – Cwele"
Retrieved from https://www.fin24.com/Economy/32-of-smes-in-sa-atrisk-of-cyber-attacks-cwele-20160309, 2016 [Accessed on 8 March
2020]
[10] L.S. Howard., "SMEs Underestimate Cyber Risks Which Could Prove
'Fatal': Allianz Report." Available from
https://www.insurancejournal.com/news/international/2018/02/21/48111
3.htm, 2016 [Accessed on 12 January 2020]
[11] R. Koeze, "Designing A Cyber Risk Assessment Tool For Small To
Medium Enterprises." The Delft University Of Technology, Faculty of
Technology, Policy and Management Research conducted at KPMG
Advisory N.V. November 2017 Electronic version available at
http://repository.tudelft.nl. [Accessed: 15 June 2018]
[12] S. Dilek, H. Çakır, and M. Aydın, "Applications of artificial intelligence
techniques to combating cybercrimes: A review". International Journal
of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, 2015.
[13] T. Aven, O. Renn, "On risk defined as an event where the outcome is
uncertain" Journal of Risk Research, 2009, vol.12, No.1, pp. 1-11.
International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security (IJCSIS),
Vol. 18, No. 3, March 2020
154 https://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/
ISSN 1947-5500 
[14] T. Ncubukezi, L. Mwansa, F. Rocaries, "A review of the current
cybercrime hygiene within the small and medium-sized enterprises"
(unpublished).
[15] T. Rid, B. Buchanan, "Attributing Cyber Attacks." Journal of Strategic
Studies, 2014, Vol 38(1-2), pp. 4–37, 2014.
[16] W. Ashford, "SMEs more vulnerable than ever to cyber-attacks," survey
shows https://www.computerweekly.com/news/450428246/SMEs-morevulnerable-than-ever-to-cyber-attacks-survey-shows, 2017 [Accessed: 8
March 2020]
[17] NIST (2014). Cybersecurity Framework. From
https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework [Accessed: 10 January 2020]
International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security (IJCSIS),
Vol. 18, No. 3, March 2020
155 https://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/
ISSN 1947-5500 
AJIC Issue 20, 2017 113
An Analysis of Cyber-Incidents in South Africa
Brett van Niekerk
Honorary Research Fellow, School of Management, IT and Governance, University of
KwaZulu-Natal, Westville, Durban
Abstract
Cybersecurity concerns are present in all nations, but the exact nature of the threats
differs depending on the country and/or region. Therefore there is a need to assess
the threats and impacts for specific countries. This article presents a high-level
analysis of “newsworthy” cyber-incidents that affected South Africa. The 54 incidents
that are considered are categorised according to impact type, perpetrator type, and
victim type, and the trends are assessed. It was found that the most common impact
type was data exposure, which was also one that had increased noticeably in recent
years. The most prevalent perpetrator type was found to be hacktivists, which had
also exhibited a recent increase in activity. A particularly concerning trend was the
recent high number of incidents of data exposure caused by error, a trend running
contrary to the drive to improve cybersecurity. It was also found that of the incidents
considered, 54% targeted state-owned or political entities as victims. In general, the
results appeared consistent with global reported trends.
Keywords
advanced persistent threat, data breach, defacement, distributed denial of service,
financial theft, system penetration
DOI: https://doi.org/10.23962/10539/23573
Recommended citation
Van Niekerk, B. (2017). An analysis of cyber-incidents in South Africa. The African
Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC), 20, 113-132.
https://doi.org/10.23962/10539/23573
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0
 114 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Van Niekerk
1. Introduction
Concerns over cybersecurity are growing globally, fuelled by reports of ever-larger
data breaches and a lack of skilled cyber-security professionals (Fearn, 2017).
However, most organisations and nations seem to be at a loss of how to effectively
respond. For instance, even though UK organisations have been found to generally
consider cyber-security important, only 44% have implemented a cyber-security
strategy (Ashford, 2017). Slay, quoted in Tate (2017), indicates that Australia has a
lack of experienced cyber-security professionals. Reports from Kenya indicate that
cyber-security is lagging, despite increased uptake of Internet services (Matinde,
2017). Similarly, reports in South Africa suggest that cyber-security is “reaching a
critical point” in the country (SABC News, 2017).
Whilst the concerns of security are common across all regions, the exact nature of the
threat types and motivations vary geographically as illustrated in Brown and Rudis
(2017). Therefore it is necessary to assess the relevant trends in one’s region to ensure
the security measures and strategies are aligned to the threat activity. This article
presents a high-level analysis of “newsworthy” cyber-incidents that targeted South
Africa. The next section scans relevant literature, followed by a description of the
methodology used. Summaries of the incidents are provided, after which the analysis
is presented. The results are discussed with reference to the literature, and the article
is then concluded.
2. Literature
There are different types of cyber-attacks, and some receive more hype than others.
Receiving significant attention are instances of nation-state cyber-espionage, which
are closely linked to advanced persistent threats (APTs). These have been found
to be constantly present in the global cyber-threat environment, but the number
of organisations affected by these is low unless they are in the specific target group
for the attackers (Brown & Rudis, 2017). Ransomware is another threat operated
by cyber-criminals that is receiving much attention. The number of ransomware
payloads increased internationally from 18% of detections in January 2016 to 66%
in November 2016. Only 1% of ransomware detections occur in Africa meaning
that all the other populated continents, however, are much more heavily affected
(Malwarebytes Labs, 2017).
In addition to the state-sponsored persistent attacks and criminal ransomware attacks
mentioned above, the major threat types include: insider threats, either malicious or
accidental, resulting in security incidents; attacks by hacktivists who are politically
or ideologically motivated; and attacks by individual hackers who are trying to learn
or show off, such as the “script kiddies” who make use of existing tools (Andress &
Winterfield, 2014).
AJIC Issue 20, 2017 115
 Analysis of Cyber-Incidents in South Africa
It has been reported that South Africa lost approximately ZAR50 billion in 2014
due to cyber-incidents, and that over half a billion online personal records were lost
or accessed illegally in South Africa during 2015 (SABC News, 2017). Estimates in
2011 put the financial losses from cyber-attacks at ZAR 3.7 billion in direct losses
and ZAR6.5 billion in indirect costs (Norton South Africa, 2012). The threat will
become more widespread going forward as the number of South African Internet
users increases, aided by the African continent’s increasing undersea capacity (Song,
2017).
The South African legislative context relating to online privacy and security is
expanding. The foundational act from which the other acts derive is the Electronic
Communications and Transactions Act (ECT) of 2002 (RSA, 2002). The Regulation
of Interception of Communications and Provision of Communication-Related
Information Act (RICA) was also promulgated in 2002 (RSA, 2002). The Protection
of Personal Information (POPI) Bill was released in 2009, and enacted in 2013 (RSA,
2009; RSA, 2013), but has yet to come into full effect. The National Cybersecurity
Policy Framework was released at the end of 2015 (SSA, 2015), followed by drafts
of the Cybercrimes and Cybersecurity Bill (Department of Justice and Correctional
Services, 2017).
Patrick (2015) has illustrated a lack of information flow regarding cyber-security
in government departments, and the need for response teams. Chandarman (2016)
has found that South African students sometimes over-estimate their knowledge
regarding security threats and techniques, possibly putting them at risk. Dlamini
and Modise (2012) interrogated awareness initiatives in the country up to 2012 and
found that the focus of the initiatives appeared to be on tertiary institutions and
schools. It thus seems clear that the cyber-security landscape in South Africa has
room to improve.
3. Methodology
The research for this article analysed a number of documented cyber-incidents related
to South Africa. The data were identified through scrutiny of published reports, news
items, postings to email mailing lists, cross-referencing via document reference lists,
and targeted online searches for additional information on documented incidents. A
total of 54 incidents spanning 23 years, from April 1994 to end-2016, were identified.
These were classified in a manner similar to that used in the work of Miller and Rowe
(2012) and Van Niekerk (2017). Miller and Rowe (2012) analysed security incidents
related to industrial control systems (ICS), categorising them by impact type and
attack vector. In Van Niekerk (2017), security incidents affecting the transportation
sector were considered, categorised by threat type and impact.
 116 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Van Niekerk
Impact categories
For this study, the impacts were categorised as follows:
x data exposure, where records have been released;
x financial, where there was an attempt (successful or otherwise) to steal
money;
x denial of service, where operations or services were affected;
x defacement, where webpages were altered;
x data corruption, where data was modified; and
x system penetration, where illegitimate access to networks or systems was
achieved, but no other activity was apparent.
Perpetrator categories
The categorisation of the perpetrators (or key perpetuating factors) was as follows:
x hacktivist, where the perpetrator was affiliated to online activist groups
making political statements;
x criminal, where the perpetrator was affiliated to criminal groups usually
seeking financial gain;
x accidental/misconfiguration, where the incident was as a result of
misconfigured systems;
x individual hacker, where the incident appeared to be to prove or develop
individual skills;
x nation-state espionage, where the incident relates to state-sponsored threats;
x malware, where malware was discovered but no perpetrator or motivation
can be established; and
x insider, where the perpetrator had legitimate access but acted maliciously for
personal gain or reasons.
The incidents were analysed according to perpetrators and impacts, in terms of overall
prevalence and trends over time. A pivot table is used to determine the prevalent
threat-impact pairs.
Victim categories
In order to determine if there is a noticeable relationship between the threat types
and impacts associated with public organisations, the victims were categorised as:
x st
AJIC Issue 20, 2017 117
 Analysis of Cyber-Incidents in South Africa
4. Findings and analysis
Impact type
Figure 1 below shows the percentage distribution of the 54 incidents across the
six impact types. As is evident, data exposure is the most prominent impact type.
Financial, denial of service. and defacement are also noticeable.
Figure 1: Impact type
The findings are detailed according to their impact categories, moving from the most
common impact category (data exposure) to the two least-common categories (data
corruption, system penetration).
Data exposure
Data exposure was found to be the most common impact category. In 2008, the
whistleblower site Wikileaks posted an unredacted version of a Competition
Commission report about possible unethical practices by South African banks after
removing the redaction (HomeGrownHoney, 2009). In 2010, a state hospital in the
Western Cape was found to have an insecure site, and thousands of patient records
could be accessed (Stone, 2010).
Advanced persistent threat (APTs) infections were also documented. An organisation
in South Africa fell victim to the APT1 espionage group attributed to Chinese
hackers, with the first major report occurring in 2010 (Mandiant, 2013). In 2012 the 
 118 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Van Niekerk
Red October cyber-espionage campaign (attributed to Russian hackers) was detected,
after having possibly operating for five years undetected, with various targets in a
number of countries affected, including infecting a diplomatic organisation in South
Africa (Limer, 2013; Paganini, 2013).
Servers hosting the espionage tool FinFisher, usually employed by governments to
track dissent, were detected in South Africa in 2013. The South African government
denied using this tool (Vermeulen, 2013). Also in 2013, the Sednit/APT28 cyberespionage campaign, attributed to Russian hackers, targeted South African embassies
via an infected document sent to the embassies purporting to be from the Department
of International Relations and Cooperation (ESET, 2016; FireEye, 2014).
The South African Police Service suffered a hack in 2013 that resulted in the
release of approximately 16,000 details of whistleblowers and victims. The attack
appeared to be by the group Anonymous in response to the police killings of striking
mineworkers at the Marikana mine (Roane, 2013; Tubbs, 2013). Also in 2013, a fastfood outlet’s point-of-sale system was infected with the Dexter malware designed to
steal customers’ credit card information (MyBroadband, 2013b). (Though this breach
resulted in financial loss to the banks, the attack listed here only compromised the
credit card information, and will therefore was classed as data exposure.)
Accidental data exposure incidents also occurred in 2013. A flaw in mobile operator
Vodacom’s portal allowed any subscriber to access high level account summary
information linked to any phone number (Muller, 2013). The City of Johannesburg’s
invoicing portal was found to have vulnerabilities that could expose personal
information, and the website was taken offline by the City – but then appeared to
be operational a few days later with the vulnerability still present (MyBroadband,
2013a).
The year 2014 also saw both accidental and malicious data exposures. A flaw
was discovered in mobile operator Cell C’s portal, allowing access to a number of
customer records (MyBroadband, 2014). Altech Autopage suffered an accidental
release of records (Patrick, 2015; Safenet, 2014). The South African National Roads
Agency Limited (Sanral) E-Toll website was hacked, making the site vulnerable to
release of personal details (Vermeulen, 2014). WooThemes was compromised, giving
hackers access to financial information (Patrick, 2015; Safenet, 2014).
In 2016, Anonymous launched #OpAfrica, and its first South African target was
an online job portal, V-Report, compromising 33,000 records (Vermeulen, 2016a).
The state’s Government Communication and Information System (GCIS) was
compromised shortly after V-Report, exposing the data of 1,500 government
employees (Fripp, 2016; Vermeulen, 2016a). A number of web pages hosted by an 
AJIC Issue 20, 2017 119
 Analysis of Cyber-Incidents in South Africa
unnamed service provider were the next target for #OpAfrica, with 2,500 websites
claimed to have been compromised (Fripp, 2016). Hackers affiliated with #OpAfrica
compromised the state-owned arms procurement agency Armscor’s invoicing portal,
releasing a number of purchasing information records (Van Zyl, 2016c). Cinema
chain Ster Kinekor was hacked, with a release of approximately 6 million records
in 2016 (Cave, 2017). The Chinese-linked group known as APT10 were involved
in the Cloud Hopper espionage campaign in late 2016, or which there were South
African victims (PwC and BAE Systems, 2017). As the majority of infections were
late 2016, it is assumed this is the compromise date for the South African victims.
Accidental exposure again featured in 2016. The eThekwini Municipality (Durban)
e-services portal was found to release customer information when the URL was
edited, and the website was taken down to correct the error (Venktess, 2016). The
e-billing portal of mobile operator MTN was found to be providing users with access
to bills of other customers, and the website was taken offline to correct the error
(MyBroadband, 2016).
Financial
The first instance of financial impact identified in the documents occurred in 2003,
when Absa bank lost approximately ZAR500,000 due to a hack (Thiel, 2004).
Hackers targeted three South African banks in 2006, managing to transfer cash
from bank accounts into prepaid accounts held with mobile operators. It appeared
that information gained from key loggers (devices or software to record a user’s
keystrokes) and phishing were used to conduct the hacks (Oiaga, 2006).
In July 2009, a criminal group acquired, via threats to an engineer at Vodacom,
duplicate SIM cards that allowed for interception of online banking one-time PIN
codes (OTPs) for bank accounts they had compromised via phishing. The group
managed to steal in excess of ZAR7 million from the compromised accounts (Dingle,
2009; Van Rooyen, 2009). The Land Bank initially lost ZAR8 million stolen through
fraudulent transfers in December 2010 after hackers compromised the bank’s IT
security possibly with inside help, but managed to recover most of money (Potgieter,
2011).
A credit card payment provider, PayGate, was compromised in August 2012,
affecting four of the major banks and compromising “hundreds of thousands” of
credit card details (Arde, 2012, p. 18). Though no details of financial losses were
released, it is assumed that the banks suffered financial losses (Ajam, 2012; Arde,
2012). Compromised passwords resulted in the National Department of Water
Affairs losing ZAR2.84 million in 2011 (Patrick, 2015; Rasool, 2012). Postbank,
the South African Post Office’s financial institution, had ZAR42 million stolen in
January 2012 after hackers accessed servers via an employee’s workstation (Patrick, 
 120 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Van Niekerk
2015; Rasool, 2012; Swart & Afrika, 2012). In 2013, over ZAR15 million was lost
by the Department of Minerals and Energy after login credentials were stolen by
criminals using a keystroke logging device (Patrick, 2015; Tengimfene, 2013).
In 2014, state-owned electricity provider Eskom’s payroll system was hacked by
employees, but the employees were prevented from making transfers by Eskom’s anticorruption units (Patrick, 2015; Speckman, 2015). In the same year, the Gautrain
Management Agency’s bank account nearly lost ZAR800 million to a hack (Patrick,
2015; Speckman, 2015). In 2015, the Road Traffic Management Corporation lost
ZAR8.5 million to a series of illegal transfer by hackers (Mkhwanazi, 2015; Patrick,
2015). In 2016, Standard Bank was targeted by hackers, who managed to steal
approximately ZAR300,000 via thousands of ATMs in Japan (Van Zyl, 2016b).
Denial of service
A South African petrochemical company’s supervisory, control and data acquisition
system was infected by the PE Sality virus in 2009, denying the operator’s visibility
of operations for eight hours until the infected servers were recovered (Cusimano,
2010; Pretorius, 2016). The aforementioned Sanral E-Toll website came under a
denial-of-service attack in 2012, but the attack was not successful (SANews, 2012). It
is assumed this attacker was conducted by hacktivists, given the ongoing controversy
over the e-toll project.
In 2013, the website of the national ruling party, the African National Congress
(ANC), was made inaccessible due to a distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack
by Anonymous Africa (different from Anonymous #OpAfrica) (Vermeulen, 2016b).
Also in 2013, the Independent Online news website was targeted and access disrupted
(Vermeulen, 2016b), and mobile operator MTN and affiliated service providers
suffered a service outage due to a DDoS attack (ITNewsAfrica, 2013). MTN again
suffered performance degradation in 2015 due to a DDoS attack (TelecomSpeak,
2015).
Anonymous Africa returned in 2016 by targeting the South African Broadcasting
Corporation (SABC), whose website was unavailable due to the DDoS attack,
with the hackers stating that the attack was in protest against corruption and the
recent censoring of protests (Vermeulen, 2016b). Also in 2016, the websites of the
news channel ANN7, The New Age newspaper, and computing company Sahara
were targeted with DDoS attacks, in protest against perceived corruption by their
owners and the South African government (Van Zyl, 2016a). A series of denialof-service attacks was conducted against the Economic Freedom Fighters political
party (Gorton, 2016).
Defacement
The websites of five major universities (University of Stellenbosch, Natal University, 
AJIC Issue 20, 2017 121
 Analysis of Cyber-Incidents in South Africa
Rhodes University and the University of the Witwatersrand and University of Cape
Town) were defaced by hackers in 2003. Each website appeared to be attacked by a
different hacker, and international hackers were suspected (Porter, 2003). In 2004, 45
company websites in Cape Town and Stellenbosch were defaced by a group known
as Spykids, who appeared to be motivated by a desire for recognition (Thiel, 2004).
In January 2005, hackers from Morocco, known as Team Evil, defaced approximately
260 South African websites, replacing the legitimate websites with anti-US messages
(Mbongwa & Makua, 2005).
In 2008, the Democratic Alliance political party’s website was compromised and
was offline for over a week; a spokesperson stated that it appeared to be common
hacking, implying that is was not a targeted or political attack (Mail & Guardian,
2008). The ANC Youth League website was defaced, with a fake message supposedly
from the then Youth League president Julius Malema stating he was stepping down
(Redelinghuis, 2011).
Three government websites were defaced by Moroccan hackers in 2012, protesting the
official South Africa position on Western Sahara (Saville, 2012). The Administrative
Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences website was defaced by a Bangladeshi
hacker in 2013, who posted a message notifying the website owner to secure the
website (ITWeb, 2013). Approximately 20 websites, including Sasol, were defaced
by a Moroccan hacktivist in 2014, again protesting the South African position on
Western Sahara (Ackroyd, 2014).
Data corruption, system penetration
These two categories are the smallest, and are therefore presented together. They also
represent the earliest three attacks reported. It is reported that in 1994 a right-wing
hacker attempted to disrupt the first democratic elections in South Africa, but was
detected after moving votes from the ANC to three right wing parties (Plaut, 2010).
Stats SA’s website was targeted by hackers in 1999, who replaced data with negative
comments about Telkom (BBC News, 1999). A teenage hacker managed to penetrate
through Telkom (the state telephony operator) in 1998, however no damage was
done. The teenager was arrested (Reuters, 1998).
Trends in impact type
Figure 2 below illustrates the trends for each of the six impact types between April
1994 and end-2016. As can be seen, there were significant spikes in data exposure
attacks in 2013, 2014 and 2016, and of denial of service attacks in 2013 and 2016.
The number of financial-impact attacks, the third-most-common kind, remained
largely stable from 2011 to 2016; and defacements, the fourth-most-frequent mode
of attack, remained at a consistent level between 2011 and 2014 but were not found
to be present in 2015 or 2016.
 122 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Van Niekerk
Thus, the financial-crime motivation for hacking appears to be remaining somewhat
constant, whereas the data exposure and denial of service motivations, often indicators
of hacktivism and protest – i.e., they commonly used to discredit or exact revenge
-- appear to be on the rise in the South African context.
Finally, it is interesting to note that after reaching a total of 11 instances in 2013,
there were declines in 2014 (7 instances) and 2015 (2 instances), before a spike to
12 instances in 2016, the largest number recorded for any of the years studied – an
apparent indication that cybersecurity measure are still not being effectively applied
in South Africa, and/or that attempts at perpetration are becoming increasing
complex and skilful.
Figure 2: Trends in impact type
Perpetrator type
Figure 3 presents the percentage distribution of the perpetration types. Hacktivist
perpetrators – i.e., perpetrators affiliated to online activist groups making political
statements – were found to be the most common, followed by criminals, then
individual hackers, and then instances of accidental/misconfiguration due to nonmalicious insiders. 
AJIC Issue 20, 2017 123
 Analysis of Cyber-Incidents in South Africa
Figure 3: Perpetrator type
Figure 4 illustrates the trends in perpetrator type. Hacktivist perpetration has been
present, off and on, since 1999, with slight increases in 2012 and 2012, and a sharp
spike in 2016, indicating a growing protest and revenge dimension in South Africa’s
cybersecurity risk profile. Another concerning trend is the increasing prevalence of
cases of accidental/misconfiguration due to non-malicious insiders, non-existent
before 2010 but representing three cases in each of 2014 and 2016. It was found that
nation-state cyber-espionage perpetrators have only been active in South African
cyberattacks since 2010, whereas individual hackers have had an intermittent
presence throughout.
Figure 4: Trends in perpetrator type
 124 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Van Niekerk
Table 1 is a pivot table associating the perpetrator types to the impact types.
The strongest association is between criminal hackers and a financial attacks (10
instances), followed by accidental/misconfiguration due to non-malicious insiders
resulting in data exposure (9 instances). These are followed by hacktivists exposing
data (6 instances) and hacktivists denying service (6 instances), and then nation-state
espionage perpetration seeking to expose (and presumably gain) data.
Whilst the prevalence of criminal activity is almost a given, data exposure due to
error (accidental/misconfiguration) is presumably much more easily prevented than
criminal activity should be of particular concern to South African institutions.
Table 1: Impacts by perpetrator type
Impacts
Data
exposure
Denial
of
service
Financial Defacement
Data
corruption
System
penetration Totals
Accidental/
misconfiguration
9 9
Criminal 1 10 11
Hacktivist 6 6 4 1 17
Insider 1 1
Malware 1 1 2
Nation-state
espionage 5 5
Individual
hacker 2 1 4 1 1 9
Totals 22 9 12 8 2 1 54
Victim type
Figure 5 presents the distribution of victims in terms of state/political entities and
other entities. As can be seen, it was found that attacks targeting the state/political
entities represented more than half of the 54 attacks documented.
AJIC Issue 20, 2017 125
 Analysis of Cyber-Incidents in South Africa
Figure 5: Victim type
Figure 6 below llustrates the trends over time for the two victim categories. While the
first attack on a state/political entity was detected in the first year of study, 1994, the
first attacks on a non-state/political entity was only documented in 2003. However,
in two of the most recent years studied, 2014 and 2016, attacks on non-state/political
entities outnumbered state/political breaches.
Figure 6: Trends in victim type
Table 2 below is a pivot table illustrating associations been impacts and victim types.
There does not appear to be any significant difference between the distribution of
impact types for the two victim types
 126 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Van Niekerk
Table 2: Impacts by victim type
Impacts
Data
exposure
Denial
of
service
Financial Defacement Data
corruption
System
penetration Totals
Other 12 5 5 3 25
State/
political 10 4 7 5 2 1 29
Total 22 9 12 8 2 1 54
Table 3 below presents the perpetrator types associated with each of the two victim
types. As before, nothing significant can be determined from these figures. The fact
that hacktivists and nation-state perpetrators targeted state and political victims
more than other organisations is logical. The state or political may have more impact
from most perpetrators due to a lack of information security capability at those
organisations.
Table 3: Perpetrator by victim type
Perpetrator
Accidental/
misconfiguration
Criminal Hacktivist Individual
hacker Insider Malware
Nationstate
espionage
Total
Other 5 5 7 4 2 2 25
State/
political 4 6 10 5 1 3 29
Total 9 11 17 9 1 2 5 54
5. Conclusions
This research has shown that in South Africa, the leading perpetrators of cyberattacks are hacktivists and criminals. The top two cyber-attack impacts are data
exposure and financial theft. The top two perpetration-impact combinations are
criminals resulting in financial impact, and accidental/misconfiguration resulting in
data exposure. 
AJIC Issue 20, 2017 127
 Analysis of Cyber-Incidents in South Africa
Given the prevalence of cyber-crime globally, the criminal appearance as a top
perpetrator, linked to a top impact, is unsurprising. As Internet connectivity in Africa
increases and a greater percentage of the population has Internet access, we can
expect the rate of cyber-crime to increase, targeting, among others, new entrants who
are not yet fully aware of the security risks. Due the increasing financial impact of
cyber-incidents, it is imperative that the legislative environment is enabled to afford
corporations protection and support law-enforcement in combatting cyber-attacks.
The increase in hacktivism in South Africa, notable in the data for 2016, can be
linked to increased political tensions in the country (Vermeulen, 2016b). Even
some of the non-state/non-political organisations targeted were linked to perceived
government corruption (Van Zyl, 2016a). None of the organisations targeted, nor
the way they were targeted, appeared to have any major direct impact on national
stability or the national economy. However, there are at present certain large stateowned enterprises in South Africa, also linked to the political scandals, which have
not yet been targeted. Should, for instance, the major electricity provider, Eskom,
be attacked and for some reason operations hindered, there could be significant
socioeconomic ramifications.
The numerous instances of cybersecurity threats caused by accidental/misconfiguration
perpetration is concerning, as they have all occurred since the POPI Bill of 2009. It
is possible that the Bill resulted in increased awareness and, in turn, an increase in
exposures being reported. However, it still suggests that organisations, both state/
political and other neglecting their responsibility to ensure that the systems are
configured correctly. A possible solution will be to focus cyber-security awareness
training on IT professionals in the country, in order to assist in creating a secure
culture and an improvement of security in system development. Moreover, once
the POPI Act is fully enforced and organisations are held fully accountable for
such breaches, more effort may be given to discovering flaws, thereby reducing the
accidental exposure.
Nation-state espionage is relatively low, and this is consistent with the findings of the
report by Brown and Rudis (2017). At the same time, it is interesting to note that
two of the nations most commonly associated with cyber-espionage campaigns –
Russia and China – belong to a club of countries, the BRICS, of which South Africa
is also a member along with Brazil and India. As can be seen from the revelations
of the United States and Western European nations spying on each other, even
allied countries conduct espionage operations against each other. Therefore as global
tensions rise, South Africa should not be surprised if economic friendly countries
increase espionage activities to monitor its politics and foreign policy. This concept,
known as the “cyber-security dilemma”, is discussed by Buchanan (2017). This in
turn may also instigate an increase of international hacktivist activity. 
 128 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Van Niekerk
Overall, the prevalence of perpetration factors and actors, and the impacts, that
this study found in South Africa are consistent with reported international cyberincident trends. A limitation of this study is that the data available were limited to
what is reported publicly. Until it is mandatory for South African organisations to
report cyber-incidents, it will be difficult to conduct in-depth assessments of the
composition of threat activities and their impacts.
References
Ackroyd, B. (2014, December 4). Cyber hacktivist strikes SA sites again. ENCA. Retrieved
from http://www.enca.com/technology/cyber-hactivist-strikes-sa-sites-again
Ajam, K. (2012, November 10). Alarm over credit card breach. The Independent on Saturday.
Andress, J., & Winterfield, S. (2014). Cyber warfare: Techniques, tactics and tools for security
practitioners (2nd ed). Waltham, MA: Elsevier.
Arde, A. (2012, November 17). Hack attack a costly lesson for banks, The Independent on
Saturday.
BBC News. (1999, September 13). Hackers deface SA stats site. Retrieved from http://news.
bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/446392.stm
Brown, R., & Rudis, B. (2017). Rapid7 threat report 2017 Q1. Retrieved from https://www.
rapid7.com/globalassets/_pdfs/research/rapid7-threat-report-2017-q1.pdf
Buchanan, B. (2017). The cybersecurity dilemma. Oxford: Oxford University Press. https://doi.
org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190665012.001.0001
Cave, K. (2017, March 24). Cinema chain hack sees data security take centre stage in
South Africa. IDG Connect. Retrieved from http://www.idgconnect.com/blogabstract/25679/cinema-chain-hack-security-centre-stage-south-africa
Chandarman, R. (2016). Cybersecurity awareness of students at a private higher education institute
in South Africa. Master’s dissertation, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Westville,
Durban.
Cusimano, J. (2010). DCS virus infection, investigation and response: A case study.
Presentation to Industrial Control Systems Joint Working Group (ICSJWG) Fall
Conference, 25-28 October, Seattle.
Department of Justice and Correctional Services. (2017). Cybercrimes and Cybersecurity Bill.
Pretoria.
Dingle, S. (2009, July 15). Anatomy of an SMS banking scam. FIN24.com. Retrieved from
http://www.fin24.com/articles/default/display_article.aspx?ArticleId=2638902
Dlamini, Z., & Modise, M. (2012). Cyber security awareness initiatives in South Africa: A
synergy approach. In V. Lysenko (Ed.), 7th International Conference on Information
Warfare and Security (pp. 98-107). Seattle: University of Washington.
ESET. (2016, October). En route with Sednit: Part I: Approaching the target. Retrieved from
https://www.welivesecurity.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/eset-sednit-part1.
pdf
Fearn, N. (2017, March 29). Critical lack of skills could be the biggest security challenge. IDG
Connect. Retrieved from http://www.idgconnect.com/abstract/25505/critical-lackskills-biggest-security-challenge
FireEye. (2014). APT28: A window into Russia’s cyber espionage operations? Retrieved from
https://www2.fireeye.com/apt28.html 
AJIC Issue 20, 2017 129
 Analysis of Cyber-Incidents in South Africa
Fripp, C. (2016, February 12). Anonymous begins #OpAfrica: Claims thousands of SA
sites compromised. htxt.africa. Retrieved from http://www.htxt.co.za/2016/02/12/
anonymous-makes-good-on-promise-goes-after-sa-government-websites/
Gorton, B. (2016, June 14). Anonymous Africa goes after “racist” EFF and their “Godfathers”
Zanu PF. Sowetan Live. Retrieved from http://www.sowetanlive.co.za/news/
article16983627.ece
HomeGrownHoney. (2009, January 7). Hackers expose South African banks. ITWeb. Retrieved
from http://mydl.itweb.co.za/index.php?option=com_myblog&show=hackersexpose-south-african-bankshtml&Itemid=
ITNewsAfrica. (2013, August 30). MTN victim of cyber attack. Retrieved from http://www.
itnewsafrica.com/2013/08/mtn-victim-of-cyber-attack/
ITWeb. (2013, May 6). No damage during Aarto hacking. Retrieved from http://www.itweb.
co.za/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=63798
Limer, E, (2013). Meet Red October: The global cyber-espionage ring that spent 5 years
in the shadows. Gizmodo. Retrieved from http://gizmodo.com/5975793/meet-redoctober-the-global-cyber+espionage-ring-that-spent-5-years-in-the-shadows
Mail & Guardian. (2008, August 15). Hacker compromises DA website. Retrieved from
https://mg.co.za/article/2008-08-15-hacker-compromises-da-website
Malwarebytes Labs. (2017). State of malware report 2017. Retrieved from https://www.
malwarebytes.com/pdf/white-papers/stateofmalware.pdf
Mandiant. (2013, February 19). APT1: Exposing one of China’s cyber espionage units. Retrieved
from https://www.fireeye.com/content/dam/fireeye-www/services/pdfs/mandiantapt1-report.pdf
Matinde, V. (2017, March 10). Cybersecurity must play catch up as more Kenyans move
online. IDG Connect. Retrieved from http://www.idgconnect.com/abstract/25318/
cybersecurity-play-catch-kenyans-online
Mbongwa, L., & Makua, J. (2005, January 13). Moroccan hackers blamed for website
blitz. Independent Online. Retrieved from http://www.iol.co.za/news/south-africa/
moroccan-hackers-blamed-for-website-blitz-231419
Miller, B., & Rowe, D. C. (2012). A survey of SCADA and critical infrastructure
incidents. In RIIT ’12 (Ed.), Proceedings of the 1st Annual Conference on Research
in Information Technology [RIIT ‘12], (pp 51-56), New York: ACM. https://doi.
org/10.1145/2380790.2380805
Mkhwanazi, S. (2015, October 12). Roads agency account hacked for R8.5m. Independent
Online. Retrieved from http://www.iol.co.za/capetimes/roads-agency-accounthacked-for-r8-5m-1.1928834
Muller, R. (2013, December 30). My Vodacom security flaw exposes subscriber details.
MyBroadband. Retrieved from https://mybroadband.co.za/news/security/94234-
my-vodacom-security-flaw-exposes-subscriber-details.html
MyBroadband. (2013a, August 21). City of Joburg exposes private information again.
Retrieved from https://mybroadband.co.za/news/security/84929-city-of-joburgexposes-private-information-again.html
MyBroadband. (2013b, October 15). Mass security breach of fast food payment systems in
SA. Retrieved from http://mybroadband.co.za/news/security/88985-mass-securitybreach-of-fast-food-payment-systems-in-sa.html
MyBroadband. (2014, January 5). Big Cell C security flaw uncovered. Retrieved from https://
mybroadband.co.za/news/security/94332-big-cell-c-security-flaw-uncovered.html 
 130 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Van Niekerk
MyBroadband. (2016, May 30). MTN exposing subscribers’ personal details online. Retrieved
from https://mybroadband.co.za/news/cellular/166734-mtn-exposing-subscriberspersonal-details-online.html
Norton South Africa (2012) Norton cybercrime report 2012. Retrieved from http://
za.norton.com/cybercrimereport/promo?inid=uk_hho_downloads_home_link_
cybercrimereport
Oiaga, M. (2006, July 4). Three South African banks hit by hackers. Softpedia. Retrieved
from http://news.softpedia.com/news/Three-South-African-Banks-Hit-byHackers-28590.shtml
Paganini, P. (2013, January 17). Red October, RBN and too many questions still unresolved.
Security Affairs blog. Retrieved from http://securityaffairs.co/wordpress/11779/
cyber-crime/red-october-rbn-and-too-many-questions-still-unresolved.html
Patrick, H. (2015). Security information flow in the public sector: KZN health and education. PhD
thesis. University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban.
Plaut, M. (2010, October 26). Book says hacker tried to stop Mandela coming to power. BBC
News. Retrieved from http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-11630092
Porter, B. (2003, August 8). Hackers target SA universities. News24. Retrieved from http://
www.news24.com/SciTech/News/Hackers-target-SA-universities-20030808
Potgieter, D. (2011, January 8) Absa intercepts land bank swindle. Saturday Star. Retrieved
from http://www.iol.co.za/business/companies/absa-intercepts-land-bankswindle-1.1009423
Pretorius, B. H. (2016). Cyber-security and governance for industrial control systems (ICS) in
South Africa. Master’s dissertation, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban.
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), & BAE Systems. (2017). Operation Cloud Hopper.
Retrieved from https://www.pwc.co.uk/issues/cyber-security-data-privacy/insights/
operation-cloud-hopper.html
Rasool, F. 2012. Postbank heist signals policy gap, ITWeb. Retrieved from http://www.itweb.
co.za/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=50818
Redelinghuis, K. (2011, March 30). ANC Youth League website hacked by “Warbird”.
Memeburn. Retrieved from http://memeburn.com/2011/03/anc-youth-leaguewebsite-hacked/
Republic of South Africa (RSA). (2002a). Electronic Communications and Transactions Act
25 of 2002.
RSA. (2002b). Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
Communication-Related Information Act (RICA) 70 of 2002.
RSA. (2009). Protection of Personal Information (POPI) Bill 9 of 2009.
RSA. (2013). Protection of Personal Information (POPI) Act 4 of 2013.
Reuters. (1998, June 11). South Africa police arrest teen hacker. Retrieved from http://lists.
jammed.com/ISN/1998/11/0032.html
Roane, B. (2013, May 22). SAPS website hacked. The Star. Retrieved from http://www.iol.
co.za/news/crime-courts/saps-website-hacked-1.1520042
SABC News. (2017, April 19). Cyber-attacks reaching a critical point in SA. Retrieved
from http://www.timenews.co.za/timenews-sabc-news-cyber-attacks-reaching-acritical-point-in-sawednesday-19-april-2017
Safenet. (2014). Breach database: Top data breaches. Retrieved from http://www.
breachlevelindex.com/#!breach-database 
AJIC Issue 20, 2017 131
 Analysis of Cyber-Incidents in South Africa
SANews. (2012, December 21). Attack on e-toll website foiled. Retrieved from http://www.
sanews.gov.za/south-africa/attack-e-toll-website-foiled
Saville, M. (2012, December 9). Three SA government websites hacked. Mail & Guardian.
Retrieved from https://mg.co.za/article/2012-12-09-three-government-websiteshacked
Song, S. (2017). African undersea cables – Interactive. Many Possibilities blog. Retrieved
from https://manypossibilities.net/african-undersea-cables-interactive
Speckman, A. (2015). Cybercriminals are on the prowl. BDLive. Retrieved from http://www.
bdlive.co.za/businesstimes/2015/02/01/cybercriminals-are-on-the-prowl
State Security Agency (SSA). (2015). National cybersecurity policy framework. Pretoria.
Stone, A. (2010, April 25). Patient records for all to see. I-Net. Retrieved from http://news.
za.msn.com/local/article.aspx?cp-documentid=153155730
Swart, W., & wa Afrika, M. (2012, January 15). It was a happy New Year’s Day for a gang
who pulled off...R42m Postbank heist. Times Live. Retrieved from https://www.
timeslive.co.za/news/south-africa/2012-01-15-it-was-a-happy-new-years-day-forgang-who-pulled-offr42m-postbank-heist
Tate, S. (2017, April 19). Why Australia will lose a cyberwar. Vice. Retrieved from https://
www.vice.com/en_au/article/why-australia-will-lose-a-cyberwar
TelecomSpeak. (2015, May 18). Cyber attack targets MTN Data Centre. Retrieved from
http://www.telecomspeak.com/2015/05/18/cyber-attack-targets-mtn-data-centre
Tengimfene, N. (2013). Media statement on progress made by the Justice, Crime Prevention
& Security cluster in the fight against corruption. Pretoria: Government
Communication and Information System (GCIS).
Tubbs, B. (2013, May 22). SAPS hack spells negligence. ITWeb. Retrieved from http://www.
itweb.co.za/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=64268:SAPS-hackspells-negligence&catid=265
Van Niekerk, B. (2017). Analysis of cyber-attacks against the transportation sector. In M.E.
Korstanje (Ed.), Threat mitigation and detection of cyber warfare and terrorism activities
(pp. 69-92), Hershey PA: IGI. https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-5225-1938-6.ch004
Van Rooyen, K. (2009, July 18). Hidden price of a banking scam. The Times. Retrieved from
http://www.thetimes.co.za/News/Article.aspx?id=1036132
Van Zyl, G. (2016a, June 15). Hack attack threat for Gupta sites, Oakbay and Sahara down.
Fin24. Retrieved from https://www.fin24.com/Tech/Cyber-Security/anonymousthreatens-hack-attacks-on-gupta-websites-20160615
Van Zyl, G. (2016b, June 30). Standard Bank computer was hacked in R300m ATM fraud
hit – report. Fin24. Retrieved from http://www.fin24.com/Tech/Cyber-Security/
standard-bank-computer-was-hacked-in-r300m-atm-fraud-hit-report-20160630
Van Zyl, G. (2016c, July 12). Anonymous “hacks” Armscor website. Fin24. Retrieved from
http://www.fin24.com/Tech/News/anonymous-hacks-armscor-website-20160712
Venktess, K. (2016, September 8). eThekwini municipality website leaks user data – Expert.
Fin24. Retrieved from http://www.fin24.com/Tech/News/ethekwini-municipalitywebsite-leaks-user-data-expert-20160908
Vermeulen, J. (2013, May 14). Spyware servers in South Africa: the plot thickens.
MyBroadband. Retrieved from http://mybroadband.co.za/news/security/77110-
government-spyware-servers-in-south-africa-telkom-govt-mum.html 
 132 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Van Niekerk
Vermeulen, J. (2014, January 8). E-toll website flaw a cyber-attack: Sanral. MyBroadband.
Retrieved from https://mybroadband.co.za/news/security/94554-e-toll-websiteflaw-a-cyber-attack-sanral.html
Vermeulen, J. (2016a, February 12). Anonymous hacks SA government database,
MyBroadband. Retrieved from http://mybroadband.co.za/news/security/155030-
anonymous-hacks-sa-government-database.html
Vermeulen, J. (2016b, June 13). This is how I took down the SABC: Anonymous hacker.
MyBroadband. Retrieved from http://mybroadband.co.za/news/security/168303-
this-is-how-i-took-down-the-sabc-anonymous-hacker.html
AJIC Issue 28, 2021 1
The Cyber Threat Landscape in South Africa: A 10-Year Review
Heloise Pieterse
Senior Researcher and Cybersecurity Specialist, Information and Cybersecurity Centre,
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Pretoria
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2908-4012
Abstract
The world is witnessing a rise in cyber-related incidents. As information technology
improves and the reliance on technology increases, the frequency and severity of
cyber incidents escalate. The impact is felt globally, and South Africa is not immune
to the effects. The country’s fast-paced technological evolution continues to increase
the attack surface within the cyber domain. The increased attack surface is confirmed
by recent cyberattacks affecting well-known and established South African organisations. This article reviews findings from an evaluation of South Africa’s cyber threat
landscape that analysed 74 cyber incidents identified as occurring between 2010 and
2020. The 74 incidents are categorised according to incident type, affected sector, perpetrator type, and motivation. It is found that the most common incident type is data
exposure, the most-affected sector is the public sector, the most prevalent perpetrators
are hackers, and the most common motivation is criminal. The article makes recommendations about how South Africa can reduce the risk factors in its cyber threat
landscape.
Keywords
cybersecurity, cyber threats, cyberattacks, cyber incidents, attack surface,
compromised websites, cybercrime, data exposure, system intrusion, denial of service
DOI: https://doi.org/10.23962/10539/32213
Recommended citation
Pieterse, H. (2021). The cyber threat landscape in South Africa: A 10-year review.
The African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC), 28, 1-21.
https://doi.org/10.23962/10539/32213
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence:
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0
 2 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Pieterse
1. Introduction
The prevalence of cyber incidents globally contributes to the ever-increasing cybersecurity concerns. Well-known and established organisations, such as Solar Winds
(Willett, 2021) and Microsoft (Wyatt, 2021), have fallen victim to sophisticated cyberattacks. South Africa is not immune, and has witnessed a steady increase in cyberattacks in recent years. 2019 proved pivotal as South Africa experienced a cross-industry spike in cyber incidents (Mcanyana et al., 2020), a trend that continued in
2020 and was further driven by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The City of Johannesburg (CoJ), a metropolitan municipality responsible for local
governance, suffered two noteworthy cyber incidents during 2019 (Moyo, 2019a).
First, in July, a ransomware attack affected City Power, CoJ’s electricity utility. Second, in October, a network breach was detected after a ransom note was received
from a group called the Shadow Kill hackers. Both cyber incidents caused downtime
to several customer-facing systems. Following the breach at CoJ, the South African Bank Risk Information Centre (SABRIC) confirmed that the banking sector
had been targeted by a wave of distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks (Moyo,
2019b).
In 2020 the COVID-19 pandemic caused a surge in cyber incidents as the pandemic created new opportunities for attackers to exploit. During May, an accidental
data leak caused by changes to the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) website—
changes made to accommodate the Temporary Employee/Employer Relief Scheme
(TERS)—exposed employers’ confidential information. The issue causing the data
leak was reported by a security researcher and subsequently resolved by the UIF
(Vermeulen, 2020a). In June 2020, the second-largest private hospital operator in
South Africa, Life Healthcare Group, fell victim to a cyberattack. Although the full
extent of the attack remains unclear, Life Healthcare Group confirmed that the attack affected admissions systems, business processing systems, and e-mail servers
(Mungadze, 2020). Two months later, South Africa suffered a massive data breach
when Experian, a credit bureau agency, exposed personal information to a suspected fraudster. The exposed personal information affected approximately 24 million
South Africans, as well as 800,000 business entities (Moyo, 2020a). The remainder of
2020 continued to witness various cyber incidents affecting South Africa’s financial,
public, construction, and telecommunication sectors.
In 2021, the attractiveness of South Africa as a cyber target was further demonstrated by the large-scale cyberattack that affected Transnet, the South African stateowned rail, port, and pipeline company (Moyo, 2021). According to Noëlle van der
Waag-Cowling, a cyber programme lead at the Security Institute for Governance
and Leadership in Africa, the incident has been described as an act of “cyber warfare”
and serves as a warning to South Africa (Goldstuck, 2021; Slabbert & Peyper, 2021). 
AJIC Issue 28, 2021 3
The Cyber Threat Landscape of South Africa: A 10-Year Review
Shortly thereafter, the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development confirmed a security breach that affected its information technology system. The breach
was the result of ransomware, causing all the department’s systems to be encrypted
and unavailable to both internal employees and members of the public (Ngqakamba,
2021).
Globally, cyber incidents are well-documented in peer-reviewed scholarly articles
and research reports. In South Africa, however, despite the steady increase in cyber
incidents, the formal reporting of such incidents is not common. Neither the South
African Police Service (SAPS) nor the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) offers
resources or statistics pertaining specifically to local cyber incidents. The Cybersecurity Hub—South Africa’s national Computer Security Incident Response Team
(CSIRT)—provides a service for stakeholders to report cyber incidents, but it does
not report such incidents to the general public. Furthermore, few peer-reviewed articles exist that have evaluated South African cyber incidents. One notable exception
is the Van Heerden et al. (2016) review of 12 South African cyber incidents that
occurred between 1994 and 2015. Van Heerden et al. (2016) presented a new visual
classification scheme for cyber incidents, which facilitates the representation of the
cyber incidents according to eight distinct classes: attacker, goal, mechanism, effect,
motivation, target, vulnerability, and scenario (Van Heerden et al., 2016). Another noteworthy exception is Van Niekerk’s (2017) presentation of a comprehensive
high-level analysis of 54 cyber incidents that affected South Africa between 1994
and 2016. Van Niekerk (2017) classifies the incidents according to impact, perpetrator, and victim types, finding the leading perpetrators to be criminals and hacktivists,
and the leading impacts of the cyber incidents to be data exposure and financial theft
(Van Niekerk, 2017).
Although the two above-mentioned studies do offer insight into South Africa’s cyber threat landscape, they only address incidents up to the end of 2015 and 2016 respectively. This article considers a full decade of cyber incidents, from 2010 to 2020,
providing an analysis of 74 newsworthy cyber incidents that affected South Africa
during that period. The cyber incidents considered are categorised according to incident type, sector affected, perpetrator type, and motivation. This categorisation permits a
detailed trend analysis and a picture of South Africa’s current cyber threat landscape.
2. Methodology
Data collection
Since information was not readily available from official sources (e.g., SAPS, the
NPA, the national CSIRT), the cyber incidents analysed were identified by reviewing published peer-reviewed articles and media reports (e.g., reports published by
ITWeb, MyBroadband and BusinessTech), as well as by conducting targeted online
searches. The selection of cyber incidents was based on the following: the incident
affected a South African organisation(s) or citizens; and the impact of the incident 
 4 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Pieterse
caused a breach (either network or data), affected services, or led to financial loss. A
total of 74 cyber incidents occurring in the decade from January 2010 to December
2020 were identified.
Data analysis
Insight and guidance were taken from the approaches used by Van Heerden et al.
(2016) and Van Niekerk (2017) in deciding how to categorise the 74 cyber incidents.
A classification scheme was developed that consisted of four classifications, namely
incident type, sector affected, perpetrator type, and motivation.
Incident type
The first classification, incident type, classifies the cyber incident according to one of
the following types:
x Compromised website: intentional or unintentional activity affecting the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of the website (Kumar et al., 2019);
x Cybercrime: criminal activity involving a computer, network device, or network causing financial impact (Brush, n.d.);
x Data exposure: disclosure or leakage of data or information within the public
domain (Sabillon et al., 2016; Van Niekerk, 2017);
x System intrusion: unauthorised or illegitimate access to a system or network
(Kakareka, 2014; Van Niekerk, 2017); or
x Denial of service: preventing authorised or legitimate users from accessing
network resources or affecting operations (Sabillon et al., 2016; Van Niekerk,
2017).
Sector affected
The second classification, sector affected, classifies the incident in terms of the area
of the economy in which it occurred, with the following potential classifications:
construction, financial, healthcare, information technology (IT), leisure and hospitality,
manufacturing, media, public, retail, telecommunications, transportation, or other.
Perpetrator type
The third classification, perpetrator type, classifies the individual or group responsible
for the cyber incident as being of one of the following types:
x Hacktivist: an individual or group of individuals affiliated with activists’
groups promoting political agendas or social change (Sabillon et al., 2016;
Van Niekerk, 2017);
x Insider: an individual with a trusted relationship, institutional knowledge,
and legitimate access, but acting maliciously for personal gain (Van Heerden
et al., 2012; 2016; Van Niekerk, 2017);
x Hacker: a well-versed or unskilled individual using tools developed by elite
computer users to break security and infiltrate networks or information systems (Van Heerden et al., 2
AJIC Issue 28, 2021 5
The Cyber Threat Landscape of South Africa: A 10-Year Review
Cybercriminal: an individual or group of individuals affiliated to criminal
groups motivated by financial gain (Van Niekerk, 2017);
x Nation state: state-sponsored sophisticated hackers who target the information systems or networks of other countries (Sabillon et al., 2016; Van
Niekerk, 2017); or
x Non-malicious individual: a person causing internal or external disclosure of
a security flaw or a vulnerability affecting an information system.
Motivation
The fourth classification, motivation, classifies the rationale behind the cyber incident according to one of the following motives:
x Political: driven by a political aspect, such as political reasoning, spreading propaganda, or attacking political enemies (Gandhi et al., 2011; Van
Heerden et al., 2012);
x Economic: illegal actions driven by financial gain, e.g., deploying ransomware with the purpose of acquiring paid ransom (Gandhi et al., 2011; Van
Heerden et al., 2012; 2016);
x Fun/Personal: driven by a desire to prove skills, to solve challenging problems, or to expose security flaws, i.e., driven by non-malicious intentions
(Van Heerden et al., 2012; 2016);
x Accidental: unintentional or unexpected discovery of a security flaw or vulnerability; or
x Criminal: conscious decision to intentionally conduct wrongdoing or criminal intent (but lacking financial incentive), e.g., performing a system intrusion to access personally identifiable information (PII) (Van Heerden et al.,
2012; 2016).
3. Findings
High-prof ile cyber incidents identif ied
Examples of high-profile cyber incidents identified include:
2012
A hacker called H4ksniper claimed responsibility for disrupting three South African
government websites (MyBroadband, 2012). Subsequently, various other South African websites fell victim to either hacktivists or hackers.
2014
Unpatched security vulnerabilities resulted in the mass hacking of South African
websites that were using outdated versions of web content management systems such
as Joomla and WordPress (MyBroadband, 2014). The hacks involved the insertion of
hidden links to international websites to improve the page rank of the websites on
the Google and
 6 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Pieterse
2013–2014
These two years saw several accidental exposures of confidential data. Security researchers found on multiple occasions the exposure of PII by South African mobile operator, Vodacom (Muller, 2013; BusinessTech, 2014). Such exposure of PII can
have grave consequences for organisations, especially with the coming into force of
South Africa’s 2013 Protection of Personal Information Act (POPIA) on 1 July 2021
(RSA, 2013).
2016-2020
Compromised websites remained frequent in the second half of the decade (McKane, 2020a; Moyo, 2017; MyBroadband, 2018; Mzekandaba, 2019; Vermeulen, 2016).
Also significant in this period was an increase in cyber incidents exposing data.
While accidental exposure of data persisted (MyBroadband, 2016), data exposure was
increasingly politically or criminally motivated (BusinessTech, 2016; Moyo, 2019c).
A global trend during the latter half of the decade was the frequent occurrence of
ransomware attacks. During 2017, such attacks (WannaCry and NotPetya) were
driven by EternalBlue, a Windows zero-day exploit targeting a vulnerability in the
server message block (SMB) protocol (Trautman & Ormerod, 2019). Originally developed by the US National Security Agency (NSA), EternalBlue was leaked by the
Shadow Brokers hacker group, causing a global cyberattack. Several South African
organisations were also affected by large-scale ransomware attacks, including telecommunications provider, Telkom, the Office of the Chief Justice, and a stolen vehicle recovery company, Tracker (Moyo, 2020b; MyBroadband, 2017; Rawlins, 2017;
Vermeulen, 2020b; 2020c).
Annual frequency of cyber incidents
As seen in Figure 1, the data revealed annual increases in cyber incidents for most
(but not all) of the years studied, with a particularly sharp annual increase from 2019
(11 incidents) to 2020 (19 incidents). 
AJIC Issue 28, 2021 7
The Cyber Threat Landscape of South Africa: A 10-Year Review
Figure 1: Annual cyber incident totals, 2010–2020

Incident type
Figures 2 to 4 present the classification of the 74 cyber incidents according to incident type, in three periods: 2010–2015, 2016–2018, and 2019–2020. All the cyber
incidents are represented by the actual title used in media reports.
Figure 2: Classification of cyber incidents by type, 2010–2015 (21 incidents)
 8 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Pieterse
Figure 3: Classification of cyber incidents by type, 2016–2018 (23 incidents)
Figure 4: Classification of cyber incidents by type, 2019–2020 (30 incidents)
AJIC Issue 28, 2021 9
The Cyber Threat Landscape of South Africa: A 10-Year Review
The most prevalent incident type across the ten years studied (see Figure 5) was
data exposure (39.19% of incidents), followed by compromised website (21.62%), system
intrusion (14.86%), cybercrime (13.51%), and denial of service (10.81%). The finding
on the prominence of data exposure aligns with the finding from research conducted
by Van Niekerk (2017) on the period 1994 to 2016, which found data exposure to be
the most prominent impact caused by cyber incidents in South Africa. Meanwhile,
this study’s finding that denial of service was the type of cyber incident present in
10.81% of incidents marks a decrease in percentage share compared to the research
results reported by Van Niekerk (2017) for the period 1994 to 2016. This decrease in
denial of service attacks can potentially be attributed to the increase in other cyber
incident types, such as cybercrime using ransomware (Trend Micro, 2017). Finally,
the findings in this study show a significant increase in system intrusion incidents
(14.86%) compared to the research results presented by Van Niekerk (2017) for the
period 1994 to 2016, which found system penetration to be the least common impact type. The increase merely demonstrates an increase in cyber incidents affecting
organisations that release such information to the general public.
Figure 5: Cyber incidents by type, 2010–2020
Figure 6 shows the year-by-year trends in incident type identified in this study.
The most prominent incident type, data exposure, had notable increases in 2016 and
2020. Reporting of such incidents is expected to grow even further with the aforementioned implementation of POPIA, which requires mandatory reporting of data
breaches involving personal information (Dullabh & Gabryk, 2021). Less prominent than data exposure incidents but recurring continually between 2011 and 2020
were incidents leading to compromised websites. Also illustrated is the small yet notable increase in the annual total of cybercrime-related incidents between 2018 and
2019, with 2020 maintaining the relatively high level of such attacks. These findings
confirm the increasing move towards criminally motivated cyber incidents (see “motivation” sub-section below). Another notable trend illustrated in Figure 6 is the 
 10 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Pieterse
recent rise of cyber incidents of the system intrusion type. Identified reports on such
incidents confirmed illegitimate access to a system or internal network but restricted
the disclosure of information describing the incident’s impact (e.g., data leakage,
affected services or operations, encryption of data).
Figure 6: Yearly trends in incident types, 2010–2020
Sector affected
The findings captured in Figure 7 show that the three South African sectors most affected by the past decade’s cyber incidents were the public, financial, and telecommunications sectors. The public sector, which consists of state-owned, publicly controlled,
or publicly funded entities, often fell victim to cyber incidents causing compromised
websites or data exposure. Notably, the websites of the African National Congress
(ANC) and the ANC Youth League (ANCYL) were regularly targeted by hackers,
negatively affecting the reputation of the organisations. Other entities in the public
sector affected by cyber incidents include, but are not limited to, the Office of the
Chief Justice, the Social Security Agency of South Africa (SASSA), the Administrative Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences (AARTO), the Department of Basic Education, Armscor, SAPS, and several municipalities (Nama Khoi, eThekwini,
Tshwane, and Johannesburg).
In comparison to the public sector, the financial sector suffered fewer cyber incidents.
However, the incidents impacted commercial banks, insurance companies, and financial institutions. While cyber incidents affecting the financial sector are expected
to be primarily economic in motivation, the past decade witnessed an increase in incidents leaking sensitive information (see “motivation” sub-section below). Although
such incidents do not have any financial implications, affected clients can still incur 
AJIC Issue 28, 2021 11
The Cyber Threat Landscape of South Africa: A 10-Year Review
financial loss due to the misuse of such exposed information. The value associated
with sensitive information as a commodity on the dark web can be expected to cause
a steady rise in cyber incidents targeting the financial sector.
Figure 7: Sector affected per cyber incident type, 2010–2020
Finally, the telecommunications sector of South Africa, which includes mobile operators and internet service providers (ISPs), fell victim to several cyber incidents causing denial of service. More specifically, the sector experienced two significant DDoS
attacks during 2019. In the first attack, Liquid Telecom and Webafrica suffered a
large-scale volumetric DDoS attack from international sources (Moyo, 2019d). Mitigation controls were applied, and traffic volumes returned to normal. A few weeks
later, South African ISPs, RSAWEB and Cool Ideas, suffered severe DDoS attacks
(Vermeulen, 2019). The co-founder of Cool Ideas confirmed that the attack exceeded 300 Gigabytes per second (Gbps). The telecommunication sector also endured
several cyber incidents causing data exposure. On closer inspection, the exposure of
the data in these cases was accidental and caused by non-malicious individuals (see
“perpetrator type” sub-section below). Although less affected than the public and
financial sectors, entities in the telecommunication sector can expect to continue
being targeted by cyber incidents.
Perpetrator type
Figure 8 presents trends associated with perpetrator types. Hackers were found to
be the most common perpetrator type, responsible for more than 50% of the cyber
incidents that occurred in the past decade. While responsible for the largest subset
of cyber incidents, hackers became most prevalent only in 2017. More dominant
between 2012 and 2018 were hacktivists, who were responsible for 11 cyber incidents
during the same period.
 12 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Pieterse
Figure 8: Trends in perpetrator type, 2010–2020
Figure 8 further illustrates the prevalence of incidents caused by cybercriminals. The
year 2019 witnessed a sharp increase in such incidents, apparently driven partly by
the rise of ransomware-related attacks. Another reality seen is the figure is the reappearance in 2020 (after being absent in 2019) of security flaws or misconfigurations
generated by non-malicious individuals. (In total, nine such incidents were disclosed
in the decade reviewed.) Also noteworthy in Figure 8 is the appearance, in 2020 and
for the first time in the decade reviewed, of two cyber incidents caused by insiders.
There were two such incidents in 2020. The first was a security breach at Postbank in
which its employees stole the bank’s encrypted master key (ITWeb, 2020). The master
key provides access to Postbank’s systems and enables the manipulation of captured
information. The second incident was caused by internal data theft that exposed the
personal information of Absa banking clients to external parties (McKane, 2020b).
Absa notified affected clients and confirmed that all suspicious transactions will be
reviewed in order to protect clients’ interests.
Motivation
Figure 9 shows that the most common motivation found for cyber incidents in South
Africa in the decade reviewed was criminal (39.19%). Cyber incidents driven by economic intent constituted 21.62% of the recorded incidents, while 16.22% of the incidents were political in motivation. The two least common motives, accidental (12.6%)
and fun/personal (10.81%), still, when taken together, represented nearly a quarter of
the identified incidents.
AJIC Issue 28, 2021 13
The Cyber Threat Landscape of South Africa: A 10-Year Review
Figure 9: Motives behind cyber incidents, 2010–2020
Relationships between incident type, perpetrator type, and motivation
Figure 10 shows that a strong relationship between perpetrator type and motivation
was found between hackers and criminal motivation. And, when driven by criminal
intent, hackers were found to cause cyber incidents primarily leading to data exposure or compromised websites (17 incidents across these two classifications). A smaller
number of hackers were motivated by fun/personal intentions, and these hackers were
involved in seven cyber incidents causing compromised websites.
Figure 10: Relationships between incident type, perpetrator type, and motivation
 14 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Pieterse
As also seen in Figure 10, cybercriminals were, unsurprisingly, found to be primarily
driven by economic motives (13 incidents) and strongly associated with cybercrime
incidents (eight incidents). The remaining five cyber incidents caused by cybercriminals, while also driven by economic incentives, resulted in data exposures and system
intrusions. In these five cyber incidents, the cybercriminals either attempted fraud
(using acquired or exposed credit card information) or requested ransom in the form
of bitcoin (due to ransomware attacks).
Another relationship identified was between hacktivists and politically motivated cyber incidents. In total, ten cyber incidents occurred that were driven by political incentives. Half of the incidents were caused by hacktivists affiliated with Anonymous,
a decentralised international activist/hacktivist movement driven by political agendas (Mikhaylova, 2014), and the remaining incidents were claimed by the hacktivist
groups H4ksniper, Team Hack Argentino, World Hacker Team, Team System DZ,
and Black Team. A final relationship detected in the data was between data exposure
due to the accidental misconfiguration or disclosure by benevolent individuals (nine
incidents).
A threat landscape dashboard
Figure 11 summarises the findings of this study in the form of a dashboard constructed to enable a bird’s eye view of South Africa’s cyber threat landscape.
Figure 11: Dashboard visualisation of South Africa’s cyber threat landscape
AJIC Issue 28, 2021 15
The Cyber Threat Landscape of South Africa: A 10-Year Review
4. Discussion
South Africa’s perilous cyber threat landscape
In response to the increase in cyber incidents in South Africa, iDefense, an Accenture security intelligence company, investigated notable cyber incidents and trends
during 2019. iDefense found that several factors were contributing to South Africa’s
increasingly perilous cyber threat landscape (Mcanyana et al., 2020). Based on the
findings captured in the iDefense report and the findings from this study, it can be
concluded that the following elements are negatively impacting South Africa’s cybersecurity and increasing its attack surface:
Lack of investment in cybersecurity
South Africa, as a country with a developing economy, continually faces insurmountable challenges. Investment in cybersecurity practitioners is not always possible, and
this influences South Africa’s ability to prevent and defend itself against cyberattacks.
The analysis performed confirmed that the public sector is a prime target for cyberattacks, emphasising the need for more investment in cybersecurity in this sector.
Slow development of cybercrime legislation
In general, South Africa has been slow to adopt cybercrime legislation. However, in
2021, PoPIA came into full effect and the Cybercrimes Bill was also signed into law
(Act 19 of 2020) (Bhagattjee, Govuza, & Westcott, 2021). Both PoPIA and the Cybercrimes Act should influence the ability to conduct illegal operations. For example,
disclosure of data breaches, as required by PoPIA, will offer more insight into the
tactics deployed by such cyberattacks, which can guide the deployment of defensive
measures in the future. Such insights are of great importance due to the considerable
increases in cyberattacks causing data leakage in recent years.
Lack of awareness of cyber threats
As the use of technological solutions rises, more South African citizens are exposed
to cyber threats—confirmed by the increase in cyber incidents witnessed in the past
decade. Such an increase in cyber incidents, especially incidents causing accidental
data exposure or compromised websites, shows that South Africans are inexperienced and lack technical alertness when operating in the cyber domain. Such a lack
of awareness causes South Africans to be ideal targets for cyber attackers.
Increasing use of IT
Reliance on IT by South Africans increases the cyber threat landscape. Insights
drawn from the analysis performed revealed that IT systems within the telecommunication sector fell victim to security flaws on several occasions. Such technologies,
applications, and infrastructure pose a significant risk, especially if used inappropriately (e.g., default configurations or unpatched security weaknesses), with limited
knowledge, or without the necessary approval (e.g., legacy systems). 
 16 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Pieterse
Cyber attackers taking notice
The continual exposure of South Africa’s vulnerable cyber threat landscape will undoubtedly grab the attention of other, more advanced cyber attackers. Based on the
growth shown in Figure 4, cyber incidents affecting South Africa are expected to increase. While previous cyber attackers primarily targeted the public sector, attackers
are widening their attack plane to other sectors such as construction, manufacturing,
and healthcare. South Africa’s cyber threat landscape is, therefore, expected to remain
diverse and complex.
Reducing risks in the cyber threat landscape
The factors outlined above show that South Africa is currently positioned, in many
respects, as an ideal target for cyberattacks. Nevertheless, some steps can be taken to
reduce the number of risk factors present in South Africa’s cyber threat landscape
and thus reduce the attack surface:
Adopt a defence-in-depth approach
A military strategy often used in information security, defence in depth, offers a
multi-layered security approach. The approach relies on the use of various security
controls strategically placed throughout an IT system. The multiple security controls
offer redundancy, in case a single security control fails, or a vulnerability is exploited.
Redundancy is achieved by incorporating physical (e.g., locks and security guards),
technical (e.g., firewalls and intrusion detection systems), and administrative (e.g.,
policies and procedures) controls.
Promote a security-focused cyber culture
Regular training, education, and user awareness sessions are necessary to promote
a security-focused cyber culture. Not all employees are cyber-savvy and might be
unaware of the potential risks associated with their online behaviour in the cyber domain. It is, therefore, important to teach employees best practices about cybersecurity,
as well as the procedures to follow should an attack occur.
Utilise threat intelligence
Originally only available to well-funded organisations, threat intelligence has become more accessible due to open-source feeds. However, the providers of threat
intelligence have little to no presence in South Africa. Insights derived from the
threat intelligence are heavily slanted towards developed countries and might not
be relevant to the South African context. The Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research (CSIR) is developing a technological solution that aims to function as the
primary source for cybersecurity data collection in South Africa (Burke et al., 2021).
The threat intelligence derived from the collected cybersecurity data sets will have
a strictly South African focus, offering a valuable source of information to better
understand threats and anticipate attacks.
AJIC Issue 28, 2021 17
The Cyber Threat Landscape of South Africa: A 10-Year Review
Focus on compliance
The first step to ensure protection against cyberattacks is to apply recommended
standards and best practices (e.g., the NIST Cybersecurity Framework or ISO/IEC
27001). Furthermore, the development of an appropriate cybersecurity policy, which
outlines detailed plans, rules, and practices regulating access to an organisation’s system and information source, is imperative. Finally, an incident response plan must be
put in place to ensure employees can respond appropriately should an incident occur.
Collaborate and report
South Africa’s economic challenges can cause cybersecurity to receive less attention
than required. For example, the public sector—affected by 36% of the cyber incidents
identified by this study in the period 2010–2020—requires improved cyber defences
but lacks financial stability. Collaboration, often described as the future of cybersecurity, offers a cost-effective means to share cyber threat information, improve
preparedness, and overcome cybersecurity skill shortages. The national CSIRT is
ideally situated to drive collaboration concerning cybersecurity within South Africa.
Reporting functions can include maintenance of a publicly available cyber threat
dashboard of the kind provided above in section 3. This kind of visualisation of cyber
incidents offers an overview of South Africa’s cyber threat landscape and enables
trend analysis. Such consolidated information can be used to extract intelligence to
better prepare and defend against potential cyberattacks. It is recommended that a
dashboard of this sort be established, published via appropriate platforms (e.g., the
national CSIRT), and regularly updated, to enable all stakeholders in South Africa
to have insight into the country’s existing cyber threat landscape.
Be prepared for when, not if
For South African organisations, it is not a question of if a cyberattack will occur,
but rather a question of when. Organisations must ensure that the required people,
processes, and technologies are in place to identify, protect, detect, respond to, and
recover from cyberattacks.
5. Conclusion
The purpose of this study was to investigate South Africa’s current cyber threat
landscape by reviewing noteworthy cyber incidents that have occurred in the past
decade. In total, 74 cyber incidents were analysed. As the reliance on IT infrastructure and internet connectivity increases, South Africa’s potential exposure to cyber
threats will also continue to rise. As shown by this study, the most common type of
cyber incident affecting South African organisations in the past decade was found
to be incidents causing data exposure. The most frequent perpetrators were found to
be a criminally motivated hackers. And the sector most often targeted was the public
sector (27 known incidents between 2010 and 2020). 
 18 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Pieterse
The prevalence of cyber incidents can be expected to continue in the coming years.
South African organisations need to be cognisant of cyber threats and prepare financially viable defences. However, the inadequate reporting of cyber incidents is creating a void that limits our understanding of South Africa’s cyber threat landscape.
Improved collaboration with regard to the collection, analysis, and reporting of cyber
incidents, guided by appropriate authorities such as the National CSIRT, is required.
The insights produced by this study, as summarised in the proposed dashboard, offer
a starting point for collaborative efforts that can enable South African organisations
to be better prepared and better defended against forthcoming cyberattacks.
References
Bhagattjee, P., Govuza, A., & Westcott, R. (2021, June 9). Regulating the Fourth Industrial
Revolution - South Africa’s Cybercrimes Bill is signed into law. Cliffe Dekker Hofmeyr.
Bing, C., & Kelly, S. (2021, May 8). Cyber attack shuts down U.S. fuel pipeline ‘jugular,’ Biden briefed. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/technology/colonial-pipeline-halts-all-pipeline-operations-after-cybersecurity-attack-2021-05-08/
Brush, K. (n.d.). Cybercrime. TechTarget. https://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/definition/
cybercrime
Burke, I., Motlhabi, M., Netshiya, R., & Pieterse, H. (2021). Lost packet warehousing service.
In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security (pp.
501–508). ACI.
BusinessTech. (2014, October 30). Vodacom exposing subscriber details. https://businesstech.
co.za/news/mobile/72054/vodacom-exposing-subscriber-details/
BusinessTech. (2016, February 16). Hackers leak SA government’s sensitive financial data.
https://businesstech.co.za/news/government/112817/hackers-leak-sa-governments-sensitive-financial-data/
Duffy, C. (2021, March 10). Here’s what we know so far about the massive Microsoft Exchange hack. CNN. https://edition.cnn.com/2021/03/10/tech/microsoft-exchange-hafnium-hack-explainer/index.html
Dullabh, R., & Gabryk, N. (2021, April 13). South Africa: Preparing for POPIA: Data breach
response. Mondaq. https://www.mondaq.com/southafrica/data-protection/1055314/
preparing-for-popia-data-breach-response
Eaton, C., & Volz, D. (2021, May 19). Colonial Pipeline CEO tells why he paid hackers
a $4.4 million ransom. Wall Street Journal. https://www.wsj.com/articles/colonialpipeline-ceo-tells-why-he-paid-hackers-a-4-4-million-ransom-11621435636
Gandhi, R. A., Sharma, A., Mahoney, W., Sousan, W., Zhu, Q., & Laplante, P. A. (2011). Dimensions of cyber-attacks: Cultural, social, economic, and political. IEEE Technology
and Society Magazine, 30(1), 28–38. https://doi.org/10.1109/MTS.2011.940293
Goldstuck, A. (2021, August 1). Transnet cyber hack a warning of risk to SA. BusinessLive.
https://www.businesslive.co.za/bt/business-and-economy/2021-08-01-transnetcyber-hack-a-warning-of-risk-to-sa/
AJIC Issue 28, 2021 19
The Cyber Threat Landscape of South Africa: A 10-Year Review
ITWeb. (2020, June 14). Postbank to replace 12m bank cards after security breach. https://
www.itweb.co.za/content/nWJadvbekrmqbjO1
Kakareka, A. (2014). Detecting system intrusions. In J. R. Vacca (Ed.), Network and system
security (2nd ed.) (pp. 1–27). Syngress.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-416689-9.00001-0
Kumar, R., Raj, P., & Perianayagam, J. (2019). A framework to detect compromised websites using link structure anomalies. In S. Omar, S. W. Haji, & S. Phon-Amnuaisuk
(Eds.), Advances in intelligent systems and computing: Proceedings of the Computational Intelligence in Information Systems conference (CIIS 2018) (pp. 72–84). Springer.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-03302-6_7
Mcanyana, W., Brindley, C., & Seedat, Y. (2020). Insight into the cyberthreat landscape in South
Africa. Accenture.
McKane, J. (2020a, November 10). ANC Youth League website hacked. MyBroadband.
https://mybroadband.co.za/news/government/374940-anc-youth-league-websitehacked.html
McKane, J. (2020b, November 30). Absa hit by data breach. MyBroadband. https://mybroadband.co.za/news/security/378358-absa-hit-by-data-breach.html
Mikhaylova, G. (2014). The “Anonymous” movement: Hacktivism as an emerging form of political
participation. Texas State University, San Marcos.
Moyo, A. (2017, June 29). DBE web site hacked, pro-Islamic State messages posted. ITWeb.
https://www.itweb.co.za/content/x4r1lyMRgpjqpmda
Moyo, A. (2019a, October 25). City of Joburg hit by cyber attack. ITWeb. https://www.itweb.
co.za/content/dgp45qaG8gZ7X9l8
Moyo, A. (2019b, October 25). Bad day for SA’s cyber security as banks suffer DDoS attacks.
ITWeb. https://www.itweb.co.za/content/LPp6V7r4OVzqDKQz
Moyo, A. (2019c, September 13). Garmin SA hacked, exposing users’ credit card details. ITWeb. https://www.itweb.co.za/content/O2rQGMApY5G7d1ea
Moyo, A. (2019d, October 28). Liquid Telecom, Webafrica hit by DDoS attacks. ITWeb.
https://www.itweb.co.za/content/GxwQDM1A339MlPVo
Moyo, A. (2020a, August 19). Experian hacked, 24m personal details of South Africans exposed. ITWeb. https://www.itweb.co.za/content/rxP3jqBmNzpMA2ye
Moyo, A. (2020b, February 5). Tracker hack hints at more ransomware attacks in SA. ITWeb.
https://www.itweb.co.za/content/LPp6VMr4YxNvDKQz
Moyo, A. (2021, July 22). Transnet suffers “disruption” of IT systems. ITWeb. https://www.
itweb.co.za/content/wbrpOqgYAwY7DLZn
Muller, R. (2013, December 30). My Vodacom security flaw exposes subscriber details. MyBroadband. https://mybroadband.co.za/news/security/94234-my-vodacom-security-flaw-exposes-subscriber-details.html
Mungadze, S. (2020, June 9). Life Healthcare Group hit by cyber attack amid COVID-19.
ITWeb. https://www.itweb.co.za/content/JBwErvnBK4av6Db2
MyBroadband. (2012, December 9). South African websites hacked. https://mybroadband.
co.za/news/security/66474-south-african-websites-hacked.html
 20 Te African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC)
Pieterse
MyBroadband. (2014, September 21). Mass hacking of South African websites. https://mybroadband.co.za/news/security/110316-mass-hacking-of-south-african-websites.
html
MyBroadband. (2016, May 30). MTN exposing subscribers’ personal details online. https://
mybroadband.co.za/news/cellular/166734-mtn-exposing-subscribers-personal-details-online.html
MyBroadband. (2017, May 21). Telkom systems crippled by WannaCry ransomware. https://
mybroadband.co.za/news/security/211576-telkom-systems-crippled-by-wannacry-ransomware.html
MyBroadband. (2018, July 7). South African presidency website hacked. https://mybroadband.co.za/news/security/267491-south-african-presidency-website-hacked.html
Mzekandaba, S. (2019, July 23). SASSA web site remains down after hack. ITWeb. https://
www.itweb.co.za/content/rxP3jqBpVJ27A2ye
Ngqakamba, S. (2021, September 9). Justice department’s IT system brought down in ransomware attack. News24. https://www.news24.com/news24/southafrica/news/justice-departments-it-system-brought-down-in-ransomware-attack-20210909
Rawlins, L. K. (2017, June 28). Hackers again prove their global power. ITWeb. https://www.
itweb.co.za/content/nLPp6VMrdbzvDKQz
Republic of South Africa (RSA). (2013). Protection of Personal Information Act (POPIA)
4 of 2013.
Sabillon, R., Cano, J., Cavaller, V., & Serra, J. (2016). Cybercrime and cybercriminals: A comprehensive study. International Journal of Computer Networks and Communications
Security, 4(6), 165–176.
Slabbert, A., & Peyper, L. (2021, August 1). Transnet attack is cyber warfare. City Press. https://
www.news24.com/citypress/business/transnet-attack-is-cyber-warfare-20210801
Trautman, L. J., & Ormerod, P. (2019). Wannacry, ransomware, and the emerging threat to
corporations. Tennessee Law Review, 86(503), 504–556.
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3238293
Trend Micro. (2017). Ransomware: Past, present, and future. https://documents.trendmicro.
com/assets/wp/wp-ransomware-past-present-and-future.pdf
Van Heerden, R. P., Irwin, B., Burke, I. D., & Leenen, L. (2012). A computer network attack taxonomy and ontology. International Journal of Cyber Warfare and Terrorism
(IJCWT), 2(3), 12–25. https://doi.org/10.4018/ijcwt.2012070102
Van Heerden, R. P., Von Soms, S., & Mooi, R. (2016). Classification of cyber attacks in South
Africa. In IEEE (Ed.), 2016 IST-Africa Week Conference (pp. 1–16).
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISTAFRICA.2016.7530663
Van Niekerk, B. (2017). An analysis of cyber-incidents in South Africa. The African Journal of
Information and Communication (AJIC), 20, 113–132.
https://doi.org/10.23962/10539/23573
Vermeulen, J. (2016, February 12). Massive number of South African websites hacked by Anonymous. MyBroadband. https://mybroadband.co.za/news/security/155040-massive-number-of-south-african-websites-hacked-by-anonymous.html
AJIC Issue 28, 2021 21
The Cyber Threat Landscape of South Africa: A 10-Year Review
Vermeulen, J. (2019, November 25). Massive DDoS attacks – South African internet providers crippled. MyBroadband. https://mybroadband.co.za/news/internet/329539-massive-ddos-attacks-south-african-internet-providers-crippled.html
Vermeulen, J. (2020a, May 27). Data leak on UIF COVID-19 relief scheme website. MyBroadband. https://mybroadband.co.za/news/cloud-hosting/353473-data-leak-onuif-covid-19-relief-scheme-website.html
Vermeulen, J. (2020b, October 1). Ransomware group claims hack on Office of the Chief
Justice. MyBroadband. https://mybroadband.co.za/news/security/369503-ransomware-group-claims-hack-on-office-of-the-chief-justice.html
Vermeulen, J. (2020c, November 7). Ransomware group releases data after attack
on Office of the Chief Justice. MyBroadband. https://mybroadband.co.za/
news/security/374310-ransomware-group-releases-data-after-attack-on-office-of-the-chief-justice.html
Willett, M. (2021). Lessons of the SolarWinds hack. Survival, 63(2), 7–26.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00396338.2021.1906001
Wyatt, M. (2021, March 16). Responding to the Microsoft Exchange Hack. Wall Street
Journal Pro Cybersecurity Research. 

Competitive Cyber-Insurance
and Internet Security
Nikhil Shetty, Galina Schwartz, Mark Felegyhazi, and Jean Walrand
Abstract This paper investigates how competitive cyber-insurers affect network security and welfare of the networked society. In our model, a user’s probability to
incur damage (from being attacked) depends on both his security and the network
security, with the latter taken by individual users as given. First, we consider cyberinsurers who cannot observe (and thus, affect) individual user security. This asymmetric information causes moral hazard. Then, for most parameters, no equilibrium
exists: the insurance market is missing. Even if an equilibrium exists, the insurance contract covers only a minor fraction of the damage; network security worsens
relative to the no-insurance equilibrium. Second, we consider insurers with perfect information about their users’ security. Here, user security is perfectly enforceable (zero cost); each insurance contract stipulates the required user security. The
unique equilibrium contract covers the entire user damage. Still, for most parameters, network security worsens relative to the no-insurance equilibrium. Although
cyber-insurance improves user welfare, in general, competitive cyber-insurers fail
to improve network security.
Nikhil Shetty
UC Berkeley, Berkeley-94720, e-mail: nikhils@eecs.berkeley.edu
Galina Schwartz
UC Berkeley, Berkeley-94720, e-mail: schwartz@eecs.berkeley.edu
Mark Felegyhazi
ICSI, Berkeley-94704, e-mail: mark@icsi.berkeley.edu
Jean Walrand
UC Berkeley, Berkeley-94720, e-mail: wlr@eecs.berkeley.edu
1
2 Nikhil Shetty, Galina Schwartz, Mark Felegyhazi, and Jean Walrand
1 Introduction
In this paper,1 we propose a model to study the effects of cyber insurance on user security and their welfare. Our model highlights how network externalities combined
with information asymmetry lead to a missing market for cyber insurance.
The Internet serves as a ubiquitous communication platform for both individuals and businesses. Thus, an increasing amount of wealth is accessible online, and
cyber-crime is becoming one of the most lucrative criminal activities. Cyber-crime
is lucrative because network vulnerabilities are easy to exploit and persecution of
cyber-criminals is plagued by enforcement problems. First, and importantly, criminals are relying on the anonymity of the Internet protocols to disguise their traces.
Second, global Internet connectivity makes it difficult for law enforcement authorities to identify the origin of the attacks. Exploiting national differences in legal systems, criminals often operate safely from countries with the weakest legislations and
enforcement. Third, criminals quickly adapt their attack strategies as new defenses
are developed; thus, cyber-crime evolves to minimize the chance of persecution. Altogether, this situation results in formation of highly professional, mafia-style cybercrime establishments, which are rapidly expanding, see [2].
Technology-based defense and enforcement solutions are available, but there is a
consensus among security researchers [2] that the existing security problems cannot
be solved by technological means alone. We concur that these security problems
primarily result from misaligned incentives of the networked parties with respect to
their security. Existing research [4, 7, 16, 19, 18] indicates that risk management in
general and cyber-insurance in particular are potentially valuable tools for security
management. Still, at present, risk management capabilities are virtually nonexistent
in the network [2].
We model the effects of informational asymmetries in the presence of network
externalities, and study their consequences for network security incentives. We believe that these features of the environment induce socially suboptimal network
security, and complicate the management of security risks. We build on the seminal ideas of Akerlof [1], Rothschild and Stiglitz [17] and others,2 which we combine with the ideas of interdependent security originated by Heal-Kunreuther [14],
Gordon-Loeb [8] and Hausken [11].3
In our model, all users are identical, meaning that their wealth is identical and
they suffer identical damage if successfully attacked. The user’s probability of being
attacked depends on both the user security level and the network security level,
which individual users take as given. Thus, we have an externality. Indeed, due to
this externality, individually optimal user security level is lower than the socially
optimal one.
1 This work was funded in part by the National Science Foundation under grant NSF-0433702.
Any opinions, findings, conclusions, and recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding source.
2 See [20] for the literature review.
3 See also [7, 9, 21, 5, 10, 3, 6, 13, 12]. This list is by no means exhaustive.
Competitive Cyber-Insurance and Internet Security 3
Our setting emphasizes that interdependent security is a focal feature, which
shapes the incentives for Internet security. Although security interdependence is
present in other contexts (such as terrorist attacks [15]), network security is especially prone to these effects because everyone is interlinked.
First, we investigate the effects of information asymmetry in the presence of network effects. Though our model allows to study both moral hazard (when insurers
are not aware of user security levels) and adverse selection (when insurers cannot
distinguish different user types), in this paper, we address only moral hazard. We
demonstrate that for a wide range of parameters, insurance market fails to exist, i.e.,
we observe a missing market.
Next, we assume no information asymmetry between the insurers and the insured
(users). We demonstrate that user utility is higher with insurance, but the network
security level is not necessarily higher. On reverse, in many cases network security
worsens with insurers. Indeed, insurers only manage risks, but they do not necessarily reduce them.
Our homogeneity assumption is simplistic, and does not hold in the actual Internet. But, adding user and insurer heterogeneity to our setting only adds more informational asymmetries. Then, the lemon problem becomes likely, which itself could
cause missing markets [1]. Thus, with heterogeneity, one expects adverse selection
problems, which would also contribute to missing markets.
We make two main contributions to the literature. First, we observe that even
with no heterogeneity (of users and insurers), information asymmetries complicate
the formation of viable cyber-insurance markets. Second, we demonstrate that even
in the absence of informational asymmetries, competitive cyber-insurers fail to improve network security. The significant implication is that in the existing network
environment, cyber-insurance markets cannot serve as a catalyst for improvement
of network security.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we propose a base model, derive
its Nash equilibrium, and compare it with socially optimal allocation. In Section 3,
we add competitive insurers to our base model, analyze the equilibrium with insurers. We consider two cases: when individual security levels are non-contractible and
when insurers include the requirement about individual security level into the contract. In Section 4, we summarize our findings and conclude. The technical details
are relegated to Appendix.
2 Model
In this section, we present our base model, which highlights the interdependence
of user and network security. We consider a network populated by identical users.
Each user i has two choice variables: the convenience level ai > 0 of his network
activity, and his security level si ∈ [0,1]. The convenience level ai can be, for example, characterized by the number of applications utilized by the user, such as emails,
Web, IM, P2P, etc. If there are no security problems, the user derives utility from
4 Nikhil Shetty, Galina Schwartz, Mark Felegyhazi, and Jean Walrand
his wealth and from network usage. We assume that both these components of user
utility Ui are additively separable:
Ui = K1 · f(W) +K2 · g(ai)−K3 · ai,
where K1, K2 and K3 are positive constants, and W > 0 denotes user’s wealth. We
assume that the functions f and g are increasing and concave, reflecting that user
wealth W and convenience level ai have a positive but decreasing marginal benefit
for the user. To increase his convenience level, user incurs a linear cost (cost of
effort).
In the presence of network attacks, we assume that, if the attack on the user is
successful, the user incurs a monetary damage D ∈ (0,W). Let pi be the probability that user i suffers such an attack. This probability depends on two factors: the
network security level ¯s ∈ [0,1], which determines the probability of a user being
attacked, and the user security level si, which determines the probability of success
of such an attack. This justifies our expression for pi:
pi = (1−si)·(1−s¯) = vi · v¯, (1)
where for mathematical convenience, we introduce the user vulnerability level vi =
1 − si and the network vulnerability level ¯v = 1 − s¯. Further, assume that ¯s is equal
to the average security levels of its users:
s¯=
∑ i=1,...N
si
N , (2)
and we let the number of users N be large enough so that a single user has a negligible effect on the network security level. Thus, each user takes the network security
level as a given parameter.
We assume that user’s choice of a higher security requires a higher user cost (in
terms of effort), and this cost is proportional to the convenience level. Again, assuming additive separability, we express the expected utility of user i in the presence of
network insecurity as:
E[Ui] = K1 {(1− pi)· f(W) + pi · f(W −D)}+K2 · g(ai)−K3 · ai ·(h(si)+1), (3)
where the security cost function, h(·) is increasing and convex (h′
,h′′ > 0) with
h(0) = 0 corresponding to zero security level and h(1) = ∞, corresponding to a
hypothetical “perfectly secure” system. Thus, it becomes increasingly costly to improve the security level at a higher level of security.
For simplicity, we let f(x) = g(x) = √x and h(x) = √
1
1−x −1 and solve the problem for these specific functions. Then, (3) becomes:
E[Ui] = K1
!
(1− pi)
√
W + pi
√
W −D
"
+K2
√ai −K3ai
1
√vi
). (4)
Competitive Cyber-Insurance and Internet Security 5
Since we assume that the convenience level of user i’s network usage ai is not affected even when this user is attacked, this model may be more suitable for attacks
like phishing, eavesdropping, etc. rather than for attacks like denial-of-service.
2.1 Analysis
We start by deriving the optimal convenience level a∗
i by taking the partial derivative
of (4) with respect to ai:
∂E[Ui]
∂ai
= K2
1
2
1
√ai
−K3
1
√vi
,
from which a∗
i is:
a∗
i = 1
4
K2
2
K2
3
vi. (5)
Thus, the user’s a∗
i depends only on her choice of vi, but not on network vulnerability
level ¯v. Next, we substitute (5) in (4) to obtain:
E[Ui] = 1
4
K2
2
K3
[
√vi −vivK¯ (
√
W − √
W −D) +K
√
W] (6)
where K = 4K1K3
K2
2
. To simplify, we let 1
4
K2
2
K3 = 1, and obtain a normalized utility:
E[Ui] = √vi −vivK¯ (
√
W − √
W −D) +K
√
W. (7)
The constant K characterizes how users value their wealth relative to the utility from
the network.
2.1.1 Nash Equilibrium
To find the user i’s best response v∗
i (v¯) to a given network vulnerability ¯v, we optimize (7) with respect to vi (subject to vi ≤ 1) and express v∗
i (v¯) as
v∗
i (v¯) = min# 1
[2 ¯vK(
√
W − √
W −D)]2 ,1
$
. (8)
From (8), v∗
i (v¯) is identical for all users, from which any Nash equilibrium is symmetric, and let v∗
i (v¯) = v∗
j(v¯) = v∗ for any users i and j. Then, from (2), we have
v¯ = v∗ and hence,
v∗ = min# 1
[2v∗K(
√
W − √
W −D)]2 ,1
$
,
6 Nikhil Shetty, Galina Schwartz, Mark Felegyhazi, and Jean Walrand
from which we obtain Nash equilibrium vulnerability v∗:
v∗ = 1−s
∗ = min# 1
[2K(
√
W − √
W −D)]2/3 ,1
$
. (9)
From (9), v∗ < 1 only if √
W − √W −D > 1
2K and thus, all else equal, users invest
in security only when their damage D or K become sufficiently high, or when user
wealth W is low.
2.1.2 Social Optimum
We assume that a social planner unilaterally dictates user vulnerability, vi = v, and
maximizes cumulative utility of the users. Since users are identical, this maximization is identical to a representative user utility maximization with ¯v = v. From (7),
the representative user utility is:
E[U] = √v−v2
K(
√
W − √
W −D) +K
√
W. (10)
Maximizing (10), subject to v ≤ 1, we obtain the socially optimal vulnerability vsoc
as:
vsoc = 1−s
soc = min# 1
[4K(
√
W − √
W −D)]2/3 ,1
$
. (11)
Thus, vsoc < 1 only if (
√
W −√W −D) > 1
4K . As expected, vsoc ≤ v∗, which allows
us to formulate the following proposition:
Proposition 1. When the socially optimal security level is strictly positive, it is
strictly higher than the individually optimal one: ssoc > s∗. Users are strictly better
off in the social optimum than in the Nash equilibrium.
In the next section, we extend this model to the presence of competitive insurers.
We will investigate how insurer information about user security level (or lack of
such information) impacts network security.
3 Insurance Model
We define market equilibrium similar to the model of Rothschild and Stiglitz [17],
who pioneered the examination of equilibria in insurance markets with information
asymmetries. We assume that each insurer offers a single insurance contract in a
class of admissible contracts, or does nothing. A Nash equilibrium is defined as a
set of admissible contracts such that: i) all contracts result in a non-negative utility
for the insurers, ii) taking as given the contracts offered by incumbent insurers (those
offering contracts), there is no additional contract which an entrant-insurer (one not
offering a contract) can offer and make a strictly positive profit and iii) taking as
Competitive Cyber-Insurance and Internet Security 7
given the set of contracts offered by other incumbent insurers, no incumbent can
increase its profits by altering his offered contract. The literature referred to such
contracts as “competitive”, because entry and exit are free, and because no barrier
to entry or scale economies are present.
We consider risk neutral insurers who compete with each other. Let ρ be the
premium charged to a user and L > 0 be his loss covered by the insurer. We do not
consider L < 0 because it is unrealistic to expect a fine when a user suffers a damage.
Let v and ¯v be the user and network vulnerability. Then, we denote the respective
user utility by U(v,v¯,ρ,L), and from (7) and (1), we have:
U(v,v¯,ρ,L) = √v+vvK¯ %W −D+L−ρ + (1−vv¯)K
%W −ρ. (12)
If v,ρ,L are identical for all users, then v = v¯, and we obtain
U(v,v,ρ,L) = √v+v2
K
%W −D+L−ρ + (1−v2
)K
%W −ρ. (13)
Additionally, we will assume that insurers take network security ¯v as given. This
assumption reflects that individual insurers cannot affect v¯ on their own.
3.1 Insurance with Non-Contractible Security
In this section, we assume that it is impossible (or too costly) for the insurers to
monitor the users’ security level. Indeed, even if v is included in the contract and
user compliance is observable by the insurer, but unverifiable in court (due to the
prohibitively high costs), the insurer would effectively operate as if no requirement
on v is imposed. Thus, we consider the contracts of the form (ρ,L) only. In addition, we will assume that contracts stipulate that purchase of extra coverage from
outside parties is prohibited. Further, since the users are homogeneous, we will restrict our attention to a symmetric equilibrium, i.e., the equilibria with identical user
actions. Henceforth, we will use the superscript ‡ to distinguish the values in such
an equilibrium.
Let user i purchase a contract (ρ,L). Then, he will choose his vulnerability vi to
maximize his utility (taking ¯v as given):
E [Ui] = √vi −vivK¯ (
%W −ρ −%W −D+L−ρ) +K
%W −ρ. (14)
Any contract which improves user utility U(v,v¯,ρ,L) is preferred by users to any
other contract. Hence, in equilibrium, there should exist no such deviating contract
that makes non-negative profits for an insurer. Further, the equilibrium contract is
constrained by user participation - a user must prefer to buy insurance, assuming
that others already did so, to staying without insurance. In Appendix, we show that
this participation constraint never binds, and, in equilibrium, due to competition,
insurers’ profits are zero: ρ‡ = &
v‡
'2
L‡. Further, we demonstrate that, in any equilibrium:
8 Nikhil Shetty, Galina Schwartz, Mark Felegyhazi, and Jean Walrand
L‡ < D,
and from user optimization, we have:
v‡ = 1
(
2K(
%W −ρ‡ −%W −D+ (L‡ −ρ‡)
)2/3 . (15)
Comparing (15) with (9), we infer that in any equilibrium:
v‡ > v∗
. (16)
Although the availability of insurance may allow users to reach a higher utility,
the network security is strictly lower with insurance. In Appendix, we prove the
following proposition:
Proposition 2. If D < 8
9W, any insurance contract with security levels unobservable
by the insurers strictly decreases the utility of the users. Hence, no insurance is
offered and no insurance market exists. If D > 8
9W, there could exist an equilibrium
in which all users purchase insurance contract (ρ‡,L‡). This insurance improves
users’ utility relative to the no insurance case, but decreases their security (i.e.,
v‡ > v∗ is always true).
From Proposition 2, the presence of insurers negatively affects network security.
Indeed, here, security is chosen by the users, and insured users have meager incentives to secure themselves. This is a typical manifestation of a moral hazard. In this
case, the expected per user loss due to network insecurity increases by:
∆‡ = *
(v‡)
2 −(v∗)
2+
D.
3.2 Insurance with Contractible Security
In this section, we assume that insurers can enforce a desired security level for the
insured users at zero cost. Thus, we permit contracts (v,ρ,L) to specify a user’s
required vulnerability v. In reality, this may be achieved, for example, by deploying
tamper-proof security software that monitors and enforces user security.
3.2.1 Social Planner
Next, we derive the social planner choice of contract when security is contractible.
Let (v†,ρ†,L†)soc be the contract chosen by a social planner. The social planner
objective is to maximize the user utility, subject to the constraint of non-negative
profits:
Competitive Cyber-Insurance and Internet Security 9
maxρ,v,L U(v,v,ρ,L)
s.t. v2L ≤ ρ and v ≤ 1.
In Appendix, we solve this optimization problem, and derive the following social
planner’s equilibrium:
ρ†soc = (v†soc)
2L†soc,
and full coverage will be offered since users prefer it:
L†soc = D.
If the equilibrium vulnerability v†soc < 1, then it must be a solution of:
v3
W −v2D = 1
(2KD)2 , (17)
which we have proven to be unique.
3.2.2 Competitive Insurers
Any insurance contract(v,ρ,L) that achieves a higher user utility U(v,v¯,ρ,L) would
be preferred to other contracts. In equilibrium, there should exist no contract that
permits non-negative insurer profits and yields a higher user utility than the equilibrium contract does. In addition, we modify the definition of insurance market
equilibrium in Section 3 and assume that no single insurer affects the network vulnerability. This assumption is realistic since competitive insurers lack market power.
The participation constraint must hold in equilibrium, i.e., insured users must obtain at least the same utility with insurance than by staying uninsured. In Appendix,
we show that only a unique contract can exist in equilibrium. Let this equilibrium
contract be denoted by (v†,ρ†,L†).
In Appendix, we demonstrate that, in equilibrium, insurers make zero profits and
offer full coverage since users prefer it.
ρ† = (v†)
2L†, and L† = D.
If the equilibrium vulnerability v† < 1, then it must be a solution of:
v3
W −v2D = 1
(KD)2 , (18)
which we have proven to be unique. From (17) and (18), we conclude that the vulnerability in the competitive insurer equilibrium is higher than that in the social
optimum: v† > v†soc. In Appendix, we also derive the condition for v† < v∗. We
find that equilibrium vulnerability only improves (relative to the Nash equilibrium
without insurance) when D
W is lower than some critical value. This critical value is
achieved only when v∗ is close to 1, i.e., when user security is close to zero in the
10 Nikhil Shetty, Galina Schwartz, Mark Felegyhazi, and Jean Walrand
no-insurance Nash equilibrium. Thus, for a large range of parameters, v† > v∗, i.e.,
the presence of insurance leads to a higher vulnerability.
This permits us to formulate the following proposition:
Proposition 3. With insurers present, and security levels contractible, in any equilibrium, full coverage L† = D is offered. For most parameters, equilibrium network
security is lower than in the no-insurance equilibrium. Only when user security is
low in the no-insurance Nash equilibrium (i.e., v∗ close to 1), the presence of insurers improves network security.
From Proposition 3, with security levels observable by the insurers, the insurers’ presence allows to improve user welfare, but hardly improves network security.
When v† < v∗, the insurers’ presence reduces the per user expected loss from network insecurity by ∆†, where:
∆† = *
(v∗)
2 −(v†)
2+
D.
Else, the per user expected loss increases by
∆† = *
(v†)
2 −(v∗)
2+
D.
Figure 1(a) depicts the equilibrium security level of users (and hence the network
security level) as a function of the damage D while Figure 1(b) depicts the equilibrium utility of users as a function of D. The parameter values used are K = 1 and
W = 100.
0 20 40 60 80 100 0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
D
s vs D
No insurance NE
No insurance SO
Insurance − Competition
Insurance − Social planner
0 20 40 60 80 100
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
11
D
U vs D
No insurance NE
No insurance SO
Insurance − Competition
Insurance − Social Planner
(a) (b)
Fig. 1 (a) Security level and (b) utility of homogeneous users in equilibrium as a function of the
damage 0 < D < W. Here W = 1000 and K = 1.
Competitive Cyber-Insurance and Internet Security 11
4 Conclusion
In this paper, we investigate the effects of competitive cyber-insurers on network security and welfare. We highlight the impact of asymmetric information in the presence of network externalities and address the effects of interdependent security on
the market for cyber-risks. The existing literature attributes cyber-insurance a significant role in cyber-risk management; it especially emphasizes positive effects of
cyber-insurance market on security incentives. We find that, on reverse, the presence
of competitive cyber-insurers weakens user incentives to improve security.
First, we consider insurers who cannot observe (and thus, cannot contract) user
security; here, insurers observe the network security only. Then, the moral hazard
problem is present, i.e., with more insurance coverage, the users’ incentives to invest
in security become meager. In this case, for most parameters, the insurance market
collapses, i.e., no insurance is offered in equilibrium. Even if cyber-insurance exists,
it covers a minor fraction of damages only. Our findings are in line with the existing
Internet, where cyber-insurance is scantly observed.
Second, we consider insurers who observe (and thus, can contract) user security. Here, insurers’ contracts include user security level which insurers enforce at
zero cost, and thus, no moral hazard is present. Still, in general, competitive insurers fail to improve upon the security level of the no-insurance equilibrium. Though
insurance improves the utility for risk-averse users, it does not serve as an incentive
device for improving security practices. Indeed, insurance is a tool for risk management and redistribution, not necessarily a tool for risk reduction.
To sum up, we argue that a combination of network effects and information asymmetries leads to difficulties in formation of viable insurance markets for cyber risks.
Thus, our results dash the hopes for both, expectations of development of cyber
insurance markets under the current network environment, and for the beliefs that
such markets may serve as a catalyst for improvement of network security.
5 Appendix
Proof of Proposition 2
When the user vulnerability v is non-contractible, the contracts have the form (ρ,L),
and v is selfishly chosen by the users. Since our users are homogeneous, we will
restrict our attention to a symmetric equilibrium, i.e., user actions in equilibrium
are identical. Let (ρ⋄,L⋄) be such an equilibrium insurance contract and ¯v⋄ be the
resulting network vulnerability. First, we show that in any equilibrium L⋄ < D.
Assume the reverse and let (ρ⋄,L⋄ = D) be an equilibrium. In this case, it is
optimal for each user to choose v = 1. Hence, ¯v⋄ = 1 and ρ⋄ = D for non-negative
insurer profits. From (13), U(1,1,D,D) = U(1,1,0,0), which implies that the user
is indifferent between buying and not buying insurance. If the vulnerability in the
no-insurance Nash equilibrium v∗ < 1, then the user’s participation constraint does
12 Nikhil Shetty, Galina Schwartz, Mark Felegyhazi, and Jean Walrand
not hold: U(vi,1,0,0) > U(1,1,D,D) for some vi < 1. This is a contradiction since
user i is better off not purchasing such an insurance, and therefore L⋄ < D.
To determine the vulnerability that the insured user chooses selfishly, we differentiate his utility with respect to v, keeping ¯v fixed:
∂U(v,v¯
⋄,ρ⋄,L⋄)
∂v = 0,
and we have
v = 1
(2 ¯v⋄K(
√W −ρ −%WD +L−ρ))2
. (19)
where WD = W − D. In equilibrium, v = v¯
⋄ and from (19), we obtain (similar to
(9)):
v¯
⋄ = 1
(
2K(
√W −ρ⋄ −%WD + (L⋄ −ρ⋄)
)2/3 , (20)
Comparing (20) with (9), we infer that:
v∗ < v¯
⋄
, (21)
because
%W −ρ⋄ < √
W and ,
WD + (L⋄ −ρ⋄) ≥ √
WD.
Next, let us make sure that no user deviates and stays without insurance, that is the
participation constraint holds. For the uninsured user i, utility is maximized at
vi = 1
(v¯⋄)2
*
2K(
√
W − √
WD)
+2 . (22)
Comparing this with (9), we have
vi(v¯
⋄)
2 = (v∗)
3 ,
and from (21),
vi =
-v∗
v¯⋄
.2
v∗ < v∗,
and his maximum attainable utility is
Ui = √vi +viv¯
⋄
(
2K(
√
W −
√
WD)
)
+K
√
W
=
-v∗
v¯⋄
.√
v∗ +
-v∗
v¯⋄
.
(v∗)
2
(
2K(
√
W − √
WD)
)
+K
√
W < U∗. (23)
Note that U∗ = U(v∗,v∗,0,0). Hence, for (ρ⋄,L⋄) to be an equilibrium contract,
U(v⋄,v¯
⋄,ρ⋄,L⋄) > U(v∗,v∗,0,0) = U∗. Then, from (23),
Competitive Cyber-Insurance and Internet Security 13
Ui < U∗ < U(v⋄,v¯
⋄,ρ⋄
,L⋄),
and we infer that the participation constraint does not bind.
Next, we show that, if D < 8
9W, the only equilibrium contract is (0,0). Consider
a contract (ρ,L) and let ˜v be the vulnerability obtained from (20). Due to insurer
competition, in any equilibrium
ρ = v˜
2L. (24)
If not, an entrant insurer could design another contract that yields lower profits,
which users prefer since it maximizes their utility. The user utility is obtained by
substituting (20) in (12). Then, we have
U = K
%W −ρ +
1
(16K(
√W −ρ −%WD +L−ρ))1/3
. (25)
Using (24), we rewrite (25) as K
√
W −v˜2L+ 1
(16K(
√
W−v˜2L−
√W−D+L−v˜2L))1/3 .
Let ˙
v˜ denote ∂ v˜
∂L , and let W˜ D = WD + (L−ρ) and W˜ = W −ρ. Next, we demonstrate that ˙
v˜ > 0. From (20),
∂v˜
3
∂L = ∂
∂L
1
(2K(
√
W˜ − √
W˜ D))2
3 ˜v2 ˙
v˜ = −2
(2K(
√
W˜ − √
W˜ D))3
- 1
2
√
W˜
∂W˜
∂L − 1
2
√
W˜ D
∂W˜ D
∂L
.
= −2
(2K(
√
W˜ − √
W˜ D))3
-(−v˜
2 −2 ˜v˙
vL˜ )
2
√
W˜ − (1−v˜
2 −2 ˜v˙
vL˜ )
2
√
W˜ D
.
= 1
(2K(
√
W˜ − √
W˜ D))3
-(v˜
2 +2 ˜v˙
vL˜ )
√
W˜ + (1−v˜
2 −2 ˜v˙
vL˜ )
√
W˜ D
.
∴ ˙
v˜
-
3 ˜v2 +
2 ˜vL
(2K(
√
W˜ − √
W˜ D))3
/ 1
√
W˜ D − 1
√
W˜
0.
= 1
(2K(
√
W˜ − √
W˜ D))3
- v˜
2
√
W˜ + (1−v˜
2)
√
W˜ D
.
,
where the last step is obtained by moving all the terms involving ˙
v˜ to the LHS. The
RHS is obviously positive while the coefficient of ˙
v˜ on the LHS is also positive
(since W˜ > W˜ D) and ˙
v˜ > 0 is proven.
Next, we differentiate the utility w.r.t. L,
14 Nikhil Shetty, Galina Schwartz, Mark Felegyhazi, and Jean Walrand
∂U
∂L = K
2
√
W −v˜2L
(−v˜
2 −2 ˜v˙
vL˜ ) +
−1
3
(16K)1/3(
√
W −v˜2L− √
W −D+L−v˜2L)4/3 ×...
...-(−v˜
2 −2 ˜v˙
vL˜ )
2
√
W −v˜2L − ((1−v˜
2)−2 ˜v˙
vL˜ )
2
√
W −D+L−v˜2L
.
= K(−v˜
2 −2 ˜v˙
vL˜ )
2
√
W −v˜2L − Kv˜
2
3
-(−v˜
2 −2 ˜v˙
vL˜ )
2
√
W −v˜2L − ((1−v˜
2)−2 ˜v˙
vL˜ )
2
√
W −D+L−v˜2L
.
Collecting the terms and simplifying we obtain:
2
K
∂U
∂L = −v˜
2 √
W˜ − 2 ˜v ˙ √vL˜
W˜ + v˜
2
3
√
W˜ D − v˜
2
3
-
(−v˜
2−2 ˜v ˙
vL˜ )
√
W˜ − (−v˜
2−2 ˜v ˙
vL˜ )
√
W˜ D
.
= −v˜
2
-
√
1
W˜ − 1
3
√
W˜ D
.
− 2 ˜v ˙ √vL˜
W˜ + v˜
2(v˜
2+2 ˜v ˙
vL˜ )
3
-
√
1
W˜ − √
1
W˜ D
.
= −v˜
2
-
3
√
W˜ D−
√
W˜
3
√
W˜
√
W˜ D
.
− 2 ˜v ˙ √vL˜
W˜ + v˜
2(v˜
2+2 ˜v ˙
vL˜ )
3
- √
W˜ D−
√
W˜ √
W˜
√
W˜ D
.
(26)
Since 2 ˜v ˙
vL˜ > 0 and √
W˜ D < √
W˜ , the last two terms of (26) are strictly negative
for any L ≥ 0.
Let D < 8
9W. Then, W < 9(W −D), and taking the square root we obtain:
3
√
WD − √
W > 0, (27)
and since W˜ D = WD + (L‡ −ρ‡) > WD and W˜ = W −ρ < W from (27) we have:
3
%
W˜ D −
%
W˜ > 3
√
WD − √
W > 0.
Hence, we have proven that if D < 8
9W, 3√
W˜ D − √
W˜ > 0. In this case, the first
term of (26) is negative as well, which leads to:
2
K
∂U
∂L < 0.
Thus, we have proven that if D < 8
9W, utility is maximized at L = 0. Thus, the only
equilibrium insurance contract is (0,0).
If D > 8
9W, there could exist an insurance contract, which improves user utility
relative to U∗. See Fig. 2(a) for an example which shows how U(ρ,L) is maximized
at L > 0, and users may reach a higher utility with insurance.
Proof of Proposition 3
First, we notice that in any equilibrium, L† = D and insurer profit is zero due to
competition, as in Proposition 2. Hence, we restrict our analysis to full coverage
only.
Competitive Cyber-Insurance and Internet Security 15
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
10.184
10.186
10.188
10.19
10.192
10.194
U(ρ,L) vs L
L
0 200 400 600 800 1000 0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
W
δ = D/W
δ
∗
δ
1
(a) (b)
Fig. 2 (a) Unobservable case: U vs L (L ∈ [0,20], K = 1, W = 100, D = 99) and (b) Observable
case: δ† and δ1 vs W.
Second, in any equilibrium, user utility from deviation to no-insurance gives user
a strictly lower utility. Indeed, assume the reverse. Suppose a user can deviate to vi
with no insurance and his utility without insurance is equal to his utility with insurance, i.e., U(vi,v†,0,0) ≥U(v†,v†,v†2D,D). Consider an entrant insurer who offers
him a contract (vi,viv†D,D) that offers non-zero coverage at actuarially fair price.
By adopting this contract, the user improves his utility, which conflicts our assumption about the equilibrium. Therefore, the utility from deviation must be strictly
lower and all users strictly prefer to buy insurance.
Lastly, we prove that in any equilibrium, all user contracts are identical. Assume
the reverse, and let (v1,v1vD¯ ,D) and (v2,v2vD¯ ,D) be two contracts in equilibrium,
with non-zero fraction of users buying each contract. Without loss of generality, we
let v1 < v2, and thus v1 < v¯ < v2. From Section 3.2.2, we assume that insurers take
v¯ as given. Consider the contract (v˜,v˜vD¯ ,D) offered by an entrant insurer. Suppose
this contract maximizes U(v˜,v˜vD¯ ,D):
∂
∂v˜
&√
v˜+K
√
W −v˜vD¯ '
= 0.
∂
∂v˜
&√
v˜+K
√
W −v˜vD¯ '
= 0
1
2
√v˜
− KvD¯
2
√
W −v˜vD¯ = 0
√W −v˜vD¯ √v˜ = KvD¯ (28)
From (28), there is a unique solution for ˜v since the LHS is monotone decreasing. Hence, ˜v ̸= v1 and ˜v ̸= v2 since if either were true, then U(v1,v1vD¯ ,D) ̸=
U(v2,v2vD¯ ,D), which is a contradiction. Thus, U(v˜,v˜vD¯ ,D) > U(v1,v1vD¯ ,D) =
U(v2,v2vD¯ ,D) and insured users will be willing to deviate to this new contract.
16 Nikhil Shetty, Galina Schwartz, Mark Felegyhazi, and Jean Walrand
Thus, we have shown that two different contracts cannot be present in equilibrium,
and we have proven that in any equilibrium, all users buy an identical contract.
Next, we prove that the equilibrium is unique. From (28), in any equilibrium,
v˜ = v¯ = v†, and we have
√
W −v†2D
√
v† = Kv†D
%
W −v†2D = Kv†
√
v†D
v†3
W −v†2D = 1
(KD)2 . (29)
From (29), there is a unique solution for the equilibrium v†, since the LHS is monotone decreasing. Thus, the equilibrium is unique.
Next, we determine how this unique v† compares to v∗. When both v† and v∗ < 1,
we can equate v3 from (9) and (29) to get
1
[2K(
√
W − √
W −D)]2 = W −v2D
(KD)2
D2
[2(
√
W − √
W −D)]2 = W −v2D
W
D − D
[2(
√
W − √
W −D)]2 = v2
Using (9) for v∗ < 1 and denoting D
W by δ, we have
W
D − D
[2(
√
W − √
W −D)]2 = 1
[2K(
√
W − √
W −D)]4/3
1
D
W
−
D
W
[2(1−
,
1− D
W )]2
= 1
[2K
√
W(1−
,
1− D
W )]4/3
1
δ − δ
[2(1− √
1−δ)]2 = 1
[2K
√
W(1− √
1−δ)]4/3 .
Thus, we obtain an equation for δ:
(1−
%
1−δ)
1/3
-(1− √
1−δ)
δ − δ
4(1− √
1−δ)
.
= 1
[2K
√
W]
4/3
(1−
%1−δ)
1/3
- 1
(1+ √
1−δ)
− (1+ √
1−δ)
4
.
= 1
[2K
√
W]
4/3 (30)
We observe that the LHS is an increasing function of δ, which gives us a unique
solution δ∗ of (30). For δ ≤ δ∗, we have v† ≤ v∗, i.e., insurance improves the security level in the no-insurance Nash equilibrium. From (9), we know that when δ is
Competitive Cyber-Insurance and Internet Security 17
low, v∗ is high. This implies that insurance improves upon the no-insurance security
level only when v∗ is high. Let δ1 denote the δ at which v∗ = 1. Fig. 2 (b) depicts
δ1 and δ∗ as a function of the wealth W (K = 1).
Social Planner
The contract offered by a social planner must be a solution to the following optimization problem:
maxv,ρ,L U(v,v,ρ,L)
s.t. v2L ≤ ρ and v ≤ 1.
Next, we write the Lagrangian:
LAN = U(v,v,ρ,L)−λ1(v2
L−ρ)−λ2(v−1)
Taking the derivatives of LAN w.r.t. v, L and ρ and equating to 0 gives us the following equations.
∂LAN
∂v = ∂U(v,v,ρ,L)
∂v −2λ1vL−λ2 = 0
( 1
2
√v −2vK(
%W −ρ −%W −D+L−ρ))−2λ1vL−λ2 = 0 (31)
∂LAN
∂L = ∂U(v,v,ρ,L)
∂L −λ1v2 = 0
Kv2
2
√W −D+L−ρ −λ1v2 = 0 (32)
∂LAN
∂ ρ = ∂U(v,v,ρ,L)
∂ ρ +λ1 = 0
− Kv2
2
√W −D+L−ρ − K(1−v2)
2
√W −ρ
+λ1 = 0 (33)
Further, from complementary slackness, we have
λ1(v2L−ρ) = 0, (34)
and λ2(v−1) = 0 (35)
Note that v ̸= 0, since that would require infinite security costs for the users. From
(32), we conclude that λ1 > 0 and thus the constraint (34) binds:
v2L = ρ (36)
18 Nikhil Shetty, Galina Schwartz, Mark Felegyhazi, and Jean Walrand
Equating λ1 from (32) and (33), we obtain:
K
2
√W −D+L−ρ = Kv2
2
√W −D+L−ρ
+
K(1−v2)
2
√W −ρ
Canceling out K/2 > 0, we obtain:
1
√W −D+L−ρ = v2
√W −D+L−ρ
+ (1−v2)
√W −ρ
,
or (1−v2)
√W −D+L−ρ = (1−v2)
√W −ρ
,
which leads to:
L = D if v < 1. (37)
Now, if v < 1, we can substitute (36) and (37) into (32) to get λ1 = K
2
√W−v2D
.
Substituting this value of λ1, λ2 = 0 (since v < 1) and (37) into (31), we get
1
2
√v = K
√
W −v2D
vD
v3
W −v2D = 1
(2KD)2 (38)
Thus, if v < 1, it is the unique solution to (38) (since the LHS is monotone increasing).
References
1. Akerlof, G.A.: The market for ’lemons’: Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 84(3), 488–500 (1970). URL
http://ideas.repec.org/a/tpr/qjecon/v84y1970i3p488-500.html
2. Anderson, R., B ¨oehme, R., Clayton, R., Moore, T.: Security economics and european policy.
In: Proceedings of WEIS’08. Hanover, USA (2008)
3. Baer, W.S., Parkinson, A.: Cyberinsurance in it security management. IEEE Security and
Privacy 5(3), 50–56 (2007). DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2007.57
4. B ¨ohme, R.: Cyber-insurance revisited. In: Proceedings of WEIS’05. Cambridge, USA (2005)
5. Bolot, J., Lelarge, M.: A new perspective on internet security using insurance. INFOCOM
2008. The 27th Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE pp. 1948–1956 (2008). DOI
10.1109/INFOCOM.2008.259
6. Fisk, M.: Causes and remedies for social acceptance of network insecurity. In: Proceedings of
WEIS’02. Berkeley, USA (2002)
7. Gordon, L.A., Loeb, M., Sohail, T.: A framework for using insurance for cyber-risk management. Communications of the ACM 46(3), 81–85 (2003)
8. Gordon, L.A., Loeb, M.P.: The economics of information security investment. ACM Trans.
Inf. Syst. Secur. 5(4), 438–457 (2002). DOI http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/581271.581274
9. Grossklags, J., Christin, N., Chuang, J.: Secure or insure?: a game-theoretic analysis of
information security games. In: WWW ’08: Proceeding of the 17th international con-
Competitive Cyber-Insurance and Internet Security 19
ference on World Wide Web, pp. 209–218. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2008). DOI
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1367497.1367526
10. H. Ogut, N.M., Raghunathan, S.: Cyber insurance and it security investment: Impact of interdependent risk. In: Proceedings of WEIS’05. Cambridge, USA (2005)
11. Hausken, K.: Returns to information security investment: The effect of alternative information
security breach functions on optimal investment and sensitivity to vulnerability. Information
Systems Frontiers 8(5), 338–349 (2006). DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10796-006-9011-6
12. Hofmann, A.: Internalizing externalities of loss prevention through insurance monopoly: an
analysis of interdependent risks. Geneva Risk and Insurance Review 32(1), 91–111 (2007)
13. Honeyman, P., Schwartz, G., Assche, A.V.: Interdependence of reliability and security. In:
Proceedings of WEIS’07. Pittsburg, PA (2007)
14. Kunreuther, H., Heal, G.: Interdependent security. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 26(2-3),
231–49 (2003). URL http://ideas.repec.org/a/kap/jrisku/v26y2003i2-3p231-49.html
15. Kunreuther, H.C., Michel-Kerjan, E.O.: Evaluating the effectiveness of terrorism risk financing solutions. NBER Working Papers 13359, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc
(2007). URL http://ideas.repec.org/p/nbr/nberwo/13359.html
16. Majuca, R.P., Yurcik, W., Kesan, J.P.: The evolution of cyberinsurance. Tech. Rep.
CR/0601020, ACM Computing Research Repository (2006)
17. Rothschild, M., Stiglitz, J.E.: Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: An essay on the
economics of imperfect information. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 90(4), 630–49
(1976). URL http://ideas.repec.org/a/tpr/qjecon/v90y1976i4p630-49.html
18. Schechter, S.E.: Computer security strength and risk: a quantitative approach. Ph.D. thesis,
Cambridge, MA, USA (2004). Adviser-Smith,, Michael D.
19. Soohoo, K.: How much is enough? a risk-management approach to computer security. Ph.D.
thesis, Stanford University
20. Stiglitz, J.E.: Information and the change in the paradigm in economics. American Economic
Review 92(3), 460–501 (2002). URL http://ideas.repec.org/a/aea/aecrev/v92y2002i3p460-
501.html
21. Varian, H.: System reliability and free riding. In: Workshop on the Economics of Information
Security, WEIS 2002. Cambridge, USA (2002)
View publication stats

Exploring SME cybersecurity practices in developing countries
Salah Kabanda, Maureen Tanner, and Cameron Kent
Department of Information Systems, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa
ABSTRACT
The continued use of information technology systems by small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in developing countries has the potential to bring
significant benefits but, at the same time, expose them to online cybersecurity threats. Addressing these threats is, therefore, of paramount importance for developing countries, not only because SMEs are seen as the
vehicle for employment and job creation, but because research on SMEs
and cybersecurity in this context is limited. This study is a contribution
toward addressing this gap.
The purpose of this study is, therefore, to explore SME cybersecurity
practices and the challenges they face in developing countries. The goal is
to sensitize practitioners and government institutions about the challenges
and practices faced by SMEs, so that the various parties can work collaboratively in providing context-specific solutions to address these challenges
and improve current cybersecurity practices. The study follows a qualitative
enquiry approach to solicit information from three South African SMEs that
had implemented cybersecurity practices. The findings show that an SME’s
perception of cybersecurity is constrained by internal factors of budget,
management support, and attitudes. Further findings show that SMEs’
cybersecurity practices are affected by the landscape of cybersecurity, as
well as institutional pressures.
KEYWORDS
Small and medium
enterprises (SMEs);
cybersecurity; developing
countries; institutional
pressure; South Africa
Introduction
Developing countries, specifically those in Africa, have traditionally lagged developed countries in
adoption and use of the Internet. However, recent reports from the International
Telecommunication Union (ITU) (2016) show that “developing countries now account for the
vast majority of Internet users, with 2.5 billion users compared with one billion in developed
countries.” These developments, though, should be put in context of the Internet penetration
rates, which is 81% in developed countries, compared with 40% in developing countries and 15%
in the least-developed countries (ITU 2016). Thus, despite poor Internet penetration, developing
countries are changing the Internet usage landscape by becoming one of the key players. They are
taking advantage of the multitude of benefits that the Internet provides. For example, organizations
can now forge international relationships with new vendors (to lower costs) and new customers (to
increase sales), thereby decreasing communication costs, and resulting in higher efficiency and
quicker transaction processing.
Despite these benefits, organizations also face many challenges when using the Internet––for
example, the threat from attackers, spammers, and criminal corporations. This danger is more real
for developing countries and more so for the SMEs who tend to have limited resources to acquire
and implement cybersecurity mechanisms in their organizations (Sulayman et al. 2012) and do not
CONTACT Salah Kabanda salah.kabanda@uct.ac.za Department of Information Systems, University of Cape Town, Tel:
+27216504253.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in the article can be found online at www.tandfonline.com/hoce.
© 2018 Taylor & Francis
JOURNAL OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPUTING AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
2018, VOL. 28, NO. 3, 269–282
https://doi.org/10.1080/10919392.2018.1484598
have a dedicated IT management department that can shoulder the responsibilities even though they
hold sensitive data about their staff, customer, and business partners and proprietary (Leung 2012).
A consistent theme in literature has been how SMEs do not take cybersecurity concerns seriously
(Nycz, Martin, and Polkowski 2015). This is partly because of the misconception that cybersecurity is
associated with large organizations who have sophisticated and vulnerable information systems
(Abbott et al. 2015); and partly because there are limited studies on the phenomenon from these
contextual setting. The need for SMEs to be aware of and understand the consequences of cybersecurity and how it can be addressed cannot be understated because this awareness and the understanding can potentially “influence the adoption of secure behaviours” (Bada and Sasse 2014).
Against this background, the purpose of this study is to explore SME cybersecurity practices and
the challenges they face in developing countries. The goal is to sensitize practitioners and government institutions of the challenges and practices faced by SMEs, so that the various parties can work
collaboratively to arrive at context-specific solutions to address these challenges and improve current
cybersecurity practices. SMEs in South Africa have been used to study this phenomenon because
there have been “several negative comments about Africa’s lack of preparedness to combat cybercrime” (Von Solms and Kritzinger 2011); and “South Africa remains one of top three countries that
are targeted by phishing attacks” (Dlamini and Modise 2013).
Related work
Cybersecurity in developing countries
Security issues related to information technology (IT) continue to be a concern in both large and
small organizations. This is because “cybercrime has led to the loss of billions of dollars, the
malfunctioning of computer systems, the destruction of critical information, the compromising of
network integrity and confidentiality, etc.” (Abubakar et al. 2015). Despite these negatives, there
remains little academic literature on the issue of cybersecurity, specifically for developing countries.
According to Ben-David et al. (2011), developing countries have five core forces that shape their
security landscape: (1) poor “security hygiene,” i.e., the degree to which it runs with up-to-date
software patches and recent malware protection; (2) unique usage patterns not commonly seen in
the developed economies such as reliance on mobile technology for conducting financial transactions
even in places where credit cards and the web have not penetrated; (3) novice users who have joined
the Internet and do not have exposure to the risks posed online and disseminating security
educational material and tools is extremely challenging; (4) the use of pirated software which may
not necessarily pose as a security risk, but challenging to verify that such software is not malicious;
and (5) limited understanding on the adversaries’ of cybersecurity. These contextual factors can
potentially explain why SME adopt information technologies but are ignorant of cybersecurity
concerns. For example, Abubakar, Bass, and Allison (2014) found Nigerian SMEs to be less
concerned with challenges like security, privacy and data loss, although they continued to show
optimism in using the potential opportunities that cloud computing presents. In another study,
Alawiye-Adams and Awoyemi (2014) report how the lack of cybersecurity framework poses as one
of the main barriers toward automated teller machine (ATM) transaction charges on the new key
cash-less policy in Nigeria.
In South Africa, Grobler and Van Vuuren (2010) identify the following as main concerns:
continuous phishing attacks, Sim-swap fraud and ID theft. According to the authors, these concerns
are enabled and fueled by bandwidth availability, shortage of IT education, absence of African
languages, lack of standardized procedures, and operating system distribution (Grobler and Van
Vuuren 2010). Other studies such as Von Solms and Kritzinger (2011) have identified increasing
bandwidth, increasing use of wireless technologies and infrastructure, lack of cybersecurity awareness, ineffective legislation and policies, and weak technical cybersecurity measures factors which
introduce a higher level of cybersecurity risks and expose the critical infrastructures in many African
270 S. KABANDA ET AL.
countries to higher levels of risk. As a consequence, researchers such as Irons and Ophoff (2016)
have called for the need to develop digital forensics skills in South Africa through university
programs, have associated training courses, and evaluate the extent to which the current cybersecurity awareness initiatives address cybersecurity threats and risks (Dlamini and Modise 2013).
Figure 1 summarizes the cybersecurity landscape of developing countries, and more specifically
that of Africa. Other related work on cybersecurity (Ahmad, Maynard, and Shanks 2015) have
shown that miscommunication and organizational barriers, such as financial resources (Srinidhi,
Yan., and Tayi 2015), management support (Soomro, Shah, and Ahmed 2016), availability of
expertise and awareness of cybersecurity threats (Champion et al. 2014; Cowley and
Greitzer 2015), are significant factors that affect cybersecurity implementation.
Cybersecurity approaches
There have been several approaches for tackling cybersecurity and these include intrusion, anomaly,
signature, hybrid, honeypot, web server logging (web servers, contents of log files, and log data
analysis) and Intrusion using web server logs. Table 1 documents these approaches.
The intrusion detection (ID) system is used in systems to detect attempted or successful
unauthorized access to a network or computer system (Patcha and Park 2007). ID can be used to
prevent intrusions as well as provide information in the case of a successful intrusion, which may
help to implement an appropriate counter-measure (Abraham, Grosan, and Chen 2005).
Data sources for analyzed information may vary with host or network activity, with application
and command logs being common sources for information analysis (Patcha and Park 2007). To
avoid the large amount of data that have to be analyzed, most ID systems store data for a particular
period of time in order to be able to reference it at a later point. The ID system is usually managed
Figure 1. Factors influencing cybersecurity implementation in developing countries.
Table 1. Approaches to tackling cybersecurity (Garcia-Teodoro et al. 2009; Mirza et al. 2016).
Intrusion Detection Security tools that, like other measures such as antivirus software, firewalls and
access control schemes, are intended to strengthen the security of information
and communication systems.
Anomaly Intrusion detection A type of intrusion detection which attempt to estimate the “normal” behavior of
the system to be protected, and generate an anomaly alarm whenever the
deviation between a given observation at an instant and the normal behavior
exceeds a predefined threshold
Signature patterns A type of intrusion detection which seek defined patterns, or signatures, within
the analyzed data.
Hybrid approach (anomaly and signature
intrusion detection methods)
Generalized use of a principal signature-based detection module, combined with
a complementary anomaly-based scheme
Honeypot Computer connected to the Internet that offers services and data that appear to
be of value to an attacker but in fact is a deception traps used to monitor and
log the activities of attackers
Web server logging Gain knowledge of the state of a web server, given suitable web server log
information
JOURNAL OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPUTING AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 271
by the Network Intrusion Detection Sensor Products (NIDS)—a device linked to the network and
assesses incoming data to the server. Another product, among others that can manage the ID, is the
Host Intrusion Detection Sensor (HIDS) which is a piece of software installed on a host compute for
the purpose of identifying threats via behavior or signature analysis, then proceeding to attempt the
prevention of an attack. HIDS are considered active defense mechanism because they combine
identification and attack response (Peterson 2004).
The use of anomalies is another means of addressing cybersecurity. Anomaly ID systems require normal
usage patterns to identify the intrusions which are generated by aggregating data usage (Abraham, Grosan,
and Chen 2005). The behavior of all users is monitored and any deviation from normal usage is deemed as
an intrusion. Anomaly ID is deemed to be an essential part of protecting against malicious attacks (Lee and
Xiang 2001). Signature detection is another means of identifying attacks that attempt to exploit application
software or a system (Abraham, Grosan, and Chen 2005). Signature patterns are pre-encoded and updated
using known vulnerabilities to general systems, then compared to incoming input in order to detect
intrusion attempts (Abraham, Grosan, and Chen 2005; Kruegel and Vigna 2003). By watching out for
certain patterns, the signature ID systems compare and match incoming packets, commands or other input
to known attack signatures (Patcha and Park 2007). Unfortunately, it is extremely challenging to stay
current to the near daily disclosure of vulnerabilities, even when concentrating on a specific aspect such as
web-server related vulnerabilities (Kruegel and Vigna 2003). Vulnerabilities can also be very specific to
certain technologies or their combinations, making signature ID systems better when complemented with
anomaly ID systems (Kruegel and Vigna 2003). A good signature needs to be concentrated enough to be
able to identify that certain attack, but elastic enough to be able to identify if a variation of a certain attack is
being used (Kreibich and Crowcroft 2003). If the signature is either too concentrated or elastic, a large
number of false positives and negatives will be recorded (Kreibich and Crowcroft 2003).
The hybrid detection approach involves a combination of anomaly and signature detection
methodologies (Patcha and Park 2007). At the core of the hybrid system is a signature ID system
that operates by using information on what the attacker’s suspicious and normal actions have been
(Patcha and Park 2007). Other researchers have proposed the use of honeypots as a means of
gathering information about attackers; Web Server Logging which can be used to detect security
breaches or misbehavior are very useful when performing a postdisaster inspection of a security
incident (Oliner, Ganapathi, and Xu 2012). In addition, the ID using Web Server Logs can be
implemented. The main goal of a log-based ID system should be to gain knowledge of the state of a
web server, given suitable web server log information (Barse and Jonsson 2004).
Soomro, Shah, and Ahmed (2016) posits that the concept of security needs to be examined
holistically, because numerous activities of management, particularly development and execution
of security policy, awareness, compliance training, development of effective enterprise information architecture, IT infrastructure management, business and IT alignment and human resources
management, had a significant impact on the quality of management of information security. De
Barros and Lazarek (2018) conquers stating that handling cyber threats requires a cooperative
action to secure nations cyberspace and one key factor is the existence of well-defined organizational structure. While there are several studies that have examined the adoption of different
Table 2. Respondent profile.
SME Position Experience in information security (years)
A Respondent A1 Co-founder and CSO
(chief strategic officer)
15
Respondent A2 Senior security analyst: threat analysis 6
Respondent A3 Senior security analyst: research and development 8
Respondent A4 Security analyst and developer 3
Respondent A5 Network specialist 10
B Respondent Owner, entrepreneur and technical specialist 15
C Respondent C1 Developer 10
Respondent C2 Chief technical officer 10
272 S. KABANDA ET AL.
approaches to cybersecurity, there are limited studies in the context of developing countries
which explore the factors that influence how SMEs implement cybersecurity and the challenges
they face. With this literature review in mind, we seek to examine (1) the factors that influence
South African SME cybersecurity implementations, and (2) the various approaches adopted and
challenged faced from the adoption of these approaches. Figure 1 will act as a sensitizing lens for
exploring the objectives.
Methodology
Research approach
A qualitative enquiry was adopted for the study with the purpose of allowing the researcher to be
grounded in the SME contextual setting and be able to make sense of the results from the SME
perspective. Studies that follow such an inquiry have been advocated for in developing countries
(Avgerou 2001). Given the unique contextual landscape of developing countries, that is different
from developed economies which sets the pace on how best to address cybersecurity, it is important
to understand how cybersecurity is perceived by organizations from these environments. It is
through such an enquiry that cybersecurity solutions can be designed that are context specific to
developing countries.
Purposive sampling was adopted to identify and select SMEs that were engaged with cybersecurity
implementation. Three SMEs (A–C) were selected to participate in this study. These were selected on
the basis that they had previously, and some were still currently, engaged in cybersecurity. These
SMEs, therefore, have experienced cybersecurity and can share that knowledge with the researcher.
SME_A was an Information Security consulting firm of 90–150 employees. SME_B was relatively
smaller than SME_A with less than 10 employees. The organization was involved in the development
of software which customer use by paying a subscription fee. SME_C was a software development
company with clients primarily in the United States of America. The organization had 150–200
employees and had its internal networks and application security to consider as well as the security
of applications which they wrote for customers.
Data collection and analysis
Data from SMEs were collected via semi-structured qualitative interviews. The factors influencing
implementation of cybersecurity in developing countries, as depicted in Figure 1 guided the interview process. The study had in total eight respondents from the three participating SMEs
(see Table 2). Five members of SME_A participated in the study. In addition to the interviews,
multiple months of web server logs were given to the researcher by Interviewee 5. The respondent
from SME_B was the owner and the person responsible for the management and technical operations. The respondent also provided the researcher with a 2000-line snippet of Apache Web Server
logs. Two participants from organization C responded to the study request. Although the SME
sample size is small, qualitative studies are more concerned with in-depth understanding of the
phenomenon from its natural setting as perceived by participants.
Data analysis commenced with the transcription of the recorded interviews which were complimented with the researcher’s notes that were made during the process of the interviews. Then, the
interview documents were repeatedly read to identify patterns across the entire data corpus.
Thematic analysis was used identify, analyze and report patterns (themes) emerging from the data
(Braun & Clarke, 2006). Inductive coding followed whereby a list of concepts were created and then
assembled into categories describing a significant theme from the data. Then, deductive coding
followed: the data was repeatedly read to identify patterns that were consolidated into significant
themes. NVIVO Version 10 was used to assist with analysis.
JOURNAL OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPUTING AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 273
Discussion of findings
Internal factor: SMES perception of cybersecurity
The findings show that five factors influenced how SMEs perceived cybersecurity. These are as
follows: budget, lack of management support, IT complexity and legacy systems, attitude toward
security, and compliance to regulations.
Low budget priority
Budget was consistently noted as a constraint to having efficient cybersecurity mechanisms in place
by most participants. For example, SME_A1 indicated that
. . .there is less money available for information security activities such as independent testing. Smaller
companies won’t spend money on independent security testing because it is too expensive. . .and so when
doing external testing on smaller companies, we often deal with the company’s CEO or CTO instead of
anyone that specializes in security––simply because they do not have the budget for such a course.
As a consequence, “. . .most small budget places have a bad security posture” (SME_A4).
All respondents indicated that much still needs to be done to protect their systems and processes, but
agreed that this is a challenge because “there is no immediate return on investment and so generally we
don’t have third parties testing for our systems. We ensure we put the necessary security checks and
perform our own internal audits of the software” (SME_C1). According to this respondent, external
testing by third parties was not a priority due to its cost, although they acknowledge the importance of
engaging specialist third-party service to continuously test the robustness of the security defenses. The
smaller budget available to SMEs makes it unlikely that they will get external consulting firms to
perform security assessments which then leave these organizations more vulnerable to attackers. There
was consensus that an organization’s attention to security and budget were proportional.
Minimal management support
Respondents also indicated that top management’s support and their ability to prioritize security by
assigning the appropriate budget to it were crucial in having a successful cybersecurity measures in
place. They acknowledge that management support is mainly hindered by the financial resources and
other competing projects. For example, respondent SME_A4 explains:
Often you’ll see that the less budget given to security the more vulnerabilities there are - but this is
not always the case but it has happened here before because resources are not there to address the
issue [security]. . . there’s definitely a correlation between the amount of money spent and the
company’s security as it equates to the amount of attention given toward it [security].
The implication of this empirical findings is that according to organization A, management’s
commitment of cybersecurity is influenced by financial availability (budget). Additional findings
show that management supported new technologies that brought cost savings. For example, one of
the respondents explained that “we usually do not have as many servers on site, especially with the
recent rise (and reduction in cost) of cloud computing” (SME_B). Similar remarks were made by
SME_C1 “Smaller companies are looking to leverage IaaS far more, especially if they’re at their
infancy. It’s not uncommon for companies not have a massive server room and host their stuff
locally unlike we have here to host our applications” Hosting web applications in this manner allows
SMEs to not have their own servers on site, reducing cost and increasing scalability.
Less technologically complex
It was perceived that, because SMEs often do not have complex legacy systems in place, they do not
face as much security threats as larger organizations. Legacy systems was seen as a source of security
274 S. KABANDA ET AL.
issues as they often need custom security code to be written to maintain their security level, but were
often no longer supported by their manufacturers. Respondent A1 explained: “Smaller companies
have fewer assets (servers etc.) that are easier to maintain. Bigger companies have more legacy
systems that need a lot of work to maintain to be secure” (A1).
Size less vulnerable
SME_B had the perception that the organization will not become a target for cybercrime because of
its size:
Well I can only talk about myself being a small business; I try to do as much as I can in writing
the code. Because it’s a small business I do everything. I write the code and definitely have to think
about security, but because I’m a small business I feel like I’m not going to be targeted easily. I don’t
have proper precautions I guess, I have no precautions. I just hope I’ve written the code OK enough.
Similar perceptions were reported by SME_A2 that “Smaller companies don’t have determined
attackers” and therefore they were at a lesser risk of attack than large organization. This attitude,
specifically by respondent SME_A2, is concerning given that the respondent works in an information security consulting firm as a senior security analysts responsible for detecting potential threats.
Priority on compliance to regulations and policies
All SMEs indicated the need to comply with institutional policies and this was seen as the first
preference prior to engaging with stringent cybersecurity measures. This was because compliance to
regulations such as Payment Card Industry (PCI) standards was not seen as challenging and costly
and organizations were assured of bare minimum amount of security because according to SME_C1,
we avoid areas that are risky. For example, we’ve recently implemented a ticketing system for one
of our client, and we’ve had to adhere to PCI compliance. What’s very important is that we try not to
store any credit card information; we try to limit our risk. . . bigger companies are more aware of it,
because there’s potentially more risk.
All SMEs acknowledged that management was able to provide sufficient funding to ensure
compliance and attain some security in their organization. However, this bare minimum security
derived from compliance overshadowed the consequences of not having sound cybersecurity
measures.
Difficulty in using cyber tools
Although most SMEs confirm that cost was one of the barrier toward cybersecurity; some organizations had adopted and were currently using cyber tools and techniques in their organizations. The
main challenge they faced with these tools was in how to operate them effectively, given their
complexity. There was a perception that the tools were complex to implement and maintain
(SME_A1); and for some tools, the value was not realized (SME_A4).
Cybersecurity approaches and their challenges
Cybersecurity approaches
The common cybersecurity approach used by SMEs was web server logging. The majority of
respondent agreed that there were multiple ways web server logging could be performed in SMEs
although not all are viable and valuable for organizations with limited resources. The most suggested
methods included the use of Apache or IIS logging as respondent C2 indicated: “Web server logging
is done through the standard Windows IIS logging facility.” Some of the respondents suggested that
logging attributes that were perceived as useful should be stored. These include IP, visiting path, path
traversed, time stamp, success rate (of loading page), user agent and URL. Respondent SME_A1 gave
JOURNAL OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPUTING AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 275
an example of logged items: “Useful things that are usually logged include the browser used, time of
day and geographical location. These provide a much better chance of responding to an anomaly.”
Apache and IIS logging is accepted as a viable cost-effective manner of performing web server
logging as there is limited setup, no additional software cost and easily compressible output given
through this method. SME_A2 explained:
I think logging is actually easier for a smaller company because you have a smaller focus and
footprint to make those logs into something useful. . . If you’re logging 170 web servers with 30
applications as opposed to 3 web servers on 3 servers it is easier to figure out something that
happening as opposed to on a big scale.
Although SME_A used mostly Apache web server logs as their form logging, it planned to
implement the ELK stack elastic search method of logging in the future as SME_A5 indicates: “...
mostly Apache. We are working on rolling out the ELK stack, the elastic search log stack, and
shipping logs to a central log server.” In addition, there was strong suggestion that SMEs should opt
for open source as demonstrated by SME_A5: “we’re running snort [a free, open source solution] at
the moment on our firewall.” Other options highlighted as cost-effective means of performing ID
and IP (Intrusion Protection) along with core router, firewall, and general network functionality ID
include the use of Unified Threat Management (UTM) devices, log analysis tools such as “Fail to
Ban,” and Cloud Front. SME_A5 explained that “The easiest and most cost-effective way to
implement ID on a small network. . .is to use fail to ban, it’s a very simple utility, that does not
need a special firewall; you can have an ADSL router with a port open.” SME_B preferred the use of
external services such as “Cloud Front” which was deemed cost-effective as it shows only cached
pages to the user if they are deemed to be suspicious, reducing the likelihood that they will gain
access to sensitive information that a general user should not see. SME_B explains: “I have a hosted
proxy service called Cloud Front which does a basic kind of intrusion detection, if there’s very
strange traffic they only serve you the cache, they don’t let you go further.” SME_C focused on the
prevention of intrusions rather than their detection, with a strong emphasis on ensuring that their
authentication methods are secure. All organization identified this type of security measure as critical
when exposed to a limited budget and named this type of technique as a must have for all
organizations “because it limits the attacking surface” (SME_A4); and allows the organization to
“focus on ensuring that only users with valid credentials are allowed in and that other methods of
gaining access to the network are reduced to an absolute minimum” (SME_C2).
Challenges with intrusion detection
Most respondents argued that ID for an SME is possible using open source software. They strongly
identified IDS or IPS (Intrusion Protection System) as inadequate and not useful to smaller
companies such as start-ups, due to the amount of time and money it may take to implement
such technologies. The intrusion detection using ID technique was highlighted as costly as it was
hardware and software intensive. As such, SMEs opted for free open source software. Several
challenges relating to the ID technique were identified. One of the challenges, especially signature
based, was that the malicious content in an attack needs to be identified before action can be taken
against it. SME_A1 explains: “Generally speaking, signature detection is seen as very weak. Most
companies that have the funds to do intrusion detection want anomaly detection using web
application firewalls.” Although anomaly detection was proposed, it was perceived as more expensive
to acquire, implement and maintain. There was skepticism about the usefulness of the ID technique
as SME_A4 explained:
The bad thing for IDSs is it’s normally only when I’m really, really loud, when I put on a nessus
scanner or do dirbusting, trying to brute force directories. As far as ID goes, only very few apps,
systems and networks I’ve tested have ever noticed me even though I’ve not tried to be quiet at all. . .
(SME_A4)
The majority of the respondents failed to perceive the ID technique as useful. SME_A5
elaborated:
276 S. KABANDA ET AL.
I’m trying to still figure out what the benefits are. We might get a lot of false positives, especially
in our business where the guys are hacking [the consulting firm hacks clients to perform security
assessments]; they’re actually sending malicious packets across the network. How is that going to
work in our IDS? If I’m running one in the office here and want to protect some nodes, are we going
to get false positives?
Due to the costs and the uncertainty attached to the ID technique, other organization opted for
open source software solutions. For example, the network administrator of organization A was in the
processes of implementing an open source IDS Snort, on their network. Respondents voiced their
observation that IDSs are rarely seen during security assessments as SME_A1 indicated: “People say
that intrusion detection is on the rise, but we don’t actually ever see it implemented well in practice.”
Another challenge was in using web server logs to perform ID. Most SMEs used web server
loggings for two main reasons: post disaster analysis and big data analytics. Most had yet to fully
utilize the functionality. For example, SME_A2 was “yet to see locally [in South Africa], someone to
do logging well. . .” while SME_A3 shared his experience: “What I’ve seen in most assessments is that
web server logs are ignored.” The concern highlighted by respondents regarding web server logs was
what to do once you have the web server logs that are generated via general Apache or IIS web server
logging because “Logging is only half the problem, logging is very easy, and it’s what we do with the
logs afterwards that is hard” (SME_A2). The findings show that there was a problem in getting value
out of web server logs because of the vast amounts of data being stored - “The volume of logs is just
so huge, even for a low traffic website” (SME_A3). As a result, “we don’t actually do much with those
[Apache logs], we don’t do any parsing” (SME_A5). SME_B indicated that they had never analyzed
their logs but only looked at errors to determine what code they need to fix in their application:
I’ve got little modules on that if there is an error I get it sent to an error site, and that compiles all
my errors. In those errors I’ve seen a few little SQLi attempts. I don’t know if it was a person or a
script, but someone was trying out some very strange URLs. But I just looked at it and said “ok well
whatever, it didn’t work, they failed because it caused an error.
SME_B admitted that once they had noticed signs of SQLi and other cybersecurity attacks in their
error reporting, no further actions was taken as they perceived these to be unsuccessful events which
produced errors. The findings also show that SMEs were not familiar with software such as Splunk to
organize their logs in a central location so that they can be better analyzed graphically as SME_A3
reports: “. . .technology like Splunk is quite popular that lets you get all your logs from multiple
sources and push them to a central logging server to look at some basic visualizations, but I haven’t
seen anything exciting in customers I’ve looked at.”
Finally, respondents noted that it was not viable to perform ID based on web server logs alone as
web server logs do not contain enough information to perform proper ID. If web server logs are used
as means of performing ID, they need to be (1) complimented with other methods of monitoring the
web server and simultaneously “making sure that there is value for money. i.e. that you are not
taking up too much hard drive space or processing power” (SME_A1); and (2) done in real time in
order to be useful instead of “looking at logs after the fact or if some huge alarm goes off in a big
organization” (SME_A4). An analysis of the web server logs of organization A and B, using Deep
Web Analyzer, shows that security and ID received minimal attention.
Summary of findings
Internal factors
Cybersecurity has been documented as one of the main threats for SMEs and SMEs are encouraged
to not only become aware of the consequences of not having protective measures in place to address
this challenge but to also engage in ongoing measures of protecting their organization systems from
potential threats. However, SMEs in this study indicate that cybersecurity comes with its own
implementation challenges. The main organizational challenges were budget constraints, management, and employee support and commitment toward security concerns of IT systems. Respondents
JOURNAL OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPUTING AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 277
opinioned the lack of financial resources, specifically the budget to access cybersecurity and other ITrelated resources. In the absence of this resource, management became involved in IT decisions and
implementation although they do not have the expertise required. While respondents perceived this
as a disadvantage, Talke, Salomo, and Rost (2010) sees management involvement as a means of
providing strong impact on the strategic choice of firms, making the organization focus on innovation fields which can then drive new product innovativeness and firm performance. Souitaris and
Maestro (2010) also contend that such involvement “has a positive effect on new technology venture
financial performance.”
Management and employee attitude toward cybersecurity was highly influenced by (1) the lack of
immediate return on investment; and (2) the perception that there is a low likely hood of SMEs
being the target of cybercrime and related crimes because of their size and less IT complex systems
and legacy systems. Most respondents perceived the lack of legacy systems and complexity as an
advantage because they are able to easily examine and adopt new potential technologies such as IaaS.
Although such technologies and systems, enabled by increasing bandwidth, wireless technologies
and infrastructure (Von Solms and Kritzinger 2011) bring cost savings, it is important to note that
SMEs themselves are “novice users” (Ben-David et al. 2011) who can be negatively affected if security
measures are not implemented. These challenges highlighted in Figure 2 confirm traditional barriers
SMEs face with cybersecurity and therefore reaffirm the need to redress organizational factors.
Environmental factors
The findings show that three contextual factors of technological issues, consumer related challenges
and Institutional pressure, shaped how SMEs perceived cybersecurity in South Africa.
Technological and consumer related concerns. The findings show that SMEs were aware of cybersecurity concerns and attempted to address these using available techniques that were within their
financial means. The majority of SMEs used web server logging as a means of addressing ID because
it was perceived to be “easier for a smaller company because you have a smaller focus and footprint
to make those logs into something useful” (SME_A2). However, the signature IDS detection method
was perceived as a weak form of protection while anomaly IDS detection methods were perceived
costly to acquire, implement and maintain. Other options highlighted as cost-effective for SMEs
include the use of: core router, firewall and general network functionality, UTM devices, log analysis
tools such as “Fail to Ban,” and Cloud Front. SMEs however identified several challenges with some
of the approaches because the value from its use was not realized and therefore did not see the need
to perform consistent security checks. This confirms the findings of Ben-David et al. (2011) that
organizations in developing countries have poor security hygiene given that they do not regularly
update their security such as updating operating system and anti-virus software.
SMEs noted they find it difficult to have real time analysis of web server logs––an ideal situation.
Instead there was an after the fact analysis and the problem of what to do with the logs so that they
actually give value to the organization: “it’s what we do with the logs afterwards that are hard”
Figure 2. Factors influencing cybersecurity implementation in South African SMEs.
278 S. KABANDA ET AL.
(SME_A2). Despite the use of these techniques, there was acknowledgment that awareness of how to
use them to derive maximum benefits was lacking, like in the case of web server logging; but no
acknowledgement that the lack of IT expert (security experts) was a factor although this can be
inferred from the limited use practice (minimal recurrent use of cybersecurity measures), lack of
assimilation of security culture within the SMEs, and the lack of confidence in security implementation as demonstrated by SME_B “I don’t have proper precautions I guess, I have no precautions. I
just hope I’ve written the code OK enough and . . . I’m hoping that I’m not going to be targeted.” The
lack of IT expert and awareness of how to derive maximum benefits reaffirms the findings in
literature of the need for IT education (Grobler and Van Vuuren 2010). As a consequence of these
challenges, SMEs such as startup had limited use of cybersecurity techniques and the organizational
challenges they continue to face, reinforce the limited use practice.
Institutional pressure. The findings show that external factors further reinforced the limited use
practice. The landscape of developing countries as demonstrated by (Ben-David et al. 2011; Von
Solms and Kritzinger 2011) show to have significantly influenced how cybersecurity was practiced by
SMEs in this study. We see the existence of coercive pressure (external authoritative pressures, such
as governmental policy or regulatory activity, or driven by market forces or competition (Tolbert
and Zucker 1999) from regulatory bodies such as PCI standards, but a lack of normative and
mimetic institutional pressures, which are influential for organizations to gain legitimacy from
external institutions. In this context, legitimacy defines accepted form of actions of an entity within
some socially constructed system of norms, values, beliefs, and definitions and this plays a key role in
how organizations access various resources from potential trading partners (Lui, Ngai., and Lo 2016).
Institutional legitimacy is attained not only when organizations compete for resources and customers, but also when they comply to and address institutional pressures which have the potential to
shape the way an organizations behaves (Lui, Ngai., and Lo 2016), such as how it adopts and
implements cybersecurity. Although coercive pressure is exerted on SMEs, it is important that other
pressure sources be exerted to influence behavior in how they obtain legitimacy and avoid potential
sanctions such as denying them the resources and social support. For example, the findings show
that SMEs did not appear to be aware of and concerned of normative pressure from cybersecurity
community of practice, such as professional standards and practices, for example established by
education and training methods and professional bodies (DiMaggio and Powell 1983). This is a
concern because normative pressure is a source from which SMEs can obtain “professional opinions
or controlling the work conditions and methods in an industry” (Hovav 2017).
Mimetic pressure occurs when organizations emulate the actions of similar organizations in the same
industry (Martínez-Ferrero and García-Sánchez, 2017; Craig, and Rodrigues, 2016). In this study, we
observe how SMEs consciously adopted or in other cases propagated for open source software solutions
(SME_A), and cloud computing solutions (SME_C, SME_B). Mimetic pressure has the potential to
influence other organizations to adopt an innovation in uncertain times, particularly when there is little
understanding of a new process, technology or external conditions (DiMaggio and Powell 1983). Thus,
SMEs that broadly deploy and routinize IT security measures (such as, cybersecurity) into their daytoday work procedures have the potential to act as role models for SMEs that face similar contextual
challenges. The findings therefore show evidence of coercive and mimetic pressure but relatively weak
normative pressure. This is problematic because “any business that wants to have a competitive edge in
today’s global marketplace should adopt a comprehensive security policy in consultation with partners,
suppliers, and distributors that will provide ‘safe environment’ for the conduct of online transactions”
(AlSlamy 2008).The presence of such pressure, can positively influence behavior (Daddi et al. 2016),
such as having proactive cybersecurity measures, although behavior change can also depend on
organizational structure and on their management style.
To reinforce the importance of each of the external forces, we have distinctively categorized them
into technological factors to address concerns related to the use of extant technologies and the
consequence of emerging software and technologies; consumer factors, which address awareness,
JOURNAL OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPUTING AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 279
attitude, and social behavior of consumers; and institutional pressure, which requires organization
adherence in order for it to obtain competitive, social, and political legitimacy. In this manner, each
institutional force is addressed. Our findings, therefore, call for the need to reexamine the role of
institutional pressure, as well as organizational factors in how SMEs address cybersecurity. Our
findings, therefore, extend the current forces that shape the security landscape of developing
countries by noting the importance of institutional forces, as well as organizational forces which
constrain and enable SME activities by providing frameworks for legitimizing actions and behavior.
Conclusion
This study has examined the cybersecurity phenomenon from a developing country perspective.
South African SMEs set the case of investigation and provided a means of understanding how they
perceive cybersecurity and the factors that influence the techniques that they employ. The findings
show that SMEs’ perception of cybersecurity is constrained by internal organizational factors of
budget, management support, and attitudes. These factors are perceived to have a negative influence
toward cybersecurity implementation and constrain how cybersecurity is implemented. SMEs do not
have complex systems which could potentially make it difficult to embrace stringent cybersecurity
measures. The lack of complex business processes and legacy systems is seen as a benefit. The
developing countries’ landscape toward cybersecurity has shown to have a resilient influence on how
cybersecurity is propagated in SMEs.
Coercive pressure as a form of institutional pressure was evident in the study, specifically
complying with the PCI standards. SMEs adopted open source software and cloud computing
solutions––and this as a form of mimetic pressure that had become a widely accepted behavior.
There was minimal evidence of normative pressure. Without such pressures, SMEs are able to
operate without the need of obtaining institutional legitimacy necessary for accessing various
resources from their environment; and in so doing reinforce the understanding that SMEs can
operate without proactive cybersecurity strategies. Once reinforced, and legitimized by SMEs
themselves, it becomes taken for granted, that operating without cybersecurity is an SME social
practice. It is therefore important for mimetic and normative to be enacted and exerted on SMEs as
much as they are exerted on large organizations. Given that SMEs are usually resource constrained, it
is imperative that future studies examine how to ensure such pressures can be created in the
developing countries institutional environment.
Although the paper examines the cybersecurity phenomenon in SMEs and has identified challenges SMEs face in dealing with security threats, the study has several limitations which can be
taken further for future research. One of the limitations is the data sample which consisted of one
SMEs that had fully implemented cybersecurity. Future studies could potentially have more samples
of such SMEs as this could provide a better explanation of the cybersecurity in these contexts. One of
the findings pointed to the fact that CEO or CTO being directly involved or engaged in the
information security implementation process. It Future studies should explore the benefits of having
top management being directly involved or engaged in this process given that in many companies it
is a struggle/deficiency to get senior management to commit to and actively engage in cybersecurity
initiatives. Another finding pointed to the lack of adequate funding as being one of the issue
associated with SMEs lack of having stringent cybersecurity mechanism in place. However, there
is also a need to examine how the existing resources are spent, as this could affect cybersecurity
initiatives. While SMEs understood the need to comply with institutional policies, future studies can
explore the relationship between risk avoidance and compliance.
References
Abbott, R. G., J. McClain, B. Anderson, K. Nauer, A. Silva, and C. Forsythe. 2015. Log analysis of cyber security
training exercises. Procedia Manufacturing 31(3):5088–94. doi:10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.523.
280 S. KABANDA ET AL.
Abraham, A., C. Grosan, and Y. Chen. 2005. Cyber security and the evolution of intrusion detection systems. iManager’s Journal on Future Engineering and Technology 1:74. doi:10.26634/jfet.1.1.968.
Abubakar, A. D., J. M. Bass, and I. Allison. 2014. Cloud computing: Adoption issues for Sub-Saharan African SMEs.
Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries 62:1–17. doi:10.1002/j.1681-4835.2014.tb00439.x.
Abubakar, A. I., H. Chiroma, S. A. Muaz, and L. B. Ila. 2015. A review of the advances in cyber security benchmark
datasets for evaluating data-driven based intrusion detection systems. Procedia Computer Science 62:221–27.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.08.443.
Ahmad, A., S. B. Maynard, and G. Shanks. 2015. A case analysis of information systems and security incident
responses. International Journal of Information Management 35:717–23. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2015.08.001.
Alawiye-Adams, A. A., and B. O. Awoyemi. [November 20, 2014]. Cash-less economy policy and remote-on-US’ATM
transaction fee in Nigeria. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2528608.
AlSlamy, N. M. A. 2008. E-Commerce security. International Journal of Computer Science and Network 8:340–44.
Avgerou, C. 2001. The significance of context in information systems and organizational change. Information Systems
Journal 11:43–63. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2575.2001.00095.x.
Bada, M., and A. Sasse. 2014. Cyber security awareness campaigns: Why do they fail to change behaviour? Accessed
March 14, 2017. http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/1468954/1/Awareness%20CampaignsDraftWorkingPaper.pdf
Barse, E. L., and E. Jonsson.2004. Extracting attack manifestations to determine log data requirements for intrusion
detection. Computer Security Applications Conference, 158–67. IEEE.
Ben-David, Y., S. Hasan, J. Pal, M. Vallentin, S. Panjwani, P. Gutheim, and E. A. Brewer. 2011. Computing security in
the developing world: A case for multidisciplinary research. Proceedings of the 5th ACM workshop on Networked
systems for developing regions (pp. 39–44). ACM. June
Braun, V., & ClarkeV. (2006) Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology 3 :77–101.
Champion, M., S. Jariwala., P. Ward., and N. J. Cooke. 2014. Using cognitive task analysis to investigate the
contribution of informal education to developing cyber security expertise. In Proceedings of the Human Factors
and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting 58 (1):310–14. Sage: Los Angeles. doi:10.1177/1541931214581064.
Cowley, J. A., and F. L. Greitzer. 2015. Organizational impacts to cybersecurity expertise development and maintenance. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting 59 (2015):1187–91. Sage: Los
Angeles. doi:10.1177/1541931215591185.
Craig, R., and L. L. Rodrigues. 2016. Using a Dialectic Approach to Understand Stakeholders’ Conflicts with Corporate
Social Responsibility Activities. In AStakeholder Approach to Corporate Social Responsibility, 339–356. Routledge.
Daddi, T., F. Test, M. Frey., and F. Iraldo. 2016. Exploring the link between institutional pressures and environmental
management systems effectiveness: An empirical study. Journal of Environmental Management 183(2016): 647–656.
De Barros, M. J. Z., and H. Lazarek 2018. Comparative study of cybersecurity policy among South Africa and
Mozambique. International Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security (pp. 521–XI). Academic Conferences
International Limited.
DiMaggio, P. J., and W. W. Powell. 1983. The iron cage revisited: Institutional isomorphism and collective rationality
in organizational fields. American Sociological Review 48(2):147–60. doi:10.2307/2095101.
Dlamini, Z., and M. Modise. 2013. Cyber security awareness initiatives in South Africa: A synergy approach. Case
Study. Information Wharf Security Researcher Teachers Studies 1, ed. M. Warren, 1–22. Academic Conferences
Limited.
Garcia-Teodoro, P., J. Diaz-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and E. Vázquez. 2009. Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques, systems and challenges. Computers & Security 28(1–2):18–28. doi:10.1016/j.
cose.2008.08.003.
Grobler, M., and J. J. Van Vuuren. 2010. Broadband broadens scope for cybercrime in Africa. Information Security for
South Africa (ISSA), (1–8). IEEE
Hovav, A. 2017. How espoused culture influences misuse intention: A micro-institutional theory perspective.
Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.
Irons, A., and J. Ophoff. 2016. Aspects of digital forensics in South Africa. Interdisciplinary Journal of Information,
Knowledge, and Management 11:273–83. doi:10.28945/3576.
ITU. 2016. ICT services getting more affordable––But more than half the world’s population still not using the
Internet. Accessed March 20, 2017. http://www.itu.int/en/mediacentre/Pages/2016-PR30.aspx
Kreibich, C., and J. Crowcroft. 2003. Automated nids signature creation using honeypots. University of Cambridge
Computer Laboratory. https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Jon_Crowcroft/publication/245571098Automated_
NIDS_Signature_Creation_using_Honeypots/links/0c960537b498cddd41000000.pdf
Kruegel, C., and G. Vigna. 2003. Anomaly detection of web-based attacks. Proceedings of the 10th ACM conference on
Computer and Communications Security (251–61). ACM.
Lee, W., and D. Xiang. 2001. Information-theoretic measures for anomaly detection. Security and Privacy, IEEE
Symposium on (pp. 130–143). IEEE.
Leung, S. 2012. Cyber security risks and mitigation for SME. CISSP CISA CBCP 1–50. http://haffa.hk/files/2012-05_
HKTDC_SME.pdf
JOURNAL OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPUTING AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 281
Lui, A. K. H., E. W. T. Ngai., and C. K. Y. Lo. 2016. Disruptive information technology innovations and the cost of
equity capital: The moderating effect of CEO incentives and institutional pressures. Information & Management
53:345–54. doi:10.1016/j.im.2015.09.009.
Mirza, M., M. Usman, R. P. Biuk-Aghai, and S. Fong. 2016. A modular approach for implementation of honeypots in
cyber security. International Journal of Applied Engineering Research 11(8):5446–51.
Martínez-Ferrero, J., and Isabel-María, G-S. Coercive, normative and mimetic isomorphism as determinants of the
voluntary assurance of sustainability reports. International Business Review. 26, no. 1:102–118.
Nycz, M., M. J. Martin, and Z. Polkowski. 2015. The cyber security in SMEs in Poland and Tanzania. International
Conference on Electronics, Computers and Artificial Intelligence (ECAI), AE–27. IEEE. June 25.
Oliner, A., A. Ganapathi, and W. Xu. 2012. Advances and challenges in log analysis. Communications of the ACM
55:55–61. doi:10.1145/2076450.
Patcha, A., and J. M. Park. 2007. An overview of anomaly detection techniques: Existing solutions and latest
technological trends. Computer Networks 51:3448–70. doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2007.02.001.
Peterson, D. 2004. Intrusion detection and cyber security monitoring of SCADA and DCS networks. ISA Automation
West, May.
Soomro, Z. A., M. H. Shah, and J. Ahmed. 2016. Information security management needs more holistic approach: A
literature review. International Journal of Information Management 36:215–25. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2015.11.009.
Souitaris, V., and B. M. Maestro. 2010. Polychronicity in top management teams: The impact on strategic decision
processes and performance of new technology ventures. Strategic Management Journal 31(6):652–78.
Srinidhi, B., J. Yan., and G. K. Tayi. 2015. Allocation of resources to cyber-security: The effect of misalignment of
interest between managers and investors. Decision Support Systems 75:49–62. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2015.04.011.
Sulayman, M., C. Urquhart, E. Mendes, and S. Seidel. 2012. Software process improvement success factors for small
and medium Web companies: A qualitative study. Information and Software Technology 54:479–500. doi:10.1016/j.
infsof.2011.12.007.
Talke, K., S. Salomo, and K. Rost. 2010. How top management team diversity affects innovativeness and performance
via the strategic choice to focus on innovation fields. Research Policy 39(7):907–18. doi:10.1016/j.respol.2010.04.001.
Tolbert, P. S., and L. G. Zucker. 1999. The institutionalization of institutional theory. In Studying organization. theory
& method, edited by S. R. Clegg, S. Clegg and C. Hardy, 169–84. Thousand Oaks, New Delhi: London.
Von Solms, B., and E. Kritzinger. 2011. Critical information infrastructure protection (CIIP) and cyber security in
Africa–Has the CIIP and cyber security Rubicon been crossed? International Conference on e-Infrastructure and
e-Services for Developing Countries 116–24. Springer: Berlin.
Notes on contributors
Salah Kabanda is a senior lecturer at the University of Cape Town, South Africa. Dr. Kabanda’s research interests
focus on the adoption, use, and consequence of ICTs in both private and public organizations in developing countries.
Maureen Tanner is an associate professor at the University of Cape Town, South Africa. Her research interests include
issues related to agile software development (for both collocated and distributed teams), UML, software engineering
and social aspects of software engineering, global software development, virtual teams, team collaboration, and ICT4D.
Cameron Kent is a student in the department of information systems at the University of Cape Town. He has a
research interest in the challenges facing organizations with respect to cybersecurity.
Appendix
(1) What factors influence your understanding of and implementation of cybersecurity in your organization?
(2) What cybersecurity mechanism do you have in place in your organization?
(3) What technical challenges do you face as a result of the implementation of these cybersecurity initiatives in your
organization?
(4) What organizational and institutional challenges have you faced, or you perceive you could face, when
embarking on a cybersecurity initiative in your organization?
282 S. KABANDA ET AL.

Managing cyber risk in supply chains: a review
and research agenda
Abhijeet Ghadge
Centre for Logistics and Supply Chain Management, Cranfield School of Management, Cranfield University, Bedfordshire, UK
Maximilian Weiß and Nigel D. Caldwell
Department of Logistics Research Centre, School of Social Sciences, Heriot Watt University, Edinburgh, UK, and
Richard Wilding
Centre for Logistics and Supply Chain Management, Cranfield School of Management, Cranfield University, Bedfordshire, UK
Abstract
Purpose – In spite of growing research interest in cyber security, inter-firm based cyber risk studies are rare. Therefore, this study aims to investigate
cyber risk management in supply chain contexts.
Design/methodology/approach – Adapting a systematic literature review process, papers from interdisciplinary areas published between 1990
and 2017 were selected. Different typologies, developed for conducting descriptive and thematic analysis, were established using data mining
techniques to conduct a comprehensive, replicable and transparent review.
Findings – The review identifies multiple future research directions for cyber security/resilience in supply chains. A conceptual model is developed,
which indicates a strong link between information technology, organisational and supply chain security systems. The human/behavioural elements
within cyber security risk are found to be critical; however, behavioural risks have attracted less attention because of a perceived bias towards
technical (data, application and network) risks. There is a need for raising risk awareness, standardised policies, collaborative strategies and
empirical models for creating supply chain cyber-resilience.
Research limitations/implications – Different types of cyber risks and their points of penetration, propagation levels, consequences and
mitigation measures are identified. The conceptual model developed in this study drives an agenda for future research on supply chain cyber
security/resilience.
Practical implications – A multi-perspective, systematic study provides a holistic guide for practitioners in understanding cyber-physical systems.
The cyber risk challenges and the mitigation strategies identified support supply chain managers in making informed decisions.
Originality/value – To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first systematic literature review on managing cyber risks in supply chains. The
review defines supply chain cyber risk and develops a conceptual model for supply chain cyber security systems and an agenda for future studies.
Keywords Risk management, Cybersecurity, Text mining, Systematic literature review, Supply chain disruptions, Supply chain risk management,
Supply risk, Supply chain resilience, Cyber-attacks, Cyber risks, Cyber resilience
Paper type Literature review
1. Introduction
Much work supports the view that the links of supply chains are
increasingly global, and therefore, their integration is core to a
successful supply chain (Mustafa Kamal and Irani, 2014). The
dependencies inherent in integration have led to work on the
risks of connectedness in supply chains (Kache and Seuring,
2014; Garvey et al., 2015). Supply chains mandate a holistic
approach to risk management (Ghadge et al., 2012);
heightened levels of cooperation and integration create their
own risks (Yoon et al., 2017). This study takes as its starting
point the risks inherent in literally networking (supply chain)
actors together through information technology (IT)
infrastructures (Warren and Hutchinson, 2000), as every node
and connection between them poses a potential threat for the
chain (The Institute of Risk Management, 2014). Supply
chains that extensively use IT systems to satisfy customers’
requirements have been termed “cyber supply chains” (CSC)
(Boyson, 2014, p. 346). The UK National Cyber Security
Centre (NCSC), acts as a bridge between government and
industry/society for advice, guidance and support on cyber
security, including the management of cyber security threats
within the UK. Similar National government cyber security
organisations across the world attempt to protect their citizens
and businesses from cyber threats and share vital information
with their allies (e.g. EU, NATO) and other central bodies (e.g.
Interpol) for global cyber security. The UK Office of Science
and Technology produced a succinct definition of cyber
security as “defences against electronic attacks launched via
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on computer systems” (Houses of Parliament, 2011). First,
Emerald Insight at: https://www.emerald.com/insight/1359-8546.htm
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
25/2 (2020) 223–240
© Emerald Publishing Limited [ISSN 1359-8546]
[DOI 10.1108/SCM-10-2018-0357]
Received 31 March 2018
Revised 17 October 2018
14 February 2019
18 July 2019
Accepted 28 July 2019
223
though, a cautionary note has to be raised concerning the
additional complication that in such an emergent area,
technology changes and dates. Descriptions such as “IT
security event”, “cybercrime” or “cyber-event” all substantially
refer to the concept of risk in the cyber context; yet, for example
in their seminal paper, Faisal et al. (2007) refer to information
risks as characterised by the presence of worms, viruses and
Trojans.
A traditional or physical supply chain (SC) is dominated by
the movement of products, finance and information (Peck,
2006); whereas a cyber supply chain is a network of IT
infrastructure and technologies that are used to connect, build
and share data in virtual networks (Smith et al., 2007) enabling
new forms of risk un-connected to physical products or even a
distinct physical location (e.g. WannaCry ransomware). Supply
chains are the backbone of evolving technological ecosystems;
Industry 4.0 concepts such as the Internet of things (IoT),
additive manufacturing, virtual reality, artificial intelligence,
and blockchain help to reflect, expand, alter and innovate the
relationships between supply chain partners. However,
developments in cyber security responses lag these advances in
the digitalisation of supply chains. It has been argued that
supply chains have unintentionally expanded their vulnerability
by imprudently collaborating with many diverse partners
(Boone, 2017). Smith et al. (2007) take the view that
increasingly accessible IT systems have removed traditional,
often bureaucratic, layers which used to function as protective
barriers for organisations. In line with the growing capability of
shared IT systems, modern cyber threats have also advanced
dramatically, with increased consequences (Sokolov et al.,
2014). A recent example of the developing capability of cyber
threats was observed in the food industry, where complacency
led to the belief that IT-related risks would only affect office
based work (Khursheed et al., 2016). However, more elaborate
malware goes beyond the boundaries of offices and can infect
automated production systems and the wider supply chain
network. Cyber supply chains do not necessarily make business
simpler and safer; they add complexity and can become more
challenging to manage (Kunnathur, 2015). Intriguingly, a
difference between cyber and conventional risk has been
identified as the anonymity of cyber risk, as it can remain
undetectable until it impacts businesses (Renaud et al., 2018).
Organisations are increasingly becoming aware of cyber risks
and their consequences and have increased cyber security
response budgets (KPMG, 2017). Everyday media reports on
cyber threats highlight the criticality of these risks for practice,
yet the topic has attracted minimal academic attention in spite
of its significant implication for the global supply chains (Davis,
2015; Eling and Wirfs, 2019). According to a global risk survey
conducted by various consultancy and insurance firms (e.g.
Gartner, AXA, Society of actuaries, Deloitte) in 2018, cyber
security and data breaches emerged as the top enterprise risk.
Extant literature has failed to address the implications of cyber
threats at the level of supply chains (Smith et al., 2007; Urciuoli
et al., 2013; Xue et al., 2013). To the best of research team’s
knowledge, this study is the first to contribute a supply chain
perspective on cyber risk/security/resilience in the form of a
structured literature review (SLR). It is therefore crucial to
identify, assess and mitigate cyber risks to reduce supply chain
vulnerability. Following on from the above discussion, the
study will address the following research question:
RQ1. How can organisations manage cyber risks in supply
chains?
Through addressing this question, this study will identify,
classify, assess and mitigate cyber risks in supply chains.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2
explains the adopted research design and the use of a data
mining approach for developing multiple typologies. Sections 3
and 4 discuss the findings from the descriptive and thematic
analysis. Lastly, Section 5 discusses key findings, the conceptual
model and critical directions for further research along with
implications for research and practice.
2. Research design
Supply chains are the backbone of evolving technological
ecosystems; Industry 4.0 concepts such as the Internet of things
(IoT), additive manufacturing, virtual reality, artificial
intelligence, and blockchain help to reflect, expand, alter and
innovate the relationships between supply chain partners
(Tranfield et al., 2003). Traditional literature reviews can be
criticised for bias, as they steer the reader toward a specific
direction based on the researchers’ perception (Wilding and
Wagner, 2012). In contrast to avoid claims of bias, this study
presents a “concept-centric” approach (Webster and Watson,
2002) for conducting an SLR by adapting key elements from
Tranfield et al. (2003), Rousseau et al. (2008) and Denyer and
Tranfield (2009). The specific SLR process adopted here is
divided into three stages, with each stage containing the set of
activities shown in Figure 1.
2.1 Systematic literature review
2.1.1 Identification of data sources
This exploratory stage of identifying data sources maps a wide
range of literature and helps in building an understanding of
critical concepts and developing “search strings” (Ehrich et al.,
2002; Arksey and O’Malley, 2005). The initial step is to
Figure 1 Systematic literature review process
IDENTIFICATION OF DATA SOURCES
Identification of search strings
Identification of data sources
Setting inclusion and exclusion criteria
DATA SCREENING AND SYNTHESIS
Screening of selected data
Text mining for theme development
Data extraction and synthesis
DATA ANALYSIS AND DESSEMINATION
Descriptive and thematic analysis
Dissemination of findings
Framework development and future research
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
224
identify key search terms derived from the research question.
As the study examines how an organisation can manage cyber
risks in supply chains, i.e. the risk associated with combining
supply chains and information technology, the choice of
keywords was judiciously selected to include two connected
fields namely supply chain risk management and IT. Boolean
search was used because the search domain comprised of many
interfaces. Different search string combinations were identified
based on an initial understanding of the existing literature on
cyber risk in supply chains. Appendix provides an exhaustive
list of the keywords selected by the research team. Following a
mind mapping session, the most important search string
combinations were finalised. Keywords such as “cyber”,
“data”, “information” and “technology” were combined with
risk, disruption, security, attack, along with other related words
frequently used in the SCRM/risk management literature.
Figure 2 shows the search string combinations used for the
identification of data sources. To obtain a wide range of
literature, two electronic databases – Scopus and ProQuest –
were searched using the search strings identified. Although
broader selection criteria are recommended for an SLR, it is
critical to define the boundaries and scope of the research.
Including articles published in peer-reviewed journals
positively influences the quality of the study (Burgess et al.,
2006); hence, books, conference papers, editorials, HTMLlinks as well as both “grey literature” and “white literature”
were excluded (Ghadge et al., 2019). Furthermore, only
academic articles published in the past 20 years (1997-2017)
were considered to capture more recent developments in the
area.
2.1.2 Data screening and synthesis
Another essential stage of framing the SLR is to assess the
quality of the papers identified. While there is no consensus
across academic fields on one quality appraisal method for
SLRs, in management studies, researchers frequently rely on
the journal quality-rankings to determine article inclusion
(Tranfield et al., 2003). The decision was taken that, because of
the comparative sparsity of extant literature in this area, instead
of a particular journal quality ranking guide (i.e. CABS,
ABDC), article quality appraisal would be based on the
judgment of the research team, with additional quality
validation by an external third-party expert.
The initial search run on ProQuest produced 2,856 hits in the
literature, while 6,637 potential papers were found via Scopus.
Making use of these databases’ built-in functions, inclusion and
exclusion criteria (explained earlier) were applied to the articles
leaving a total of 3,890 peer-reviewed papers, 2,149 from
ProQuest and 1,741 from Scopus. After the removal of
duplicates, a total of 1,434 papers meeting the selection criteria
were taken into consideration.
The next necessary step was to identify papers closely related
to cyber security/risk in supply chains. This was done by
manually screening the titles and abstracts; two groups (from
the research team) independently selected papers and compiled
them together to identify common papers. Following this
iterative step, further 1,373 papers were excluded. Full-text
reading of the 61 remaining papers led to further exclusion of
22 papers. Finally following a rigorous screening process to
achieve a high-quality output, 39 papers were considered
relevant. Besides, bibliography screening of the selected papers
identified a further 3 related articles; giving a total of 41 articles
to inform the analysis and were agreed with the external thirdparty expert.
2.1.3 Data analysis and dissemination
The data analysis stage aims to break the vast amounts of
accumulated data into smaller, coherent parts and examine the
extent to which they relate to each other (Denyer and Tranfield,
2009). QDA Miner©, a qualitative data analysis software
developed by Provalis Research, was used as a text mining
platform. Text mining was applied to cross-validate the search
strings manually derived from the data identification process and
to provide further support for the data analysis. Text mining
identified the most important words or phrases by frequency
(Figure 3); the manually selected key strings strongly match with
those identified through the text mining. This cross-validation of
the choice of search strings helps to limit research team bias and
validate the reliability of the SLR process. Connectivity-based
clustering or hierarchical clustering is an algorithm based on the
core idea of filtering objects that are more related to nearby
objects (than to objects farther away), to build a hierarchical
network (Tan et al., 2017). Cluster analysis was conducted to
identify a group of entities based on their similarities and
differences in the subject area. An exploded view of the identified
clusters is provided as an example in Figure 4. It can be observed
that sub-areas having a close affinity to each other come together
(circled in Figure 4 for clarity) following a hierarchical clustering
approach. After studying all the clusters for patterns and
dendrograms for the taxonomic relationships (example shown in
Figure 5), different themes were identified for the data analysis.
Furthermore, sub-categories for themes emerged during
the iterative process of data screening, and synthesis and these
were used for developing a “theme-based” typology. A
comprehensive list of meta themes and associated sub-categories
identified are shown in Figure 6.
The two-fold reporting approach recommended by Tranfield
et al. (2003) is adopted in this paper. Descriptive analysis will
Figure 2 Search string combinations used for identification of data
sources
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
225
Figure 3 Key terms and phrases identified following data mining
Figure 4 Exploded view of cluster diagram for cyber risk in supply chains (specimen)
Figure 5 Dendrogram used for developing typologies (specimen)
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
226
report an overview of the field of study. Furthermore, a
thematic analysis will report the findings in detail and help in
drawing conclusions and future research avenues.
3. Descriptive analysis
Table I presents an overview of the SLR content in terms of the
research methodology and different types of research design
adopted for data collection and analysis.
3.1 Definitions
In the evolving definition of what constitutes a cyber supply
chain (Table II), we see broadening of scope over time, from the
earliest definition linking online activities undertaken by firms
or chain (Barlow and Li, 2007; Sindhuja and Kunnathur,
2015). What is notable is the consistent use of terms relating to
the value creation. Kim and Im (2014) believe that cyber supply
is “an effective value chain”. In terms of supply chain risk, the
same broadening of the scope is seen over time, but early work is
heavily focused on technology and exogenous threats. Later
definitions include awareness of endogenous threats “[...] theft,
loss, damage, interceptions or unauthorized access, use,
disclosure, interruptions or disruption, modification or
fabrication” (Kim and Im, 2014). In Table II, we see cohesion
on definitions of SCRM as it being the application of various
tools and a guiding process for endogenous and exogenous
risks. Therefore, the study takes forward from these definitions
that supply chain cyber security systems are an integrated
alignment of processes involving infrastructure network, IT
system and organization.
3.2 Research distribution
The work by Warren and Hutchinson (2000) can be seen as a
milestone for the field and a key paper for this study; they report a
survey that found approximately 60 per cent of IT managers had
no awareness of, or policy on cyber security. Ironically, attacks in
2005 and 2006 on Homeland Security, the department tasked
with keeping the USA secure, seem to have piqued academic
interest in the latter half of this period. Looking at the trend in the
publications between 1997 and 2017, the first article that relates
to cyber supply chains was only published in 2000; since then,
academic research on cyber security has grown, particularly in the
IT and computer engineering fields.
3.3 Geographic distribution
Approximately half of the selected papers originate from
researchers based in either the USA or UK (Figure 7);
Government institutions from both countries have raised the
profile of cyber security through different initiatives aimed at
promoting its importance among both practitioners and
academics (Luiijf et al., 2013). Keegan (2014) and Rongping
and Yonggang (2014) claim that inducements and support
from governmental bodies will be crucial for the progression of
research in this field. Surprisingly, while countries such as the
USA or UK developed their first national cyber security
strategies long before 2010, European countries such as
Germany, France or the Czech Republic did not present theirs
until 2011. India has emerged as one of the leading low-cost
destinations for outsourcing IT operations (Bahl et al., 2011),
Luiijf et al. (2013) supports the strength and economic
ambition of India with regard to ICT systems and argue that
Indian firms see cyber security as an opportunity for further
economic growth.
3.4 Methodological distribution
The research methodologies can be separated into qualitative,
quantitative and mixed approaches. Most of the research
methods in this field are qualitative, whereas only a limited
number of quantitative research designs have been identified.
These findings support the initial claims made about the
progression stage of the literature on the topic and are
consistent with Creswell (2014) positing that prevalence of
qualitative works in an academic field is an indicator of the
immaturity of the field and the lack of consensus on key
concepts. Maturity and relatively stable constructs are
associated with more quantitative research designs (ibid.); by
implication, research on the topic of cyber security in SCs is still
at a nascent stage. In part this unequal split reflects the
multidisciplinary nature of the research topic. Research in
IT-related fields is usually dominated by quantitative
approaches, while qualitative modes are more prominent in the
area of SCM (Ho et al., 2015). Qualitative and quantitative
methodologies are not substitutes for each other as they
approach different aspects of the same reality (McCracken,
1988), but are simultaneously necessary to understand
complexities in the research thoroughly. Only 12 per cent of the
sample for this SLR is purely quantitative; Charitoudi and
Blyth (2014) propose that the lack of accessible quantitative
cyber data critically limits researchers’ ability to model supply
chain cyber risks.
4. Thematic analysis
The thematic analysis combines the careful reading of the
selected papers, as a part of the data screening and synthesis
stage with categories confirmed following the text mining
approach.
4.1 Type of cyber risks
Extant literature has a variety of theoretical frameworks for the
classification of different supply chain risks (Jüttner et al., 2003;
Figure 6 Typologies: “theme-based” framework for analysis
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
227
Manuj and Mentzer, 2008; Ho et al., 2015). In an attempt to
make sense of these new and unexplored risks, Gordon and
Ford (2006) and Urciuoli et al. (2013) posit Type I and Type II
cyber risks. Type I cyber risks include incidents of phishing and
theft or manipulation of data or services, Type II covers
cyberstalking and harassment, stock market manipulation or
blackmailing and corporate espionage. However, this
classification of cyber risks only focusses on deliberate acts
carried out by malicious actors. Other classifications of cyber
risks, such as those provided by Smith et al. (2007) or Tran
et al. (2016), either miss out on principal (focal firm) risks or
become very engaged with other, mostly technical risks.
Simialry, National Cyber Security Centre, UK (2016) classify
cyber attacks into un-targetted and targetted attacks. Phishing,
ransomware and scanning are covered under un-targeted
attacks, as they target multiple devices or users. Spear-phishing,
denial of service and subverting supply chains are captured
under targetted attacks. This classification does not consider
attacks arising from physical breakdown and internal activities.
Based on the data synthesis of selected papers, a holistic
classification of cyber risks is developed as shown in Figure 8.
Each of the identified “cyber risks” are explained below.
4.1.1 Physical threats
The physical dimension includes tangibles such as switches,
servers, routers and other ICT devices. According to
Table I Descriptive analysis
Reference Research methodology Research design
Author et al. (year) Quant. Quali. Mixed Review Survey/interview Experiment/model Case study Concept
Al Kattan et al. (2009) ✓ ✓✓
Bahl and Wali (2014) ✓ ✓
Bandyopadhyay et al. (2010) ✓
Barlow and Li (2007) ✓✓ ✓
Bartol (2014) ✓ ✓
Boone (2017) ✓ ✓
Boyes (2015) ✓ ✓
Boyson (2014) ✓ ✓
Cai and Jun (2008) ✓ ✓
Charitoudi and Blyth (2014) ✓ ✓✓
Davis (2015) ✓ ✓
Deane et al. (2009) ✓ ✓
Durowoju et al., 2012 ✓ ✓
Faisal et al. (2007) ✓ ✓
Hamlen and Thuraisingham (2013) ✓ ✓
Huang et al. (2008) ✓ ✓
Jones and Horowitz (2012) ✓
Keegan (2014) ✓ ✓
Khursheed et al. (2016) ✓ ✓
Kim and Im (2014) ✓ ✓
Linton et al. (2014) ✓ ✓
Manzouri et al. (2013) ✓ ✓
Pfleeger et al. (2007) ✓ ✓
Rongping and Yonggang (2014) ✓ ✓
Sharma and Routroy (2016) ✓✓ ✓
Sindhuja (2015) ✓ ✓
Sindhuja and Kunnathur (2015) ✓✓ ✓
Sokolov et al. (2014) ✓ ✓
Stephens and Valverde (2013) ✓ ✓
Tran et al. (2016) ✓✓ ✓
Urciuoli (2015) ✓ ✓
Urciuoli and Hintsa (2017) ✓ ✓
Urciuoli et al. (2013) ✓ ✓
Venter (2014) ✓ ✓
Warren and Hutchinson (2000) ✓ ✓
Williams (2014) ✓ ✓
Windelberg (2013) ✓
Xue et al. (2013) ✓
Zhang et al. (2012) ✓
Smith et al. (2007) ✓
Linkov et al. (2013) ✓
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
228
Table II Definitions from the literature: cyber supply chain
Perspective Definitions Reference
Supply chain “E-supply chains involve organisations using online information, to perform, rather than just support,
some value-adding activities in the supply chain more efficiently and effectively”
Barlow and Li (2007,
p. 289)
“[Cyber supply chain is] the entire set of key actors and their organisational and process-level interactions
that plan, build, manage, maintain, and defend the IT system infrastructure”
Boyson et al. (2009, p. 200)
“IT system supply chain is a globally distributed and dynamic collection of people, process,
and technology”
Simpson (2010, p. 3)
“A cyber supply chain is a supply chain enhanced by cyber-based technologies to establish an effective
value chain”
Kim and Im (2014, p. 387)
Supply chain risk “The probability of loss arising because of incorrect, incomplete, or illegal access to information.” Faisal et al. (2007, p. 679)
“... degradation or disruption to a supply chain’s infrastructure or structural resources resulting from the
successful exploitation of IT vulnerabilities by threats within an organisation, within the supply chain
network, or in the external environment”
Smith et al. (2007)
“IT security incidents occur when a threat directed against an organisational asset causes a compromise
in one (or more) of three areas: confidentiality, integrity or availability (CIA)”
Deane et al. (2009, p. 5)
“Operational risks to information and technology assets that have consequences affecting the
confidentiality, availability or integrity of information systems”
“Cybercrime can be defined as any crime that is facilitated or committed using a computer, network, or
hardware device; in particular, the computer or the device may be the agent, facilitator, or target of the
crime that takes place in virtual or non-virtual places”
Cebula and Young (2010),
Urciuoli et al. (2013, p. 51)
“A cyber-event is any disturbance to this interdependent network that leads to loss of functionality,
connectivity, performance, or capacity”
Boyes (2015, p. 29)
Supply chain risk
management
“CSCRM (cyber supply chain risk management) can be defined as the organisational strategy and
programmatic activities to assess and mitigate risks across the end-to-end processes (including design,
development, production, integration, and deployment) that constitute the supply chains for IT networks,
hardware, and software systems”
Boyson (2014, p. 342)
“... the application of policies, procedures, and controls (technical, formal, informal and management) to
protect supply chain information assets (product, facilities, equipment, information, and personnel) from
theft, loss, damage, interceptions or unauthorized access, use, disclosure, interruptions or disruption,
modification or fabrication”
Sindhuja and Kunnathur
(2015, p. 483)
Figure 7 Geographic distribution of research
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
229
Boyes (2015), the presence of physical and environmental risks
seems to be ignored by many risk managers, when talking about
cyber risks. In this study, a few articles (Faisal et al., 2007;
Smith et al., 2007; Charitoudi and Blyth, 2014; Tran et al.,
2016; Urciuoli and Hintsa, 2017) acknowledge natural
disasters as a critical driver for cyber risks. For example, when a
flood or a tornado disrupts the functioning of servers, which
then interferes with the seamless flow of the cyber supply chain
network. Meanwhile, Smith et al. (2007) and Urciuoli and
Hintsa (2017) go one step further and add the deliberate
damaging or theft of physical infrastructure components to this
physical risk category. Faisal et al. (2007) also consider terrorist
attacks to be a part of the physical aspect of cyber risks. Risks
that affect the functioning and security of a supply chain’s
physical assets are, paradoxically, cyber risks.
4.1.2 Breakdown
The, perhaps, humdrum risk of systems or resources breaking
down through causes such as outdated firewalls and overdue
security updates have only attracted attention in two articles
(Boyes, 2015; Tran et al., 2016). While the least exotic cyber
risk (e.g. website failure due to a peak in data traffic), cannot be
ignored, such failures are easier to predict than natural disasters
or intentional attacks; however, their potential consequences
can be equally severe.
4.1.3 Indirect and direct attacks
The cyber risk of deliberate assaults falls into two categories -
direct attacks and indirect attacks. The first category comprises
acts such as hacking attacks (Deane et al., 2009; Khursheed
et al., 2016; Sharma and Routroy, 2016; Boone, 2017), denial
of service (Faisal et al., 2007; Deane et al., 2010) or password
sniffing (Warren and Hutchinson, 2000) for financial gains.
Several authors, for example, Faisal et al. (2007) and Tran et al.
(2016), include the risks of industrial espionage or
compromises to intellectual property, under direct attack.
In the Indirect attacks the attackers lay out “bait” which
enables them to access the target system. Commonly discussed
methods in the literature include viruses, worms and Trojans
(Warren and Hutchinson, 2000; Faisalet al., 2007; Smith et al.,
2007; Jones and Horowitz, 2012), counterfeit products, softand hardware (Urciuoli et al., 2013; Linton et al., 2014;
Williams, 2014; Boyes, 2015), malicious codes (Smith et al.,
2007; Deane et al., 2010; Kunnathur, 2015) and spoofing
attacks (Warren and Hutchinson, 2000; Smith et al., 2007). If
employees accept the bait by, for example, visiting a website or
downloading software, the attacker gains access to the system.
Cyber-attacks that originate via phishing, i.e. gaining access to
sensitive information by disguising the threat as a trustworthy
entity, are on the rise (Verizon, 2018), and heightened cyber
awareness is necessary to tackle such disguised attacks.
4.1.4 Insider threat
According to Kunnathur (2015), employees often represent the
most significant risk to a company’s cyber security. Internally,
employees were found to be careless with password
confidentiality (Stephens and Valverde, 2013), including
writing passwords down for easy recall (Venter, 2014).
Furthermore, absent-mindedly disclosing sensitive information
while discussing with colleagues or others is identified as a risk
that companies need to be aware of (Kunnathur, 2015). In
connection with these acts of thoughtlessness, the literature
also reports incidents in which employees consciously misuse
or even sabotage a company’s information. For example,
opportunistic misuse of confidential data (Deane et al., 2009)
or a premeditated personal vendetta against an employer
(Sharma and Routroy, 2016). As the employee cyber threat is
internal, whether deliberate or accidental, this is termed an
insider threat.
Reporting on deliberately executed, maliciously motivated
cyber-attacks (Urciuoli, 2015) should not be allowed to crowd
out cyber supply risks resulting from merely careless employees
(Urciuoli et al., 2013; Urciuoli et al., 2017). In both the
negligent and premeditated mode, the human factor can pose
the biggest and most unpredictable threat to a company’s cyber
security. Employees could act as insiders and support criminals
in perpetuating their actions, or they could perpetrate a crime
on their own, as they may have easy access to facilities or cargo
(Urciuoli, 2015).
4.2 Points of penetration
To allocate security resources, organisations need to know the
weak points of the supply chain network where these risks are
Figure 8 Classification of cyber risks
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
230
most likely to penetrate (Smith et al., 2007); referred to as
“points of penetration” (PoP). Urciuoli et al. (2013) reported
that 50 per cent of malicious cyber-attacks target smaller
organisations because of the lack of adequate protection
measures installed in their information systems. SMEs might
have a lower security capability, but their attack surface and
visibility are also dramatically smaller (Caldwell, 2015). Data
synthesis identifies three key “failure points” where cyber risks
emerge. PoPs are classified into technical, human and physical
dimensions.
4.2.1 Technical points of penetration
Smith et al. (2007) define the weakest link of a SC quite broadly
by claiming all IT-related assets are prone to cyber risks
including systems, software, personnel and equipment. ICT
systems and related resources may improve performance while
also increasing technology risk (Xue et al., 2013). In particular,
legacy (inherited) or outdated and poorly maintained systems
attract wilful attacks. Outsourcing servers to save up-front
capital costs reduces overall direct costs (Boyson, 2014), but
the loss of control over security may increase long-term indirect
costs dramatically.
4.2.2 Human points of penetration
Most companies, as claimed by Sindhuja (2014), complacently
assume that cyber security is only about technical security. In
reality, technical cyber security solutions will have been
grounded in security analysis; the same is often not the case
with human involvement, individuals, who theoretically should
be the first layer of protection. Boone (2017) argues that
companies are only as secure as the most susceptible
stakeholder in their supply networks. Urciuoli and Hintsa
(2017) suggest that human resources could either willingly
choose to harm their own company, or pose a threat by accident
or be forced to collaborate with criminals by means of viruses,
blackmailing, etc. Kim and Im (2014) found that internal
human errors are likely to have severe consequences, but also
more challenging to identify than external events. Kunnathur
(2015) builds on the importance of human PoPs, arguing that
potential cyber aggressors are well aware of this vulnerability.
Consequently, they suggest (ibid.) that future cyber risks, and
especially intended attacks, are expected to exploit human
PoPs rather than, hitherto, focus on the technical domain. This
vulnerability is then intensified when SC employees interact
with each other across organisational boundaries. Ill-secured
inter-organisational supply chain connections between
companies are a PoP for cyber risks, which may work as
facilitators for the propagation of these risks.
4.2.3 Physical points of penetration
Charitoudi and Blyth (2014) state that physical objects such as
buildings, machines and other surroundings can also represent
a PoP for cyber risks. In a recent study on cyber security in the
food industry, Khursheed et al. (2016) report incidents in
which obsolete firewalls and inadequate control mechanisms
allowed attackers to gain remote access to production lines. In
addition, physical infrastructures are always vulnerable to
tangible risks such as natural disaster or physical attacks that
impact cyber systems. However, as such disasters are naturally
rare and unavoidable (Smith et al., 2007), companies like to
perceive them as less of a concern for cyber safety (Sharma and
Routroy, 2016).
4.3 Propagation zones
The consequences of cyber risks can be short to long term.
While damage to servers will have noticeable effects
immediately following their occurrence, others, for example,
information leakage, can take years to recognise (Boone, 2017)
or will never be disclosed. Data theft is central to cybercrime
(Urciuoli and Hintsa, 2017) which, to date, seems to have
exempted communities from direct cyber-attack. The risk
propagation model proposed here, suggests supply chain risks
are not static and, propagate out from the centre of risk
occurrence to other related areas with the “cascading or ripple
effect” (Ghadge et al., 2013; Dolgui et al., 2018). Therefore, it
is likely that cyber risks will typically follow similar risk
propagation patterns, as shown in Figure 9.
4.3.1 Primary propagation
As indicated by the PoP discussion, regardless of where a risk
finds its way into a system, there is always a disruption to the
company’s operations. Risk propagation compromises the
operation’s continuity (Warren and Hutchinson, 2000;
Boyson, 2014), productivity (Manzouri et al., 2013) and
quality (Jones and Horowitz, 2012). Cyber-attacks in Germany
(Boyes, 2015) and Iran (Jones and Horowitz, 2012), report that
blast furnaces and centrifuges, respectively, were damaged,
threatening not just individual operations but the entire factory/
output. A lone report on the consequences for employees
(Manzouri et al.,2013) claims aggressor breaches of security
systems discourage employees, particularly their willingness to
continue working under such circumstances (echoing Reade’s
(2009) non cyber finding in terror act environments). Except
for the above, there appears to be limited discussion on primary
consequences from cyber-attacks, and there is a lack of
studies focussing on the consequences for employees and
organisational sustainability of such attacks, whether successful
or not. This theme has exposed a strong tendency to a binary
approach based on the success or failure of an attack/cyber risk
episode; thus, more studies are needed on the impacts and how
processes and people respond to the cyber-attacks.
4.3.2 Secondary propagation
Supply chain relationships facilitate information sharing,
including detrimental information such as cyber breaches.
Several authors claim that reputational damage resulting from a
cyber-attack discourages further collaboration with existing and
prospective SC partners (Urciuoli et al., 2013; Charitoudi and
Blyth, 2014). Post-supply-chain cyber-attack, authors highlight
the potential unavailability of information, services or products
Figure 9 Propagation zones of cyber risk
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
231
for further use (Warren and Hutchinson, 2000; Charitoudi and
Blyth, 2014). Inter-connected systems and machinery will be
affected, leading to unsatisfied customer requirements and loss
of sales and profit. Losses will include near-time opportunity
costs, but also potential longer-term reputational damage.
Breaches of confidential information (such as supplier
databases, contracts and payment details) could have major
implications for the supply chain network. In spite of increased
security in data storage platforms, data breaches are a regular
occurrence; thus, there is a need for robust cyber security
measures to protect cyber-physical systems.
4.3.3 Tertiary propagation
A study in the automotive industry found that hostile malware
can corrupt the braking system of a car in a way that could not
be detected by the manufacturer (Jones and Horowitz, 2012).
Thus, individuals in the wider society face the initial brunt of
this supply chain cyber-attack. According to Urciuoli and
Hintsa (2013), the consequences of SC cyber-attacks for a
community or society could be more serious, if criminals attack
supply chains relevant to public health, e.g. food or
pharmaceutical chains.
There is also a dynamic behaviour to cyber-attack
consequences; as defences improve, the attacks move elsewhere.
In two articles, Urciuoli and Hintsa (2013, 2017) explain that
criminals can for now steal valuable cyber data – such as loading
lists and transportation schedules – to plan and execute
traditional non-cyber [theft] crimes; with relative impunity. It is
evident that cyber risks directly impact organisations profit
margins, market capitalisation and brand image (Mukhopadhyay
et al., 2013), along with indirectly impacting wider businesses
and society.
4.4 Challenges for cyber security
4.4.1 Inter-organizational collaboration
In traditional supply chains, two parties might share some
information and very occasionally, the same IT platform. The
risk is amplified when cyber supply chains and order
management systems link multiple supply parties together or
share the data in outsourced (e.g. Cloud) platforms. A lack of
accepted standards and guidelines is hindering the
development of robust cyber defences (Boyson, 2014; Davis,
2015). Authors argue that supply chain partners must be more
transparent with each other on security and should combine
security resources and know-how to deal with increasingly
sophisticated cyber risks (Rongping and Yonggang, 2014). The
propagation of cyber consequences means companies cannot
afford to focus only on their security systems and must also be
aware of their partner’s security conditions (Deane et al.,2010).
Supply chain collaboration based on open, honest and trustbased relationships is needed to effectively deal with supply
chain cyber-related risks (Tran et al.,2016). Smith et al. (2007)
recommend that SC integration, by aligning systems and
processes, will yield better returns through standardised ways
of working, shared security objectives and better general
communication (see conceptual model Figure 10).
Bandyopadhyay et al. (2010) argue that higher levels of
integration and collaboration reduce free-riding behaviour
when considering investment in cyber security.
4.4.2 Employee knowledge
One of the stand-out findings from this SLR is the important
role played by employees as the front-line of cyber security in
SCs. Although the most visible layer of security to outsiders, it
is challenging to hire cybersecurity-trained and skilled
resources given the complex, emergent and technological
demands of SC security (Xue et al., 2013; Venter, 2014;
Khursheed et al., 2016). So far, cyber threats have outpaced
training and study initiatives. Ideally, such staff members are
proactive employees in contact with cyber applications who
need to know not only how to operate the systems, but also how
to react in cases of attack. Khursheed et al. (2016) describe the
ideal situation in which highly skilled employees are not only
cyber risk-reactive but also have the skill-set to pre-empt cyber
PoP risks.
4.4.3 Continuous commitment
The eco-systems in which cyber SCs operate are constantly
evolving (Kim and Im, 2014); compounded by different
geopolitical situations, regulatory frameworks as well as
corporate and national cultures that merge in one supply chain.
Cyber risk management is not only about protecting data, but
also maintaining the privacy, trust and safety of stakeholders
involved in the business network. Hackers and other potential
invaders, on the other hand, have no such encumbrances and
with the advantage of agility can invest in being ahead of the
curve thriving on awareness of cyber trends and new
technologies (Boyes, 2015), to create novel and ever more
sophisticated and unpredictable cyber-crimes.
These two issues of timeframe and level of focus are built
upon based on a theme found in the cyber supply chain
literature, the disconnection between standard business
practices and the requirement for a continuous commitment to
cyber security. According to Linkov et al. (2013), many of the
risks that have struck companies only manifest after months or
even years; however, these manifestations exceed the attention
(and job) span of most managers who are driven by short and
medium-dated performance objectives (Urciuoli and Hintsa,
2017). Boone (2017) goes beyond timing and performance to
argue that it is not merely a commitment to cyber security
issues which is missing, but also responsibility and ownership.
The introduction and maintenance of appropriate cyber
security systems cannot be a one-person show; they require
the contribution and commitment, over time, of many
departments and much expertise.
4.4.4 Governmental involvement
Traditionally, governments have focused their interest on the
security of military and national intelligence agencies (Keegan,
2014); however, they now have to include the security of supply
chains that are significant contributors to their economies. More
than 50 countries have issued national cyber security strategies
with defined objectives (Rongping and Yonggang, 2014). The
European Union regularly updates its EU Cybersecurity Strategy.
The growing complexity of cyber SCs makes it impossible for
individual companies acting alone to promote and coordinate
holistic security efforts. Hence, Keegan (2014) claims
governments have to sponsor and guide cyber security projects and
create forums which allow for more accessible communication and
planning of strategies to manage cyber risks.
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
232
4.5 Measures for mitigation
This section has identified measures to mitigate cyber risks
from the extant literature. The risk mitigation typically depends
on the type of cyber-attack, sophistication of the attack and
resilience of the organisation (Amin, 2017). While some of the
proposed countermeasures may look familiar from the
traditional SCRM studies (e.g. supplier audits and information
sharing), others focus on cyberspace more explicitly and are,
therefore, new to the literature. Building on the scope of cyber
risks identified here, the study rejects using a conventional
proactive and reactive risk mitigation classification and instead
proposes a time-phases classification of cyber-attack mitigation
measures.
In their efforts to model a system-aware cyber security
architecture, Jones and Horowitz (2012) differentiate between
three phases of a cyber-attack, namely pre-, trans- and postattack. This time phase structure is adopted in this study to use
a wider analytical lens on the stages of, and countermeasures
for a cyber-attack. Table III classifies cyber risk measures for
mitigation following pre-, trans- and post-cyber-attack stages.
Pre-attack countermeasures can be divided between those
aimed at the technical level and those which are either directed
at or carried out by human factors. Firstly, technical
countermeasures include aspects such as firewalls and
passwords (access control) or the diversification of soft-and
hardware and are frequently discussed in the literature as they
form the most fundamental layer of protection. They specify
the level of system accessibility (Kunnathur, 2015) and are
designed to make aggression less attractive to attackers
(Al Kattan et al., 2009). However, many authors argue that
such technical countermeasures only provide a partial solution
and, therefore, need to be complemented by actions that are
directed at the backbone of every supply chain, i.e. the
personnel (Smith et al., 2007; Boyson, 2014; Boyes, 2015).
The implementation of automated IT operations has allowed
companies to employ fewer staff (Urciuoli et al., 2013). In
addition, some argue that, the few remaining IT staff are then
over challenged as employees and have little time for security
awareness (Sindhuja, 2014; Venter, 2014; Kunnathur, 2015),
holistic understanding of systems (Faisal et al., 2007; Urciuoli
and Hintsa, 2017) and commitment (Tran et al., 2016; Boone,
2017). To nurture the capabilities of their employees and
prepare them for the new challenges of cyber chains, risk
awareness initiatives and training are among the most cited
countermeasures in the literature (Table III).
Equally prominent in the literature is the accreditation of
cyber systems against security standards, such as ISO/IEC.
Until now, official bodies have developed and introduced
dozens of standards for different industries and sectors covering
cyber security issues (Bartol, 2014). The adherence to these
standards can serve as a base for a standard set of terminology
and understanding of key security concepts (Davis, 2015), but
also as a guideline to desired security objectives (Kunnathur,
2015). Nevertheless, from a SC perspective, the implementation
of these standards has often been criticised for various reasons.
Kunnathur (2015) argue that current standards are designed for
independent companies; although there is a strong need for
standardised inter-organisational practices, it lacks as evidenced
Figure 10 A conceptual model forsupply chain cyber security system
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
233
by the variety of accrediting bodies/organisations (Kunnathur,
2015). Keegan (2014) and Davis (2015) argue that owing to the
numbers of entities in most supply chains, successful
implementation of inter-organisational standards is only
replicable at the level of direct supply (Tier 1 suppliers), but
cannot extend further up the supply chain network. Hence, the
focal company spending resources on accreditation against these
standards cannot ensure that the entire SC will follow their
example. Venter (2014) is particularly critical of the standards,
stating that some of the proposed methods are not feasible or are
simply bad practice. Another criticism is that there is a common
misconception of ISO standards, that they do not have an
expiration date (Al-Najjar and Jawad, 2011). This makes
companies believe that once they have acquired accreditation,
they will always meet the required standards. Consequently,
companies which have acquired a certificate often assume they
do not have to improve their processes continuously, thus risking
complacency.
Another countermeasure which is frequently examined in
the literature but still requires thorough evaluation is
information sharing. As stated in Table III, many authors
consider information sharing as a promising way to cope
with cyber risks, because it allows for intra-and interorganisational communication and processing of riskrelevant data. The enforcement of the General Data
Protection Regulation in May 2018 is likely to standardise
information sharing to protect breaches of individual and
business rights and freedom (National Cyber Security
Centre, UK, 2018). Paradoxically, many scholars claim that
information sharing is one of the most severe threats to
cyberspaces. This is owing to the level of support required to
handle large volumes of highly sensitive information,
without which human errors increase (Smith et al., 2007;
Deane et al., 2009; Kim and Im, 2014). Nevertheless, as
Tran et al. (2016) found in a series of interviews, many
companies do not perceive potential ‘information leakage’
as a security risk. It is critical that employees frequently
change their passwords and do not share passwords with
others to avoid information leakage.
Most of the risks discussed in the literature can be
attributed to the pre-attack phase; few articles address
countermeasures for subsequent phases (trans-attack and
post-attack). To address this imbalance, more work is
needed on the proactive mitigation of cyber risks and
reactive mitigation strategies. “Cyber-insurance” is one
prominent mitigating measure for the post-attack stage.
Cyber insurance dates from projections for Y2K related
crashes but has burgeoned because of the increase in virtual
events and their impact on businesses (Camillo, 2017). The
growth of Industry 4.0 is likely to be regulated by similar
insurance policies. It may be impossible to design the perfect
cyber security system that can deter all risks; therefore, it is
Table III Measures for mitigating cyber risk
Pre-attack phase
Access control Warren and Hutchinson (2000), Deane et al. (2009); Sindhuja and Kunnathur (2015)
Accreditation against security standards Warren and Hutchinson (2000), Stephens and Valverde (2013); Bahl and Wali (2014); Keegan (2014) Venter
(2014), Davis (2015); Sindhuja and Kunnathur (2015)
Certified hard- and software Boyson (2014), Kim and Im (2014); Sokolov et al. (2014); Windelberg (2016)
Cross-functional communication Boyson (2014); Sindhuja and Kunnathur (2015)
Formal agreements between SC partners Cai and Jun (2008); Boyson (2014); Sindhuja and Kunnathur (2015); Tran et al. (2016)
Information sharing Barlow and Li (2007), Boyson (2014); Linton et al. (2014); Urciouli (2015)
Internalisation of operations Boone (2017)
More sophisticated and diverse
applications
Jones and Horowitz (2012), Tran et al. (2016)
Network audit Deane et al. (2009), Stephens and Valverde (2013); Davis (2015); Windelberg (2016)
Risk awareness initiatives Warren and Hutchinson (2000), Deane et al. (2009); Stephens and Valverde (2013), Boyson (2014); Davis
(2015); Sindhuja and Kunnathur (2015)
Risk classification Faisal et al. (2007), Stephens and Valverde (2013); Boyson (2014), Davis (2015); Windelberg (2016)
Risk identification software Zhang et al. (2012) Manzouri et al. (2013), Bartol (2014); Boyson (2014), Charitoudi and Blyth (2014)
Standard guidelines for SC collaboration Pfleeger et al. (2007), Rongping and Yonggang (2014); Davis (2015); Sindhuja and Kunnathur (2015)
Supplier audit Zhang et al. (2012), Bartol (2014); Windelberg (2016)
Training Warren and Hutchinson (2000), Pfleeger et al. (2007); Deane et al. (2009), Deane et al. (2010); Bartol (2014),
Davis (2015); Sindhuja and Kunnathur (2015); Tran et al. (2016)
Vulnerability checks Jones and Horowitz (2012), Stephens and Valverde (2013); Boyes (2015)
“Zero-trust” policy Boone (2017)
Trans-attack phase
Data consistency checks Jones and Horowitz (2012)
Task force Davis (2015)
Post-attack phase
Forensics Jones and Horowitz (2012)
Incident documentation Deane et al. (2009), Davis (2015); Windelberg (2016)
Insurances Huang et al. (2008), Boyson (2014); Camillo (2017)
Recovery and backup procedures Deane et al. (2009); Windelberg (2016)
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
234
expedient to have a diverse set of countermeasures at hand,
covering different risk attack scenarios and contingencies.
5. Conclusion
At its core, supply chain management is a discipline of
connectedness; integrating the activities and processes of
diverse organisations into effectively functioning networks. But
with supply chain integration comes dependencies, some
purely commercial, but many arising from integrating IT
systems to exchange data/information, giving rise to supply
chain cyber risk. This study defines supply chain cyber risk as
accidental or deliberate IT events that threaten the integrity of a
supply chain’s infrastructure, leading to cascading disruptions.
Similar to conventional supply chain risks, cyber risk impacts in
terms of financial losses, delays and loss of customer service on
a short-term basis; and market value and brand reputation on a
long-term basis.
A SLR on the nascent area of cyber risks in supply chains was
conducted applying a rigorous, transparent and replicable
methodology. The study addressed the research question: How
can organisations manage cyber risks in supply chains? Text mining
was followed by connectivity-based clustering to identify and
verify the core themes (Figure 6) that guide and inform the
analysis. Five meta themes were selected: cyber risk types;
cyber risk propagation; cyber risk points of penetration; cyber
security challenges; and mitigation measures.
Under cyber risks, the study classifies cyber risks into five
categories: physical threats, breakdown, indirect attacks, direct
attacks and insider threats. Cyber risk propagation zones were
identified (primary, secondary and tertiary) drawing on
previous work which suggests supply chain risks are not static
and follows the “risk propagation” phenomenon (Ghadge et al.,
2013; Garvey et al., 2015). The third meta-theme identifies
three key failure points where cyber risks are likeliest to emerge.
The study classifies these PoPs into technical, human and
physical dimensions. Four critical challenges for an
organisation trying to manage supply chain cyber risks are
recognised; inter-organisational collaboration; employee
knowledge, continuous improvement and the need for
government level involvement. The fifth and final meta-theme
is measures for mitigation. Although carry over measures from
traditional risk mitigation work are identified in the literature,
the study rejects using a conventional proactive and reactive
risk mitigation classification and instead adopts a time phasebased classification. See Table III for classification of cyber risk
measures for mitigation following pre-, trans- and post-cyberattack stages.
While indirect and direct attacks (i.e. viruses, hacker attacks,
spoofing attacks) are undoubtedly the most commonly
discussed types of attack, the study found that the increasing
integration and complexity of cyber SCs, facilitates the
occurrence of unintentional cyber risk events such as the
underperformance of a critical cyber system or an unintended
human error. With the latter, the employee could potentially be
anywhere in the interconnected SC, adding to unpredictability
and compounding consequences. For capturing these
consequences, this study used a risk propagation approach and
depicted how cyber risks occurring at one point of penetration
spread to other linked entities driven by SC inter-connectivity.
5.1 Conceptual model
This study finds that companies need to implement identified
control measures holistically at the SC level to create an
extensive supply chain cyber security system that builds upon
elements from both IT and organisational security systems. To
address this need and building on the finding that cyber supply
chain risks can emerge from different sources, the study
proposes a “supply chain cyber security system” as a unifying
conceptual model (Figure 10). These sources are identified as
either associated with IT (e.g. such as a direct or indirect
attack), organisational (e.g. insider threat) or the supply chain
(e.g. physical threat) systems. Thus, all three diverse elements
namely, IT system, organisation process, and supply chain
security system (which includes process and infrastructure
network) must be aligned to manage cyber risk in supply
chains. Each of these three can then be linked to specific PoPs
weak points and linked with technical, human and physical
levels. Thus, IT security systems can counter cyber threats by
buying hardware, the latest technology and secure software
platforms. Organisational security system mitigates cyberattack by securing physical assets, adhering to set guidelines
and by raising awareness among employees. Information
sharing, collaborative risk management, and adaptability are
found to be key strategies for supply chain security. This
interlinked relationship between different (sub) system (shown
in overlapping circles in Figure 10) and distinct mitigation
strategies (shown in the triangles) is critical for managing cyber
risk in supply chains. Coordination of these security systems,
joint information sharing and applying appropriate mitigating
strategies can effectively manage cyber risk in supply chains.
This integrated model shown in Figure 10, is termed a supply
chain cyber security system. The conceptual model shows that
IT, organisation and supply chain security systems are
interlinked, and closer collaboration is essential for successful
implementation of cyber risk mitigation strategies (Stephens
and Valverde, 2013; Hamlen and Thuraisingham, 2013;
Urciuoli et al., 2013; Bartol, 2014). These inter-disciplinary
security systems should be coordinated to standardise and
implement agreed cyber security strategies for supply chains
and wider networks. Alignment of responsibilities and
managing conflicting policies/regulations in each system is a
challenging problem to handle. There is however the age-old
threat that a chain is only as strong as its weakest link; hence our
model’s focus on the integration of IT system, organisation and
supply chain (including process and network infrastructure)
security system.
5.2 A research agenda for managing cyber risk in supply
chains
A literature review is expected to provide critical knowledge
gaps along with the development of new models, proposition or
theories (Webster and Watson, 2002). The main avenues for
future research that emerged from this review are now
presented. Recent research has suggested several dimensions
that have a substantial influence on a SC’s vulnerability to
cyber risk. These include different network configurations
(Bandyopadhyay et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2012), firm sizes
(Tran et al., 2016), corporate cultures (Xue et al., 2013),
industry sectors (Sharma and Routroy, 2016; Tran et al., 2016)
and business principles (Durowoju et al., 2012; Charitoudi and
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
235
Blyth, 2014). This research found that most studies take a
generic perspective, and therefore, this study pinpoints the
need for contextualised studies that address such dimensions
in-depth to relate specific cyber risks to specific dimensions.
Similarly, an array of mitigation measures against cyber risks
have been identified; however, there is little evidence of specific
measures for mitigation being empirically tested. So, to make
the mitigation decision useful, for clarity of when and where
responses work best, strategies are identified and separated into
the three phases namely, pre-, trans- and post-attack. Adopting
this approach reveals that there is a lack of research on
developing tailored measures for cyber security threats. In
addition to highly context-specific studies, large-scale datadriven research is necessary, which can then be used to test
hypotheses and models (Barlow and Li, 2007; Kunnathur,
2015). Empirical research on building robust cyber security
models using modern big data analytics tools and techniques is
also required to inform and fuel the next generation of research
in this field.
It is evident from this SLR that human/behavioural factors
play a vital role in cyber security, and yet have been neglected in
favour of studying more technical factors such as data,
applications and networks. In cyberspace, employees are a
major failure point (PoPs), yet technologically empowered
employees manage developments such as IoT, blockchain and
decentralised distribution (omnichannel retailing) with little
awareness or training on data security. Incriminating human
interactions have widely been ignored (Kunnathur, 2015). A
variety of supply chain stakeholders can sabotage, either
deliberately or unwillingly, even the most sophisticated security
systems. However, this study also detects a related lack of
research on the impact of cyber risk on employees (and by
definition therefore their employing organisation). This is very
much an under-explored area (Manzouri et al., 2013), which
will become of increasing interest to employees, employers and
society.
5.3 Implications for research and practice
To identify relevant literature of an appropriate quality and
quantity, the SLR had to extend beyond articles in the
operations, logistics and supply chain area. Following a
replicable and reiterative screening and synthesis process, the
scope of this study was still limited to 41 independently verified
interdisciplinary papers published between 1990 and 2017.
Complementary cluster analysis following data mining
approach provided support for transparency and rigour in
conducting what is believed to be a first SLR on cyber risk in
supply chains.
The paper provides the following implications for research
and practice. The negative consequences of cyber security
disruptions could impact not only individual firms or SCs, but
entire globally-connected communities. The limited set of
papers available for this study suggests that little academic
attention has addressed this field compared to other topics/
technologies interfacing with supply chain management such as
the IoT, blockchain, digitalisation, autonomous transportation
and virtual reality. Interestingly, all these disruptive
technologies are vulnerable to cyber risks owing to the rapid
transformation of supply chains following the Industry 4.0
revolution. Supply chain integration and digitalisation go hand
in hand. Recently Gartner (2018) predicted that there would be
14.2 billion devices connected worldwide by 2019.
Consequently, it is vital to raise awareness of cyber security
risks in supply chains and help both practitioners and
academics manage future disruptive cyber risks.
There is an increased misuse of cyber-physical systems for
counterfeits, forgeries, data theft, trafficking, attacks on
transportation infrastructure, ransomware attacks and Cryptojacking. Such cyber activities significantly impact multiple
stakeholders with clear implications for a broader ecosystem.
How will businesses, governments and society react to
profound and frequent cyber-attacks? This is perhaps the most
fundamental cyber risk-related line of questioning, as the
answers will dictate the speed and level of investment in cyber
security worldwide.
References
Al-Najjar, S. and Jawad, M. (2011), “ISO 9001
implementation barriers and misconceptions: an empirical
study”, International Journal of Business Administration, Vol. 2
No. 3, pp. 118-131.
Al Kattan, I., Al Nunu, A. and Saleh, K. (2009), “A stochastic
model for improving information security in supply chain
systems”, International Journal of Information Systems and
Supply Chain Management, Vol. 2 No. 3, pp. 35-49.
Amin, Z. (2017), “A practical road map for assessing cyber
risk”, Journal of Risk Research, Vol. 22 No. 1, pp. 1-12.
Arksey, H. and O’Malley, L. (2005), “Scoping studies: towards
a methodological framework’”, International Journal of Social
Research Methodology, Vol. 8 No. 1, pp. 19-32.
Bahl, S., Wali, O. and Kumaraguru, P. (2011), “Information
security practices followed in the Indian software services
industry: an exploratory study”, Second Worldwide Cybersecurity
Summit, London.
Bandyopadhyay, T., Jacob, V. and Raghunathan, S. (2010),
“Information security in networked supply chains: impact of
network vulnerability and supply chain integration on
incentives to invest”, Information Technology and Management,
Vol. 11 No. 1, pp. 7-23.
Barlow, A. and Li, F. (2007), “E-supply chains: understanding
current and future opportunities and barriers”, International
Journal of Information Technology and Management, Vol. 6
Nos 2/3/4, pp. 286-298.
Bartol, N. (2014), “Cyber supply chain security practices DNA –
filling in the puzzle using a diverse set of disciplines”,
Technovation, Vol. 34 No. 7, pp. 354-361.
Boone, A. (2017), “Cyber-security must be a C-suite priority”,
Computer Fraud & Security, Vol. 2017 No. 2, pp. 13-15.
Boyes, H. (2015), “Cybersecurity and cyber-resilient supply
chains”, Technology Innovation Management Review, Vol. 5
No. 4, pp. 28-34.
Boyson, S. (2014), “Cyber supply chain risk management:
revolutionizing the strategic control of critical IT systems”,
Technovation, Vol. 34 No. 7, pp. 342-353.
Boyson, S., Corsi, T. and Rossman, H. (2009), “Building a
cyber supply chain assurance reference model”, Science
Applications International Corporation (SAIC).
Burgess, K., Singh, P.J. and Koroglu, R. (2006), “Supply chain
management: a structured literature review and implications
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
236
for future research”, International Journal of Operations &
Production Management, Vol. 26 No. 7, pp. 703-729.
Cai, S. and Jun, M. (2008), “A qualitative study of the
relationship between interorganizational internet
communication and purchasing performance”, International
Journal of Management and Enterprise Development, Vol. 5
No. 6, pp. 683-707.
Caldwell, T. (2015), “Securing small businesses – the weakest
link in a supply chain?”, Computer Fraud & Security,
Vol. 2015 No. 9, pp. 5-10.
Camillo, M. (2017), “Cyber risk and the changing role of
insurance”, Journal of Cyber Policy, Vol. 2 No. 1, pp. 53-63.
Cebula, J.J. and Young, L.R. (2010), “A taxonomy of
operational cyber security risks”, Technical Note CMU/SEI2010-TN-028, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie
Mellon University.
Charitoudi, K. and Blyth, A.J.C. (2014), “An agent-based
socio-technical approach to impact assessment for cyber
defense”, Information Security Journal: A Global Perspective,
Vol. 23 Nos 4/6, pp. 125-136.
Creswell, J. (2014), Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative
and Mixed Methods Approaches, SAGE Publications,
Thousand Oaks, CA.
Davis, A. (2015), “Building cyber-resilience into supply
chains”, Technology Innovation Management Review, Vol. 5
No. 4, pp. 19-27.
Deane, J.K., Rees, C.L. and Baker, W.H. (2010), “Assessing
the information technology security risk in medical supply
chains”, International Journal of Electronic Marketing and
Retailing, Vol. 3 No. 2, pp. 145-155.
Deane, J.K., Ragsdale, C.T., Rakes, T.R. and Rees, L.P.
(2009), “Managing supply chain risk and disruption from IT
security incidents”, Operations Management Research, Vol. 2
Nos 1/4, pp. 4-12.
Denyer, D. and Tranfield, D. (2009), “Producing a systematic
review’”, in Buchanan, D. and Bryman, A. (Eds), The Sage
Handbook of Organizational Research Methods, Sage
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. 671-689.
Dolgui, A., Ivanov, D. and Sokolov, B. (2018), “Ripple effect
in the supply chain: an analysis and recent literature”,
International Journal of Production Research, Vol. 56 Nos 1/2,
pp. 414-430.
Durowoju, O.A., Chan, H.K. and Wang, X. (2012),
“Entropy assessment of supply chain disruption”, Journal
of Manufacturing Technology Management, Vol. 23 No. 8,
pp. 998-1014.
Ehrich, K., Freeman, G., Richards, S., Robinson, I. and
Shepperd, S. (2002), “How to do a scoping exercise: continuity
of care”, Research, Policy and Planning, Vol. 20 No. 1,
pp. 25-29.
Eling, M. and Wirfs, J. (2019), “What are the actual costs of
cyber risk events?”, European Journal of Operational Research,
Vol. 272 No. 3, pp. 1109-1119.
Faisal, M.N., Banwet, D.K. and Shankar, R. (2007),
“Information risks management in supply chains: an
assessment and mitigation framework”, Journal of Enterprise
Information Management, Vol. 20 No. 6, pp. 677-699.
Gartner (2018), “Gartner identifies top 10 strategic IoT
technologies and trends”, available at: www.gartner.com/en/
newsroom/press-releases/2018-11-07-gartner-identifies-top-10-
strategic-iot-technologies-and-trends(accessed 18 July 2019).
Garvey, M.D., Carnovale, S. and Yeniyurt, S. (2015), “An
analytical framework for supply network risk propagation: a
Bayesian network approach”, European Journal of Operational
Research, Vol. 243 No. 2, pp. 618-627.
Ghadge, A., Dani, S. and Kalawsky, R. (2012), “Supply chain
risk management: present and future scope”, The
International Journal of Logistics Management, Vol. 23 No. 3,
pp. 313-339.
Ghadge, A., Dani, S., Chester, M. and Kalawsky, R. (2013),
“A systems approach for modelling supply chain risks”,
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, Vol. 18
No. 5, pp. 523-538.
Ghadge, A., Wurtmann, H. and Seuring, S. (2019), “Managing
climate change risks in global supply chains: a review and
research agenda”, International Journal of Production Research,
pp. 1-21, available at: https://doi. org/10.1080/00207543.2019.
1629670
Gordon, S. and Ford, R. (2006), “On the definition and
classification of cybercrime”, Journal in Computer Virology,
Vol. 2 No. 1, pp. 13-20.
Hamlen, K.W. and Thuraisingham, B. (2013), “Data security
services, solutions and standards for outsourcing”, Computer
Standards & Interfaces, Vol. 35 No. 1, pp. 1-5.
Ho, W., Zheng, T., Yildiz, H. and Talluri, S. (2015), “Supply
chain risk management: a literature review”, International
Journal of Production Research, Vol. 53 No. 16, pp. 5031-5069.
Houses of Parliament (2011), available at: www.parliament.uk/
documents/post/postpn389_cyber-security-in-the-uk.pdf
(accessed 18 July 2019).
Huang, C.D., Behara, R.S. and Hu, Q. (2008), “Managing risk
propagation in extended enterprise networks”, IT
Professional, Vol. 10 No. 4.
Jones, R.A. and Horowitz, B. (2012), “A system-aware cyber
security architecture”, Systems Engineering, Vol. 15 No. 2,
pp. 225-240.
Jüttner, U., Peck, H. and Christopher, M. (2003), “Supply
chain risk management: outlining an agenda for future
research”, International Journal of Logistics Research and
Applications, Vol. 6 No. 4, pp. 197-210.
Kache, F. and Seuring, S. (2014), “Linking collaboration and
integration to risk and performance in supply chains via a
review of literature reviews”, Supply Chain Management: An
International Journal, Vol. 19 Nos 5/6, pp. 664-682.
Keegan, C. (2014), “Cyber security in the supply chain: a
perspective from the insurance industry”, Technovation,
Vol. 34 No. 7, pp. 380-381.
Khursheed, A., Kumar, M. and Sharma, M. (2016), “Security
against cyber-attacks in food industry”, International Journal of
Control Theory and Applications, Vol. 9 No. 17, pp. 8623-8628.
Kim, K.C. and Im, I. (2014), “Research letter: issues of cyber
supply chain security in Korea”, Technovation, Vol. 34 No. 7,
pp. 387-387.
KPMG (2017), available at: https://home.kpmg/uk/en/
home/services/advisory/risk-consulting/technology-risk/
cyber-security.html
Kunnathur, A. (2015), “Information security in supply chains:
a management control perspective”, Information and
Computer Security, Vol. 23 No. 5, pp. 476-496.
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
237
Linkov, I., Eisenberg, D.A., Plourde, K., Seager, T.P., Allen, J.
and Kott, A. (2013), “Resilience metrics for cyber systems”,
Environment Systems and Decisions, Vol. 33 No. 4, pp. 471-476.
Linton, J.D., Boyson, S. and Aje, J. (2014), “The challenge of
cyber supply chain security to research and practice – an
introduction”, Technovation, Vol. 34 No. 7, pp. 339-339.
Luiijf, E., Besseling, K. and de Graaf, P. (2013), “Nineteen
national cyber security strategies”, International Journal of
Critical Infrastructures, Vol. 9 Nos 1/2, pp. 3-31.
McCracken, G. (1988), The Long Interview, SAGE, Newsbury
Park, CA.
Manuj, I. and Mentzer, J.T. (2008), “Global supply chain risk
management strategies”, International Journal of Physical
Distribution & Logistics Management, Vol. 38 No. 3, pp. 192-223.
Manzouri, M., Ab Rahman, M.N., Nasimi, F. and Arshad, H.
(2013), “A model for securing sharing information across the
supply chain”, American Journal of Applied Sciences, Vol. 10
No. 3, pp. 253-253.
Mustafa Kamal, M. and Irani, Z. (2014), “Analysing supply
chain integration through a systematic literature review: a
normative perspective”, Supply Chain Management: An
International Journal, Vol. 19 Nos 5/6, pp. 523-557.
Mukhopadhyay, A., Chatterjee, S., Saha, D., Mahanti, A. and
Sadhukhan, S.K. (2013), “Cyber-risk decision models: to
insure IT or not?”, Decision Support Systems, Vol. 56, pp. 11-26.
National Cyber Security Centre, UK (2018), “Public report on
the cyber threat to UK businesses, 2017-18”, available at:
www.ncsc.gov.uk/cyberthreat (accessed 12 February 2019).
National Cyber Security Centre, UK (2016), “Common cyber
attacks: reducing the impact”, available at: www.ncsc.gov.
uk/white-papers/common-cyber-attacks-reducing-impact
(accessed 12 February 2019).
Peck, H. (2006), “Reconciling supply chain vulnerability, risk
and supply chain management”, International Journal of
Logistics Research and Applications, Vol. 9 No. 2, pp. 127-142.
Pfleeger, S.L., Libicki, M. and Webber, M. (2007), “I’ll buy
that! Cybersecurity in the internet marketplace”, IEEE
Security & Privacy Magazine, Vol. 5 No. 3, pp. 25-31.
Reade, C. (2009), “Human resource management implications
of terrorist threats to firms in the supply chain”, International
Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management,
Vol. 39 No. 6, pp. 469-485.
Renaud, K., Flower Day, S., Warrenton, M., Cocksfoot, P. and
Oregon, C. (2018), “Is the responsibilization of the cyber
security risk reasonable and judicious?”, Computers &
Security, Vol. 78, pp. 198-211.
Rongping, M. and Yonggang, F. (2014), “Security in the cyber
supply chain: a Chinese perspective”, Technovation, Vol. 34
No. 7, pp. 385-385.
Rousseau, D.M., Manning, J. and Denyer, D. (2008),
“Evidence in management and organizational science:
assembling the field’s full weight of scientific knowledge
through syntheses”, The Academy of Management Annals,
Vol. 2 No. 1, pp. 475-515.
Sharma, S. and Routroy, S. (2016), “Modelling information risk
in supply chain using Bayesian networks”, Journal of Enterprise
Information Management, Vol. 29 No. 2, pp. 238-254.
Simpson, S., Baldini, D., Bits, G., Dillard, D., Fagan, C.,
Minnis, B. and Reddy, D. (2010), “Software integrity
controls – an assurance-based approach to minimizing risks
in the software supply chain”, SAFECode, June.
Sindhuja, P. (2014), “Impact of information security initiatives
on supply chain performance an empirical investigation”,
Information Management and Computer Security, Vol. 22
No. 5, pp. 450-473.
Sindhuja, P.N. and Kunnathur, A.S. (2015), “Information
security in supply chains: a management control perspective”,
Information & Computer Security.
Smith, G.E., Watson, K.J., Baker, W.H. and Pokorski Ii, J.A.
(2007), “A critical balance: collaboration and security in the
IT-enabled supply chain”, International Journal of Production
Research, Vol. 45 No. 11, pp. 2595-2613.
Sokolov, A., Mesropyan, V. and Chulok, A. (2014), “Supply
chain cyber security: a Russian outlook”, Technovation,
Vol. 34 No. 7, pp. 389-389.
Stephens, J. and Valverde, R. (2013), “Security of
e-procurement transactions in supply chain reengineering”,
Computer and Information Science, Vol. 6 No. 3, pp. 1-20.
Tan, P.N., Steinbach, M. and Kumar, V. (2017), “Data
mining cluster analysis: basic concepts and algorithms”,
Introduction to Data Mining, 2nd ed., Pearson, London.
The Institute of Risk Management (2014), “Cyber risk:
executive summary”, available at: www.theirm.org/media/
2612400/IRM_Cyber-Risk_Exec-Summ_A5_low-res.pdf
(accessed 12 February 2019).
Tran, T., Childerhouse, P. and Deakins, E. (2016), “Supply
chain information sharing: challenges and risk mitigation
strategies”, Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management,
Vol. 27 No. 8, pp. 1102-1126.
Tranfield, D., Denyer, D. and Smart, P. (2003), “Towards a
methodology for developing evidence-informed management
knowledge by means of systematic review”, British Journal of
Management, Vol. 14 No. 3, pp. 207-222.
Urciuoli, L. (2015), “Cyber-resilience: a strategic approach for
supply chain management”, Technology Innovation Management
Review, Vol. 5 No. 4.
Urciuoli, L. and Hintsa, J. (2017), “Adapting supply chain
management strategies to security – an analysis of existing gaps
and recommendations for improvement”, International Journal
of Logistics Research and Applications, Vol. 20 No. 3, pp. 276-295.
Urciuoli, L., Männistö, T., Hintsa, J. and Khan, T. (2013),
“Supply chain cyber security – potential threats”, Information
& Security: An International Journal, Vol. 29, pp. 51-68.
Venter, H.S. (2014), “Security issues in the security cyber
supply chain in South Africa”, Technovation, Vol. 34 No. 7,
pp. 392-392.
Verizon (2018), “Data breach investigations report”, available
at: www.verizonenterprise.com/industry/public_sector/docs/
2018_dbir_public_sector.pdf(accessed 18 July 2019).
Warren, M. and Hutchinson, W. (2000), “Cyber-attacks
against supply chain management systems: a short note”,
International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics
Management, Vol. 30 Nos 7/8, pp. 710-716.
Webster, J. and Watson, R. (2002), “Analyzing the past to
prepare for the future: writing a literature review”, MIS
Quarterly, Vol. 26 No. 2, pp. 13-23.
Wilding, R.D. and Wagner, B. (2012), “Systematic review and
the need for evidence”, Supply Chain Management: An
International Journal, Vol. 17 No. 4, pp. 377-402.
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
238
Windelberg, M. (2016), “Objectives for managing cyber supply
chain risk”, International Journal of Critical Infrastructure
Protection, Vol. 12, pp. 4-11.
Williams, C. (2014), “Security in the cyber supply chain: is it
achievable in a complex, interconnected world?”,
Technovation, Vol. 34 No. 7, pp. 382-384.
Xue, L., Zhang, C., Ling, H. and Zhao, X. (2013), “Risk
mitigation in supply chain digitization: system modularity
and information technology governance”, Journal of
Management Information Systems, Vol. 30 No. 1, pp. 325-325.
Yoon, J., Talluri, S., Yildiz, H. and Ho, W. (2017), “Models for
supplier selection and risk mitigation: a holistic approach”,
International Journal of Production Research, pp. 1-26.
Zhang, D.Y., Cao, X., Wang, L. and Zeng, Y. (2012),
“Mitigating the risk of information leakage in a two-level
supply chain through optimal supplier selection”, Journal of
Intelligent Manufacturing, Vol. 23 No. 4, pp. 1351-1364.
Further reading
Cherdantseva, Y., Burnap, P., Blyth, A., Eden, P., Jones, K.,
Soulsby, H. and Stoddart, K. (2016), “A review of cyber
security risk assessment methods for SCADA systems”,
Computers & Security, Vol. 56, pp. 1-27.
Franke, U. and Brynielsson, J. (2014), “Cyber situational
awareness – a systematic review of the literature”, Computers &
Security, Vol. 46, pp. 18-31.
Khan, O. and Estay, D.A.S. (2015), “Supply chain cyberresilience: creating an agenda for future research”,
Technology Innovation Management Review, Vol. 5 No. 4,
pp. 6-12.
Ö!güt, H., Raghunathan, S. and Menon, N. (2011), “Cyber
security risk management: public policy implications of
correlated risk, imperfect ability to prove loss, and
observability of self-protection”, Risk Analysis, Vol. 31 No. 3,
pp. 497-512.
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
239
Appendix
Corresponding author
Abhijeet Ghadge can be contacted at: Abhijeet.Ghadge@
Cranfield.ac.uk
For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
Table AI Keyword identification based on inter-disciplinary literature review
Supply chain risk management Information technology Universal keywords
Enterprise risk management Cyber security Cybersecurity
Risk management Cyber attack Disruption
Supply chain attacks Cyber breaches Firewall
Supply chain crime Cyber crime Hacker
Supply chain integrity Cyber crisis Infrastructure
Supply chain integrity risk Cyber disruptions Phishing
Supply chain resilience Cyber/IT failure Sabotage
Supply chain risk(s) Cyber incident Security
Supply chain security Cyber resilience Spoofing
Supply chain threats Cyber supply chain(s) Surveillance
Risk identification Cyber supply chain risk management Terrorism
Risk assessment Cyber systems Threat
Risk mitigation Cyber supply network
Risk control Data/information security
Information infrastructure
Information security/risk
Managing cyber risk in supply chains
Abhijeet Ghadge, Maximilian Weiß, Nigel D. Caldwell and Richard Wilding
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
Volume 25 · Number 2 · 2020 · 223–240
240
View publication stats
Vol.:(0123456789)
Quality & Quantity (2021) 55:1703–1725
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-020-01072-9
1 3
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive
exploratory research
Mattia Casula1 · Nandhini Rangarajan2 · Patricia Shields2
Accepted: 5 November 2020 / Published online: 8 December 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
While hypotheses frame explanatory studies and provide guidance for measurement and
statistical tests, deductive, exploratory research does not have a framing device like the
hypothesis. To this purpose, this article examines the landscape of deductive, exploratory
research and offers the working hypothesis as a flexible, useful framework that can guide
and bring coherence across the steps in the research process. The working hypothesis conceptual framework is introduced, placed in a philosophical context, defined, and applied
to public administration and comparative public policy. Doing so, this article explains: the
philosophical underpinning of exploratory, deductive research; how the working hypothesis informs the methodologies and evidence collection of deductive, explorative research;
the nature of micro-conceptual frameworks for deductive exploratory research; and, how
the working hypothesis informs data analysis when exploratory research is deductive.
Keywords Exploratory research · Working hypothesis · Deductive qualitative research ·
Pragmatism
1 Introduction
Exploratory research is generally considered to be inductive and qualitative (Stebbins
2001). Exploratory qualitative studies adopting an inductive approach do not lend themselves to a priori theorizing and building upon prior bodies of knowledge (Reiter 2013;
Bryman 2004 as cited in Pearse 2019). Juxtaposed against quantitative studies that employ
deductive confirmatory approaches, exploratory qualitative research is often criticized for
lack of methodological rigor and tentativeness in results (Thomas and Magilvy 2011). This
* Mattia Casula
mattia.casula2@unibo.it
Nandhini Rangarajan
nr11@txstate.edu
Patricia Shields
ps07@txstate.edu
1 Department of Political and Social Sciences, University of Bologna, Strada Maggiore 45,
40125 Bologna, Italy
2 Texas State University, San Marcos, TX, USA
1704 M. Casula et al.
1 3
paper focuses on the neglected topic of deductive, exploratory research and proposes working hypotheses as a useful framework for these studies.
To emphasize that certain types of applied research lend themselves more easily to
deductive approaches, to address the downsides of exploratory qualitative research, and
to ensure qualitative rigor in exploratory research, a significant body of work on deductive qualitative approaches has emerged (see for example, Gilgun 2005, 2015; Hyde 2000;
Pearse 2019). According to Gilgun (2015, p. 3) the use of conceptual frameworks derived
from comprehensive reviews of literature and a priori theorizing were common practices
in qualitative research prior to the publication of Glaser and Strauss’s (1967) The Discovery of Grounded Theory. Gilgun (2015) coined the terms Deductive Qualitative Analysis
(DQA) to arrive at some sort of “middle-ground” such that the benefits of a priori theorizing (structure) and allowing room for new theory to emerge (flexibility) are reaped simultaneously. According to Gilgun (2015, p. 14) “in DQA, the initial conceptual framework and
hypotheses are preliminary. The purpose of DQA is to come up with a better theory than
researchers had constructed at the outset (Gilgun 2005, 2009). Indeed, the production of
new, more useful hypotheses is the goal of DQA”.
DQA provides greater level of structure for both the experienced and novice qualitative
researcher (see for example Pearse 2019; Gilgun 2005). According to Gilgun (2015, p. 4)
“conceptual frameworks are the sources of hypotheses and sensitizing concepts”. Sensitizing concepts frame the exploratory research process and guide the researcher’s data collection and reporting efforts. Pearse (2019) discusses the usefulness for deductive thematic
analysis and pattern matching to help guide DQA in business research. Gilgun (2005) discusses the usefulness of DQA for family research.
Given these rationales for DQA in exploratory research, the overarching purpose of this
paper is to contribute to that growing corpus of work on deductive qualitative research.
This paper is specifically aimed at guiding novice researchers and student scholars to the
working hypothesis as a useful a priori framing tool. The applicability of the working
hypothesis as a tool that provides more structure during the design and implementation
phases of exploratory research is discussed in detail. Examples of research projects in public administration that use the working hypothesis as a framing tool for deductive exploratory research are provided.
In the next section, we introduce the three types of research purposes. Second, we
examine the nature of the exploratory research purpose. Third, we provide a definition
of working hypothesis. Fourth, we explore the philosophical roots of methodology to see
where exploratory research fits. Fifth, we connect the discussion to the dominant research
approaches (quantitative, qualitative and mixed methods) to see where deductive exploratory research fits. Sixth, we examine the nature of theory and the role of the hypothesis in
theory. We contrast formal hypotheses and working hypotheses. Seven, we provide examples of student and scholarly work that illustrates how working hypotheses are developed
and operationalized. Lastly, this paper synthesizes previous discussion with concluding
remarks.
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1705
1 3
2 Three types of research purposes
The literature identifies three basic types of research purposes—explanation, description
and exploration (Babbie 2007; Adler and Clark 2008; Strydom 2013; Shields and Whetsell
2017). Research purposes are similar to research questions; however, they focus on project
goals or aims instead of questions.
Explanatory research answers the “why” question (Babbie 2007, pp. 89–90), by explaining “why things are the way they are”, and by looking “for causes and reasons” (Adler and
Clark 2008, p. 14). Explanatory research is closely tied to hypothesis testing. Theory is
tested using deductive reasoning, which goes from the general to the specific (Hyde 2000,
p. 83). Hypotheses provide a frame for explanatory research connecting the research purpose to other parts of the research process (variable construction, choice of data, statistical
tests). They help provide alignment or coherence across stages in the research process and
provide ways to critique the strengths and weakness of the study. For example, were the
hypotheses grounded in the appropriate arguments and evidence in the literature? Are the
concepts imbedded in the hypotheses appropriately measured? Was the best statistical test
used? When the analysis is complete (hypothesis is tested), the results generally answer the
research question (the evidence supported or failed to support the hypothesis) (Shields and
Rangarajan 2013).
Descriptive research addresses the “What” question and is not primarily concerned with
causes (Strydom 2013; Shields and Tajalli 2006). It lies at the “midpoint of the knowledge continuum” (Grinnell 2001, p. 248) between exploration and explanation. Descriptive research is used in both quantitative and qualitative research. A field researcher might
want to “have a more highly developed idea of social phenomena” (Strydom 2013, p. 154)
and develop thick descriptions using inductive logic. In science, categorization and classification systems such as the periodic table of chemistry or the taxonomies of biology
inform descriptive research. These baseline classification systems are a type of theorizing
and allow researchers to answer questions like “what kind” of plants and animals inhabit a
forest. The answer to this question would usually be displayed in graphs and frequency distributions. This is also the data presentation system used in the social sciences (Ritchie and
Lewis 2003; Strydom 2013). For example, if a scholar asked, what are the needs of homeless people? A quantitative approach would include a survey that incorporated a “needs”
classification system (preferably based on a literature review). The data would be displayed
as frequency distributions or as charts. Description can also be guided by inductive reasoning, which draws “inferences from specific observable phenomena to general rules or
knowledge expansion” (Worster 2013, p. 448). Theory and hypotheses are generated using
inductive reasoning, which begins with data and the intention of making sense of it by theorizing. Inductive descriptive approaches would use a qualitative, naturalistic design (open
ended interview questions with the homeless population). The data could provide a thick
description of the homeless context. For deductive descriptive research, categories, serve
a purpose similar to hypotheses for explanatory research. If developed with thought and a
connection to the literature, categories can serve as a framework that inform measurement,
link to data collection mechanisms and to data analysis. Like hypotheses they can provide
horizontal coherence across the steps in the research process.
Table 1 demonstrated these connections for deductive, descriptive and explanatory
research. The arrow at the top emphasizes the horizontal or across the research process
view we emphasize. This article makes the case that the working hypothesis can serve
the same purpose as the hypothesis for deductive, explanatory research and categories for 
1706 M. Casula et al.
1 3
Table 1 Connecting research purpose and frameworks for deductive inquiry
Type of purpose Micro-conceptual framework Methodology Data analysis Primary philosophical underpinning
Explanatory Formal hypotheses Quantitative, experimental design, survey,
time series, existing data
Inferential statistics Positivism
Descriptive Categories Quantitative, survey, content analysis Simple descriptive statistics Positivism
Exploratory ??? Q2 ??? Q3 ??? Q4 ??? Q1
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1707
1 3
deductive descriptive research. The cells for exploratory research are filled in with question
marks.
The remainder of this paper focuses on exploratory research and the answers to questions found in the table:
1. What is the philosophical underpinning of exploratory, deductive research?
2. What is the Micro-conceptual framework for deductive exploratory research? [As is
clear from the article title we introduce the working hypothesis as the answer.]
3. How does the working hypothesis inform the methodologies and evidence collection of
deductive exploratory research?
4. How does the working hypothesis inform data analysis of deductive exploratory
research?
3 The nature of exploratory research purpose
Explorers enter the unknown to discover something new. The process can be fraught with
struggle and surprises. Effective explorers creatively resolve unexpected problems. While
we typically think of explorers as pioneers or mountain climbers, exploration is very much
linked to the experience and intention of the explorer. Babies explore as they take their
first steps. The exploratory purpose resonates with these insights. Exploratory research,
like reconnaissance, is a type of inquiry that is in the preliminary or early stages (Babbie
2007). It is associated with discovery, creativity and serendipity (Stebbins 2001). But the
person doing the discovery, also defines the activity or claims the act of exploration. It
“typically occurs when a researcher examines a new interest or when the subject of study
itself is relatively new” (Babbie 2007, p. 88). Hence, exploration has an open character that
emphasizes “flexibility, pragmatism, and the particular, biographically specific interests of
an investigator” (Maanen et al. 2001, p. v). These three purposes form a type of hierarchy.
An area of inquiry is initially explored. This early work lays the ground for, description
which in turn becomes the basis for explanation. Quantitative, explanatory studies dominate contemporary high impact journals (Twining et al. 2017).
Stebbins (2001) makes the point that exploration is often seen as something like a
poor stepsister to confirmatory or hypothesis testing research. He has a problem with this
because we live in a changing world and what is settled today will very likely be unsettled in the near future and in need of exploration. Further, exploratory research “generates initial insights into the nature of an issue and develops questions to be investigated by
more extensive studies” (Marlow 2005, p. 334). Exploration is widely applicable because
all research topics were once “new.” Further, all research topics have the possibility of
“innovation” or ongoing “newness”. Exploratory research may be appropriate to establish
whether a phenomenon exists (Strydom 2013). The point here, of course, is that the exploratory purpose is far from trivial.
Stebbins’ Exploratory Research in the Social Sciences (2001), is the only book devoted
to the nature of exploratory research as a form of social science inquiry. He views it as
a “broad-ranging, purposive, systematic prearranged undertaking designed to maximize
the discovery of generalizations leading to description and understanding of an area of
social or psychological life” (p. 3). It is science conducted in a way distinct from confirmation. According to Stebbins (2001, p. 6) the goal is discovery of potential generalizations,
which can become future hypotheses and eventually theories that emerge from the data. He 
1708 M. Casula et al.
1 3
focuses on inductive logic (which stimulates creativity) and qualitative methods. He does
not want exploratory research limited to the restrictive formulas and models he finds in
confirmatory research. He links exploratory research to Glaser and Strauss’s (1967) flexible, immersive, Grounded Theory. Strydom’s (2013) analysis of contemporary social work
research methods books echoes Stebbins’ (2001) position. Stebbins’s book is an important
contribution, but it limits the potential scope of this flexible and versatile research purpose.
If we accepted his conclusion, we would delete the “Exploratory” row from Table 1.
Note that explanatory research can yield new questions, which lead to exploration.
Inquiry is a process where inductive and deductive activities can occur simultaneously or
in a back and forth manner, particularly as the literature is reviewed and the research design
emerges.1
 Strict typologies such as explanation, description and exploration or inductive/
deductive can obscures these larger connections and processes. We draw insight from Dewey’s (1896) vision of inquiry as depicted in his seminal “Reflex Arc” article. He notes that
“stimulus” and “response” like other dualities (inductive/deductive) exist within a larger
unifying system. Yet the terms have value. “We need not abandon terms like stimulus and
response, so long as we remember that they are attached to events based upon their function in a wider dynamic context, one that includes interests and aims” (Hildebrand 2008, p.
16). So too, in methodology typologies such as deductive/inductive capture useful distinctions with practical value and are widely used in the methodology literature.
We argue that there is a role for exploratory, deductive, and confirmatory research. We
maintain all types of research logics and methods should be in the toolbox of exploratory
research. First, as stated above, it makes no sense on its face to identify an extremely flexible purpose that is idiosyncratic to the researcher and then basically restrict its use to qualitative, inductive, non-confirmatory methods. Second, Stebbins’s (2001) work focused on
social science ignoring the policy sciences. Exploratory research can be ideal for immediate practical problems faced by policy makers, who could find a framework of some kind
useful. Third, deductive, exploratory research is more intentionally connected to previous research. Some kind of initial framing device is located or designed using the literature. This may be very important for new scholars who are developing research skills and
exploring their field and profession. Stebbins’s insights are most pertinent for experienced
scholars. Fourth, frameworks and deductive logic are useful for comparative work because
some degree of consistency across cases is built into the design.
As we have seen, the hypotheses of explanatory and categories of descriptive research
are the dominate frames of social science and policy science. We certainly concur that neither of these frames makes a lot of sense for exploratory research. They would tend to tie
it down. We see the problem as a missing framework or missing way to frame deductive,
exploratory research in the methodology literature. Inductive exploratory research would
not work for many case studies that are trying to use evidence to make an argument. What
exploratory deductive case studies need is a framework that incorporates flexibility. This
is even more true for comparative case studies. A framework of this sort could be usefully applied to policy research (Casula 2020a), particularly evaluative policy research, and
applied research generally. We propose the Working Hypothesis as a flexible conceptual
1 In practice, quantitative scholars often run multivariate analysis on data bases to find out if there are correlations. Hypotheses are tested because the statistical software does the math, not because the scholar has
an a priori, relational expectation (hypothesis) well-grounded in the literature and supported by cogent
arguments. Hunches are just fine. This is clearly an inductive approach to research and part of the large
process of inquiry.
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1709
1 3
framework and as a useful tool for doing exploratory studies. It can be used as an evaluative criterion particularly for process evaluation and is useful for student research because
students can develop theorizing skills using the literature.
Table 1 included a column specifying the philosophical basis for each research purpose.
Shifting gears to the philosophical underpinning of methodology provides useful additional context for examination of deductive, exploratory research.
4 What is a working hypothesis
The working hypothesis is first and foremost a hypothesis or a statement of expectation that
is tested in action. The term “working” suggest that these hypotheses are subject to change,
are provisional and the possibility of finding contradictory evidence is real. In addition, a
“working” hypothesis is active, it is a tool in an ongoing process of inquiry. If one begins
with a research question, the working hypothesis could be viewed as a statement or group
of statements that answer the question. It “works” to move purposeful inquiry forward.
“Working” also implies some sort of community, mostly we work together in relationship
to achieve some goal.
Working Hypothesis is a term found in earlier literature. Indeed, both pioneering pragmatists, John Dewey and George Herbert Mead use the term working hypothesis in important nineteenth century works. For both Dewey and Mead, the notion of a working hypothesis has a self-evident quality and it is applied in a big picture context.2
Most notably, Dewey (1896), in one of his most pivotal early works (“Reflex Arc”),
used “working hypothesis” to describe a key concept in psychology. “The idea of the reflex
arc has upon the whole come nearer to meeting this demand for a general working hypothesis than any other single concept (Italics added)” (p. 357). The notion of a working hypothesis was developed more fully 42 years later, in Logic the Theory of Inquiry, where Dewey
developed the notion of a working hypothesis that operated on a smaller scale. He defines
working hypotheses as a “provisional, working means of advancing investigation” (Dewey
1938, pp. 142). Dewey’s definition suggests that working hypotheses would be useful
toward the beginning of a research project (e.g., exploratory research).
Mead (1899) used working hypothesis in a title of an American Journal of Sociology
article “The Working Hypothesis and Social Reform” (italics added). He notes that a scientist’s foresight goes beyond testing a hypothesis.
Given its success, he may restate his world from this standpoint and get the basis for
further investigation that again always takes the form of a problem. The solution of
this problem is found over again in the possibility of fitting his hypothetical proposition into the whole within which it arises. And he must recognize that this statement
is only a working hypothesis at the best, i.e., he knows that further investigation will
show that the former statement of his world is only provisionally true, and must be
false from the standpoint of a larger knowledge, as every partial truth is necessarily
false over against the fuller knowledge which he will gain later (Mead 1899, p. 370).
2 In 1958, Philosophers of Science, Oppenheim and Putnam use the notion of Working Hypothesis in their
title “Unity of Science as Working Hypothesis.” They too, use it as a big picture concept, “unity of science
in this sense, can be fully realized constitutes an over-arching meta-scientific hypothesis, which enables one
to see a unity in scientific activities that might otherwise appear disconnected or unrelated” (p. 4).
1710 M. Casula et al.
1 3
Cronbach (1975) developed a notion of working hypothesis consistent with inductive
reasoning, but for him, the working hypothesis is a product or result of naturalistic inquiry.
He makes the case that naturalistic inquiry is highly context dependent and therefore results
or seeming generalizations that may come from a study and should be viewed as “working
hypotheses”, which “are tentative both for the situation in which they first uncovered and
for other situations” (as cited in Gobo 2008, p. 196).
A quick Google scholar search using the term “working hypothesis” show that it is
widely used in twentieth and twenty-first century science, particularly in titles. In these
articles, the working hypothesis is treated as a conceptual tool that furthers investigation
in its early or transitioning phases. We could find no explicit links to exploratory research.
The exploratory nature of the problem is expressed implicitly. Terms such as “speculative”
(Habib 2000, p. 2391) or “rapidly evolving field” (Prater et al. 2007, p. 1141) capture the
exploratory nature of the study. The authors might describe how a topic is “new” or reference “change”. “As a working hypothesis, the picture is only new, however, in its interpretation” (Milnes 1974, p. 1731). In a study of soil genesis, Arnold (1965, p. 718) notes
“Sequential models, formulated as working hypotheses, are subject to further investigation
and change”. Any 2020 article dealing with COVID-19 and respiratory distress would be
preliminary almost by definition (Ciceri et al. 2020).
5 Philosophical roots of methodology
According to Kaplan (1964, p. 23) “the aim of methodology is to help us understand, in
the broadest sense not the products of scientific inquiry but the process itself”. Methods
contain philosophical principles that distinguish them from other “human enterprises and
interests” (Kaplan 1964, p. 23). Contemporary research methodology is generally classified as quantitative, qualitative and mixed methods. Leading scholars of methodology
have associated each with a philosophical underpinning—positivism (or post-positivism),
interpretivism or constructivist and pragmatism, respectively (Guba 1987; Guba and Lincoln 1981; Schrag 1992; Stebbins 2001; Mackenzi and Knipe 2006; Atieno 2009; Levers
2013; Morgan 2007; O’Connor et al. 2008; Johnson and Onwuegbuzie 2004; Twining et al.
2017). This section summarizes how the literature often describes these philosophies and
informs contemporary methodology and its literature.
Positivism and its more contemporary version, post-positivism, maintains an objectivist
ontology or assumes an objective reality, which can be uncovered (Levers 2013; Twining
et al. 2017).3
 Time and context free generalizations are possible and “real causes of social
scientific outcomes can be determined reliably and validly (Johnson and Onwuegbunzie
2004, p. 14). Further, “explanation of the social world is possible through a logical reduction of social phenomena to physical terms”. It uses an empiricist epistemology which
3 It should be noted that the positivism described in the research methods literature does not resemble philosophical positivism as developed by philosophers like Comte (Whetsell and Shields 2015). In the research
methods literature “positivism means different things to different people….The term has long been emptied
of any precise denotation …and is sometimes affixed to positions actually opposed to those espoused by the
philosophers from whom the name derives” (Schrag 1992, p. 5). For purposes of this paper, we are capturing a few essential ways positivism is presented in the research methods literature. This helps us to position
the “working hypothesis” and “exploratory” research within the larger context in contemporary research
methods. We are not arguing that the positivism presented here is anything more. The incompatibility theory discussed later, is an outgrowth of this research methods literature…
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1711
1 3
“implies testability against observation, experimentation, or comparison” (Whetsell and
Shields 2015, pp. 420–421). Correspondence theory, a tenet of positivism, asserts that “to
each concept there corresponds a set of operations involved in its scientific use” (Kaplan
1964, p. 40).
The interpretivist, constructivists or post-modernist approach is a reaction to positivism.
It uses a relativist ontology and a subjectivist epistemology (Levers 2013). In this world of
multiple realities, context free generalities are impossible as is the separation of facts and
values. Causality, explanation, prediction, experimentation depend on assumptions about
the correspondence between concepts and reality, which in the absence of an objective
reality is impossible. Empirical research can yield “contextualized emergent understanding rather than the creation of testable theoretical structures” (O’Connor et al. 2008, p.
30). The distinctively different world views of positivist/post positivist and interpretivist
philosophy is at the core of many controversies in methodology, social and policy science
literature (Casula 2020b).
With its focus on dissolving dualisms, pragmatism steps outside the objective/subjective
debate. Instead, it asks, “what difference would it make to us if the statement were true”
(Kaplan 1964, p. 42). Its epistemology is connected to purposeful inquiry. Pragmatism has
a “transformative, experimental notion of inquiry” anchored in pluralism and a focus on
constructing conceptual and practical tools to resolve “problematic situations” (Shields
1998; Shields and Rangarajan 2013). Exploration and working hypotheses are most comfortably situated within the pragmatic philosophical perspective.
6 Research approaches
Empirical investigation relies on three types of methodology—quantitative, qualitative and
mixed methods.
6.1 Quantitative methods
Quantitative methods uses deductive logic and formal hypotheses or models to explain,
predict, and eventually establish causation (Hyde 2000; Kaplan 1964; Johnson and Onwuegbunzie 2004; Morgan 2007).4
 The correspondence between the conceptual and empirical
world make measures possible. Measurement assigns numbers to objects, events or situations and allows for standardization and subtle discrimination. It also allows researchers
to draw on the power of mathematics and statistics (Kaplan 1964, pp. 172–174). Using
the power of inferential statistics, quantitative research employs research designs, which
eliminate competing hypotheses. It is high in external validity or the ability to generalize
to the whole. The research results are relatively independent of the researcher (Johnson &
Onwuegbunzie 2004).
Quantitative methods depend on the quality of measurement and a priori conceptualization, and adherence to the underlying assumptions of inferential statistics. Critics charge
4 It should be noted that quantitative researchers often use inductive reasoning. They do this with existing
data sets when they run correlations or regression analysis as a way to find relationships. They ask, what
does the data tell us?
1712 M. Casula et al.
1 3
that hypotheses and frameworks needlessly constrain inquiry (Johnson and Onwuegbunzie
2004, p. 19). Hypothesis testing quantitative methods support the explanatory purpose.
6.2 Qualitative methods
Qualitative researchers who embrace the post-modern, interpretivist view,5
 question everything about the nature of quantitative methods (Willis et al. 2007). Rejecting the possibility of objectivity, correspondence between ideas and measures, and the constraints of
a priori theorizing they focus on “unique impressions and understandings of events rather
than to generalize the findings” (Kolb 2012, p. 85). Characteristics of traditional qualitative research include “induction, discovery, exploration, theory/hypothesis generation and
the researcher as the primary ‘instrument’ of data collection” (Johnson and Onwuegbunzie
2004, p. 18). It also concerns itself with forming “unique impressions and understandings
of events rather than to generalize findings” (Kolb 2012, p. 85). The data of qualitative
methods are generated via interviews, direct observation, focus groups and analysis of
written records or artifacts.
Qualitative methods provide for understanding and “description of people’s personal
experiences of phenomena”. They enable descriptions of detailed “phenomena as they are
situated and embedded in local contexts.” Researchers use naturalistic settings to “study
dynamic processes” and explore how participants interpret experiences. Qualitative methods have an inherent flexibility, allowing researchers to respond to changes in the research
setting. They are particularly good at narrowing to the particular and on the flipside have
limited external validity (Johnson and Onwuegbunzie 2004, p. 20). Instead of specifying a
suitable sample size to draw conclusions, qualitative research uses the notion of saturation
(Morse 1995).
Saturation is used in grounded theory—a widely used and respected form of qualitative
research, and a well-known interpretivist qualitative research method. Introduced by Glaser and Strauss (1967), this “grounded on observation” (Patten and Newhart 2000, p. 27)
methodology, focuses on “the creation of emergent understanding” (O’Connor et al. 2008,
p. 30). It uses the Constant Comparative method, whereby researchers develop theory from
data as they code and analyze at the same time. Data collection, coding and analysis along
with theoretical sampling are systematically combined to generate theory (Kolb 2012, p.
83). The qualitative methods discussed here support exploratory research.
A close look at the two philosophies and assumptions of quantitative and qualitative
research suggests two contradictory world views. The literature has labeled these contradictory views the Incompatibility Theory, which sets up a quantitative versus qualitative tension similar to the seeming separation of art and science or fact and values (Smith
1983a, b; Guba 1987; Smith and Heshusius 1986; Howe 1988). The incompatibility theory
does not make sense in practice. Yin (1981, 1992, 2011, 2017), a prominent case study
scholar, showcases a deductive research methodology that crosses boundaries using both
quantaitive and qualitative evidence when appropriate.
5 Qualitative researchers are also associated with phenomenology, hermeneutics, naturalistic inquiry and
constructivism.
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1713
1 3
6.3 Mixed methods
Turning the “Incompatibility Theory” on its head, Mixed Methods research “combines
elements of qualitative and quantitative research approaches … for the broad purposes of
breadth and depth of understanding and corroboration” (Johnson et al. 2007, p. 123). It
does this by partnering with philosophical pragmatism.6
 Pragmatism is productive because
“it offers an immediate and useful middle position philosophically and methodologically; it
offers a practical and outcome-oriented method of inquiry that is based on action and leads,
iteratively, to further action and the elimination of doubt; it offers a method for selecting methodological mixes that can help researchers better answer many of their research
questions” (Johnson and Onwuegbunzie 2004, p. 17). What is theory for the pragmatist
“any theoretical model is for the pragmatist, nothing more than a framework through which
problems are perceived and subsequently organized” (Hothersall 2019, p. 5).
Brendel (2009) constructed a simple framework to capture the core elements of pragmatism. Brendel’s four “p”’s—practical, pluralism, participatory and provisional help to show
the relevance of pragmatism to mixed methods. Pragmatism is purposeful and concerned
with the practical consequences. The pluralism of pragmatism overcomes quantitative/
qualitative dualism. Instead, it allows for multiple perspectives (including positivism and
interpretivism) and, thus, gets around the incompatibility problem. Inquiry should be participatory or inclusive of the many views of participants, hence, it is consistent with multiple realities and is also tied to the common concern of a problematic situation. Finally, all
inquiry is provisional. This is compatible with experimental methods, hypothesis testing
and consistent with the back and forth of inductive and deductive reasoning. Mixed methods support exploratory research.
Advocates of mixed methods research note that it overcomes the weaknesses and
employs the strengths of quantitative and qualitative methods. Quantitative methods provide precision. The pictures and narrative of qualitative techniques add meaning to the
numbers. Quantitative analysis can provide a big picture, establish relationships and its
results have great generalizability. On the other hand, the “why” behind the explanation is
often missing and can be filled in through in-depth interviews. A deeper and more satisfying explanation is possible. Mixed-methods brings the benefits of triangulation or multiple
sources of evidence that converge to support a conclusion. It can entertain a “broader and
more complete range of research questions” (Johnson and Onwuegbunzie 2004, p. 21) and
can move between inductive and deductive methods. Case studies use multiple forms of
evidence and are a natural context for mixed methods.
One thing that seems to be missing from mixed method literature and explicit design
is a place for conceptual frameworks. For example, Heyvaert et al. (2013) examined nine
mixed methods studies and found an explicit framework in only two studies (transformative
and pragmatic) (p. 663).
6 See Feilzer (2010), Howe (1988), Johnson and Onwuegbunzie (2004), Morgan (2007), Onwuegbuzie and
Leech (2005), Biddle and Schafft (2015).
1714 M. Casula et al.
1 3
7 Theory and hypotheses: where is and what is theory?
Theory is key to deductive research. In essence, empirical deductive methods test theory.
Hence, we shift our attention to theory and the role and functions of the hypotheses in
theory. Oppenheim and Putnam (1958) note that “by a ‘theory’ (in the widest sense) we
mean any hypothesis, generalization or law (whether deterministic or statistical) or any
conjunction of these” (p. 25). Van Evera (1997) uses a similar and more complex definition
“theories are general statements that describe and explain the causes of effects of classes of
phenomena. They are composed of causal laws or hypotheses, explanations, and antecedent
conditions” (p. 8). Sutton and Staw (1995, p. 376) in a highly cited article “What Theory is
Not” assert the that hypotheses should contain logical arguments for “why” the hypothesis
is expected. Hypotheses need an underlying causal argument before they can be considered
theory. The point of this discussion is not to define theory but to establish the importance
of hypotheses in theory.
Explanatory research is implicitly relational (A explains B). The hypotheses of explanatory research lay bare these relationships. Popular definitions of hypotheses capture this
relational component. For example, the Cambridge Dictionary defines a hypothesis a
“an idea or explanation for something that is based on known facts but has not yet been
proven”. Vocabulary.Com’s definition emphasizes explanation, a hypothesis is “an idea or
explanation that you then test through study and experimentation”. According to Wikipedia a hypothesis is “a proposed explanation for a phenomenon”. Other definitions remove
the relational or explanatory reference. The Oxford English Dictionary defines a hypothesis as a “supposition or conjecture put forth to account for known facts.” Science Buddies
defines a hypothesis as a “tentative, testable answer to a scientific question”. According to
the Longman Dictionary the hypothesis is “an idea that can be tested to see if it is true or
not”. The Urban Dictionary states a hypothesis is “a prediction or educated-guess based
on current evidence that is yet be tested”. We argue that the hypotheses of exploratory
research—working hypothesis—are not bound by relational expectations. It is this flexibility that distinguishes the working hypothesis.
Sutton and Staw (1995) maintain that hypotheses “serve as crucial bridges between
theory and data, making explicit how the variables and relationships that follow from a
logical argument will be operationalized” (p. 376, italics added). The highly rated journal,
Computers and Education, Twining et al. (2017) created guidelines for qualitative research
as a way to improve soundness and rigor. They identified the lack of alignment between
theoretical stance and methodology as a common problem in qualitative research. In addition, they identified a lack of alignment between methodology, design, instruments of data
collection and analysis. The authors created a guidance summary, which emphasized the
need to enhance coherence throughout elements of research design (Twining et al. 2017 p.
12). Perhaps the bridging function of the hypothesis mentioned by Sutton and Staw (1995)
is obscured and often missing in qualitative methods. Working hypotheses can be a tool to
overcome this problem.
For reasons, similar to those used by mixed methods scholars, we look to classical
pragmatism and the ideas of John Dewey to inform our discussion of theory and working
hypotheses. Dewey (1938) treats theory as a tool of empirical inquiry and uses a map metaphor (p. 136). Theory is like a map that helps a traveler navigate the terrain—and should
be judged by its usefulness. “There is no expectation that a map is a true representation of
reality. Rather, it is a representation that allows a traveler to reach a destination (achieve
a purpose). Hence, theories should be judged by how well they help resolve the problem 
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1715
1 3
or achieve a purpose” (Shields and Rangarajan 2013, p. 23). Note that we explicitly link
theory to the research purpose. Theory is never treated as an unimpeachable Truth, rather
it is a helpful tool that organizes inquiry connecting data and problem. Dewey’s approach
also expands the definition of theory to include abstractions (categories) outside of causation and explanation. The micro-conceptual frameworks7
 introduced in Table 1 are a type
of theory. We define conceptual frameworks as the “way the ideas are organized to achieve
the project’s purpose” (Shields and Rangarajan 2013 p. 24). Micro-conceptual frameworks
do this at the very close to the data level of analysis. Micro-conceptual frameworks can
direct operationalization and ways to assess measurement or evidence at the individual
research study level. Again, the research purpose plays a pivotal role in the functioning of
theory (Shields and Tajalli 2006).
8 Working hypothesis: methods and data analysis
We move on to answer the remaining questions in the Table 1. We have established that
exploratory research is extremely flexible and idiosyncratic. Given this, we will proceed
with a few examples and draw out lessons for developing an exploratory purpose, building a framework and from there identifying data collection techniques and the logics of
hypotheses testing and analysis. Early on we noted the value of the Working Hypothesis
framework for student empirical research and applied research. The next section uses a
masters level student’s work to illustrate the usefulness of working hypotheses as a way
to incorporate the literature and structure inquiry. This graduate student was also a mature
professional with a research question that emerged from his job and is thus an example of
applied research.
Master of Public Administration student, Swift (2010) worked for a public agency
and was responsible for that agency’s sexual harassment training. The agency needed to
evaluate its training but had never done so before. He also had never attempted a significant empirical research project. Both of these conditions suggest exploration as a possible approach. He was interested in evaluating the training program and hence the project
had a normative sense. Given his job, he already knew a lot about the problem of sexual
harassment and sexual harassment training. What he did not know much about was doing
empirical research, reviewing the literature or building a framework to evaluate the training (working hypotheses). He wanted a framework that was flexible and comprehensive.
In his research, he discovered Lundvall’s (2006) knowledge taxonomy summarized with
four simple ways of knowing (Know-what, Know-how, Know-why, Know-who). He asked
whether his agency’s training provided the participants with these kinds of knowledge?
Lundvall’s categories of knowing became the basis of his working hypotheses. Lundvall’s
knowledge taxonomy is well suited for working hypotheses because it is so simple and is
easy to understand intuitively. It can also be tailored to the unique problematic situation of
the researcher. Swift (2010, pp. 38–39) developed four basic working hypotheses:
WH1: Capital Metro provides adequate know-what knowledge in its sexual harassment
training
7 The term conceptual framework is applicable in a broad context (see Ravitch and Riggan 2012). The
micro-conceptual framework narrows to the specific study and informs data collection (Shields and Rangarajan 2013; Shields et al. 2019a) .
1716 M. Casula et al.
1 3
WH2: Capital Metro provides adequate know-how knowledge in its sexual harassment training
WH3: Capital Metro provides adequate know-why knowledge in its sexual harassment training
WH4: Capital Metro provides adequate know-who knowledge in its sexual harassment training
From here he needed to determine what would determine the different kinds of
knowledge. For example, what constitutes “know what” knowledge for sexual harassment training. This is where his knowledge and experience working in the field as well
as the literature come into play. According to Lundvall et al. (1988, p. 12) “know what”
knowledge is about facts and raw information. Swift (2010) learned through the literature that laws and rules were the basis for the mandated sexual harassment training. He
read about specific anti-discrimination laws and the subsequent rules and regulations
derived from the laws. These laws and rules used specific definitions and were enacted
within a historical context. Laws, rules, definitions and history became the “facts” of
Know-What knowledge for his working hypothesis. To make this clear, he created subhypotheses that explicitly took these into account. See how Swift (2010, p. 38) constructed the sub-hypotheses below. Each sub-hypothesis was defended using material
from the literature (Swift 2010, pp. 22–26). The sub-hypotheses can also be easily tied
to evidence. For example, he could document that the training covered anti-discrimination laws.
WH1: Capital Metro provides adequate know-what knowledge in its sexual Harassment training
WH1a: The sexual harassment training includes information on anti-discrimination
laws (Title VII).
WH1b: The sexual harassment training includes information on key definitions.
WH1c: The sexual harassment training includes information on Capital Metro’s
Equal Employment Opportunity and Harassment policy.
WH1d: Capital Metro provides training on sexual harassment history.
Know-How knowledge refers to the ability to do something and involves skills (Lundvall and Johnson 1994, p. 12). It is a kind of expertise in action. The literature and
his experience allowed James Smith to identify skills such as how to file a claim or
Fig. 1 A Common structure used
in the development of working
hypotheses
Wh1
Wh1a
Wh1b
Wh1c
wh1d
Wh 2
Wh2a
Wh2b
wh2c
Wh3
Wh3a
Wh3b
Wh3c
Wh3d
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1717
1 3
how to document incidents of sexual harassment as important “know-how” knowledge
that should be included in sexual harassment training. Again, these were depicted as
sub-hypotheses.
WH2: Capital Metro provides adequate know-how knowledge in its sexual Harassment
training
WH2a: Training is provided on how to file and report a claim of harassment
WH2b: Training is provided on how to document sexual harassment situations.
WH2c: Training is provided on how to investigate sexual harassment complaints.
WH2d: Training is provided on how to follow additional harassment policy procedures
protocol
Note that the working hypotheses do not specify a relationship but rather are simple
declarative sentences. If “know-how” knowledge was found in the sexual harassment training, he would be able to find evidence that participants learned about how to file a claim
(WH2a). The working hypothesis provides the bridge between theory and data that Sutton
and Staw (1995) found missing in exploratory work. The sub-hypotheses are designed to
be refined enough that the researchers would know what to look for and tailor their hunt for
evidence. Figure 1 captures the generic sub-hypothesis design.
When expected evidence is linked to the sub-hypotheses, data, framework and research
purpose are aligned. This can be laid out in a planning document that operationalizes the
data collection in something akin to an architect’s blueprint. This is where the scholar
explicitly develops the alignment between purpose, framework and method (Shields and
Rangarajan 2013; Shields et al. 2019b).
Table 2 operationalizes Swift’s working hypotheses (and sub-hypotheses). The table
provide clues as to what kind of evidence is needed to determine whether the hypotheses
are supported. In this case, Smith used interviews with participants and trainers as well as a
review of program documents. Column one repeats the sub-hypothesis, column two specifies the data collection method (here interviews with participants/managers and review of
program documents) and column three specifies the unique questions that focus the investigation. For example, the interview questions are provided. In the less precise world of
qualitative data, evidence supporting a hypothesis could have varying degrees of strength.
This too can be specified.
For Swift’s example, neither the statistics of explanatory research nor the open-ended
questions of interpretivist, inductive exploratory research is used. The deductive logic
of inquiry here is somewhat intuitive and similar to a detective (Ulriksen and Dadalauri
2016). It is also a logic used in international law (Worster 2013). It should be noted that the
working hypothesis and the corresponding data collection protocol does not stop inquiry
and fieldwork outside the framework. The interviews could reveal an unexpected problem
with Smith’s training program. The framework provides a very loose and perhaps useful
ways to identify and make sense of the data that does not fit the expectations. Researchers using working hypotheses should be sensitive to interesting findings that fall outside
their framework. These could be used in future studies, to refine theory or even in this case
provide suggestions to improve sexual harassment training. The sensitizing concepts mentioned by Gilgun (2015) are free to emerge and should be encouraged.
Something akin to working hypotheses are hidden in plain sight in the professional literature. Take for example Kerry Crawford’s (2017) book Wartime Sexual Violence. Here
she explores how basic changes in the way “advocates and decision makers think about
and discuss conflict-related sexual violence” (p. 2). She focused on a subsequent shift from 
1718 M. Casula et al.
1 3Table 2 Operationalization of the working hypotheses: an example Working hypothesis Method of data collection Evidence/criteria WH1: Capital Metro provides adequate know-what knowledge in its sexual Harassment training
WH1a: Capital Metro provides training on anti-discrimination laws (Title VII) Interview supervisors and managers (Interview questions) How does the sexual harassment training address anti-discrimination laws? Additional
questions as appropriate
Interview participants (Interview questions) What did you learn about antidiscrimination law? Additional questions as appropriate
Document analysis (1) Capital Metro EEO Basic training manual (2) Capital Metro EEO Policy How do these documents address history of discrimina- tion laws? Additional questions as appropriate
WH1b: Capital Metro provides training on sexual harassment definitions Interview supervisors and managers (Interview questions) How does the sexual harassment training address key definitions? Additional questions
as appropriate
Interview participants (Interview questions) What definitions about sexual
harassment did you learn? Additional questions as
appropriate
Document Analysis (1) Capital Metro EEO Basic training manual (2) Capital Metro EEO Policy Which definitions can be found in these documents?
WH1c: and WH1d Data collection methods Further specification of evidence used
WH2: Capital Metro sexual harassment training provides adequate “know how” training
WH2a: Capital Metro provides training on how-to file
and report a claim of harassment
Interview supervisors and managers (Interview questions) How well does the sexual harassment training prepare participants to file and report a
claim? Additional questions as appropriate
Interview with participants (Interview questions) How well did the sexual harassment training prepare you to file and report a claim?
Additional questions as appropriate
Document analysis (1) Capital Metro EEO Basic training manual (2) Capital Metro EEO Policy How well do the documents cover how-to file a report of sexual harassment?
WH2b: Capital Metro provides training on how to document sexual harassment situations Interview of supervisors and managers (Interview questions) How does the sexual harassment training address how to document sexual harassment
situations? Additional questions as appropriate
Interview participants
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1719
1 3
Table 2 (continued)
Working hypothesis Method of data collection Evidence/criteria
(Interview questions) How well did the training cover
how to document sexual harassment situations? Additional questions as appropriate
Document analysis (1) Capital Metro EEO Basic training manual (2) Capital Metro EEO Policy How well do these documents address procedures to document sexual harassment situations
Wh2c & d Data collection methods. Etc. Specify further evidence used
1720 M. Casula et al.
1 3
silence to action. The shift occurred as wartime sexual violence was reframed as a “weapon
of war”. The new frame captured the attention of powerful members of the security community who demanded, initiated, and paid for institutional and policy change. Crawford
(2017) examines the legacy of this key reframing. She develops a six-stage model of potential international responses to incidents of wartime violence. This model is fairly easily
converted to working hypotheses and sub-hypotheses. Table 3 shows her model as a set of
(non-relational) working hypotheses. She applied this model as a way to gather evidence
among cases (e.g., the US response to sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo) to show the official level of response to sexual violence. Each case study chapter
examined evidence to establish whether the case fit the pattern formalized in the working
hypotheses. The framework was very useful in her comparative context. The framework
allowed for consistent comparative analysis across cases. Her analysis of the three cases
went well beyond the material covered in the framework. She freely incorporated useful
inductively informed data in her analysis and discussion. The framework, however, allowed
for alignment within and across cases.
9 Conclusion
In this article we argued that the exploratory research is also well suited for deductive
approaches. By examining the landscape of deductive, exploratory research, we proposed
the working hypothesis as a flexible conceptual framework and a useful tool for doing
exploratory studies. It has the potential to guide and bring coherence across the steps in
the research process. After presenting the nature of exploratory research purpose and how
it differs from two types of research purposes identified in the literature—explanation, and
description. We focused on answering four different questions in order to show the link
between micro-conceptual frameworks and research purposes in a deductive setting. The
answers to the four questions are summarized in Table 4.
Table 3 Example illustrating a set of working hypotheses as a framework for comparative case studies
Source: Adaptation from Table 1.1 of Crawford’s (2017) book Wartime Sexual Violence
Stages of potential international response to sexual violence
WH1: Nonrecognition or no action to prevent sexual violence during conflict
WH1a: Sexual violence is not recognized as part of a specific conflict or the conflict itself is not recognized
WH1b: Wartime sexual violence as a general issue is not recognized
WH1c: No action is taken, and no formal discussion occurs within or among International Organizations
(IO)
WH2: Sexual Violence is documented during a conflict and learning occurs
WH2a: Sexual violence as an aspect of a conflict is the subject of a report, publication, study or conference
attended by a state or IO
WH2b: Information gathering about sexual violence during a conflict occurs
H3: There is a rhetorical response and condemnation of sexual violence during a conflict
WH3a: Sexual violence as part of a specific conflict is subject of a speech, unprompted remarks or press
release of a high-ranking state official or leader of an IO
WH3b: Rhetorical remarks occur but resources to reduce or study sexual violence are not committed
Three additional stages of international response were provided by Crawford (2017)
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1721
1 3
Table 4 Linking micro-conceptual frameworks and research purposes in deductive research
Type of purpose Micro-conceptual framework Methodology Data analysis Primary philosophical underpinning
Explanatory Formal Hypotheses Quantitative, experimental design, survey,
time series, existing data
Inferential statistics Positivism
Descriptive Categories Quantitative, survey, content analysis Simple descriptive statistics Positivism
Exploratory Working hypotheses Qualitative, mixed methods, case study,
quantitative
Evidence of all types may or may
not use statistics
Pragmatism
1722 M. Casula et al.
1 3
Firstly, we argued that working hypothesis and exploration are situated within the pragmatic philosophical perspective. Pragmatism allows for pluralism in theory and data collection techniques, which is compatible with the flexible exploratory purpose. Secondly,
after introducing and discussing the four core elements of pragmatism (practical, pluralism, participatory, and provisional), we explained how the working hypothesis informs the
methodologies and evidence collection of deductive exploratory research through a presentation of the benefits of triangulation provided by mixed methods research. Thirdly, as is
clear from the article title, we introduced the working hypothesis as the micro-conceptual
framework for deductive explorative research. We argued that the hypotheses of explorative
research, which we call working hypotheses are distinguished from those of the explanatory research, since they do not require a relational component and are not bound by relational expectations. A working hypothesis is extremely flexible and idiosyncratic, and it
could be viewed as a statement or group of statements of expectations tested in action
depending on the research question. Using examples, we concluded by explaining how
working hypotheses inform data collection and analysis for deductive exploratory research.
Crawford’s (2017) example showed how the structure of working hypotheses provide a
framework for comparative case studies. Her criteria for analysis were specified ahead of
time and used to frame each case. Thus, her comparisons were systemized across cases.
Further, the framework ensured a connection between the data analysis and the literature
review. Yet the flexible, working nature of the hypotheses allowed for unexpected findings
to be discovered.
The evidence required to test working hypotheses is directed by the research purpose
and potentially includes both quantitative and qualitative sources. Thus, all types of evidence, including quantitative methods should be part of the toolbox of deductive, explorative research. We show how the working hypotheses, as a flexible exploratory framework,
resolves many seeming dualisms pervasive in the research methods literature.
To conclude, this article has provided an in-depth examination of working hypotheses
taking into account philosophical questions and the larger formal research methods literature. By discussing working hypotheses as applied, theoretical tools, we demonstrated that
working hypotheses fill a unique niche in the methods literature, since they provide a way
to enhance alignment in deductive, explorative studies.
Acknowledgements The authors contributed equally to this work. The authors would like to thank Quality
& Quantity’s editors and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable advice and comments on previous versions of this paper.
Funding Open access funding provided by Alma Mater Studiorum - Università di Bologna within the
CRUI-CARE Agreement. There are no funders to report for this submission.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1723
1 3
References
Adler, E., Clark, R.: How It’s Done: An Invitation to Social Research, 3rd edn. Thompson-Wadsworth, Belmont (2008)
Arnold, R.W.: Multiple working hypothesis in soil genesis. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 29(6), 717–724 (1965)
Atieno, O.: An analysis of the strengths and limitation of qualitative and quantitative research paradigms.
Probl. Educ. 21st Century 13, 13–18 (2009)
Babbie, E.: The Practice of Social Research, 11th edn. Thompson-Wadsworth, Belmont (2007)
Biddle, C., Schafft, K.A.: Axiology and anomaly in the practice of mixed methods work: pragmatism, valuation, and the transformative paradigm. J. Mixed Methods Res. 9(4), 320–334 (2015)
Brendel, D.H.: Healing Psychiatry: Bridging the Science/Humanism Divide. MIT Press, Cambridge (2009)
Bryman, A.: Qualitative research on leadership: a critical but appreciative review. Leadersh. Q. 15(6), 729–
769 (2004)
Casula, M.: Under which conditions is cohesion policy effective: proposing an Hirschmanian approach to
EU structural funds, Regional & Federal Studies, https://doi.org/10.1080/13597566.2020.1713110
(2020a)
Casula, M.: Economic gowth and cohesion policy implementation in Italy and Spain, Palgrave Macmillan,
Cham (2020b)
Ciceri, F., et al.: Microvascular COVID-19 lung vessels obstructive thromboinflammatory syndrome
(MicroCLOTS): an atypical acute respiratory distress syndrome working hypothesis. Crit. Care
Resusc. 15, 1–3 (2020)
Crawford, K.F.: Wartime sexual violence: From silence to condemnation of a weapon of war. Georgetown
University Press (2017)
Cronbach, L.: Beyond the two disciplines of scientific psychology American Psychologist. 30 116–127
(1975)
Dewey, J.: The reflex arc concept in psychology. Psychol. Rev. 3(4), 357 (1896)
Dewey, J.: Logic: The Theory of Inquiry. Henry Holt & Co, New York (1938)
Feilzer, Y.: Doing mixed methods research pragmatically: implications for the rediscovery of pragmatism as
a research paradigm. J. Mixed Methods Res. 4(1), 6–16 (2010)
Gilgun, J.F.: Qualitative research and family psychology. J. Fam. Psychol. 19(1), 40–50 (2005)
Gilgun, J.F.: Methods for enhancing theory and knowledge about problems, policies, and practice. In:
Katherine Briar, Joan Orme., Roy Ruckdeschel., Ian Shaw. (eds.) The Sage handbook of social work
research pp. 281–297. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage (2009)
Gilgun, J.F.: Deductive Qualitative Analysis as Middle Ground: Theory-Guided Qualitative Research. Amazon Digital Services LLC, Seattle (2015)
Glaser, B.G., Strauss, A.L.: The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research.
Aldine, Chicago (1967)
Gobo, G.: Re-Conceptualizing Generalization: Old Issues in a New Frame. In: Alasuutari, P., Bickman, L.,
Brannen, J. (eds.) The Sage Handbook of Social Research Methods, pp. 193–213. Sage, Los Angeles
(2008)
Grinnell, R.M.: Social work research and evaluation: quantitative and qualitative approaches. New York:
F.E. Peacock Publishers (2001)
Guba, E.G.: What have we learned about naturalistic evaluation? Eval. Pract. 8(1), 23–43 (1987)
Guba, E., Lincoln, Y.: Effective Evaluation: Improving the Usefulness of Evaluation Results Through
Responsive and Naturalistic Approaches. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco (1981)
Habib, M.: The neurological basis of developmental dyslexia: an overview and working hypothesis. Brain
123(12), 2373–2399 (2000)
Heyvaert, M., Maes, B., Onghena, P.: Mixed methods research synthesis: definition, framework, and potential. Qual. Quant. 47(2), 659–676 (2013)
Hildebrand, D.: Dewey: A Beginners Guide. Oneworld Oxford, Oxford (2008)
Howe, K.R.: Against the quantitative-qualitative incompatibility thesis or dogmas die hard. Edu. Res. 17(8),
10–16 (1988)
Hothersall, S.J.: Epistemology and social work: enhancing the integration of theory, practice and research
through philosophical pragmatism.Eur. J. Social Work 22(5), 860–870 (2019)
Hyde, K.F.: Recognising deductive processes in qualitative research. Qual. Market Res. Int. J. 3(2), 82–90
(2000)
Johnson, R.B., Onwuegbuzie, A.J.: Mixed methods research: a research paradigm whose time has come.
Educ. Res. 33(7), 14–26 (2004)
Johnson, R.B., Onwuegbuzie, A.J., Turner, L.A.: Toward a definition of mixed methods research. J. Mixed
Methods Res. 1(2), 112–133 (2007)
1724 M. Casula et al.
1 3
Kaplan, A.: The Conduct of Inquiry. Chandler, Scranton (1964)
Kolb, S.M.: Grounded theory and the constant comparative method: valid research strategies for educators.
J. Emerg. Trends Educ. Res. Policy Stud. 3(1), 83–86 (2012)
Levers, M.J.D.: Philosophical paradigms, grounded theory, and perspectives on emergence. Sage Open 3(4),
2158244013517243 (2013)
Lundvall, B.A.: Knowledge management in the learning economy. In: Danish Research Unit for Industrial
Dynamics Working Paper Working Paper, vol. 6, pp. 3–5 (2006)
Lundvall, B.-Å., Johnson, B.: Knowledge management in the learning economy. J. Ind. Stud. 1(2), 23–42
(1994)
Lundvall, B.-Å., Jenson, M.B., Johnson, B., Lorenz, E.: Forms of Knowledge and Modes of Innovation—
From User-Producer Interaction to the National System of Innovation. In: Dosi, G., et al. (eds.) Technical Change and Economic Theory. Pinter Publishers, London (1988)
Maanen, J., Manning, P., Miller, M.: Series editors’ introduction. In: Stebbins, R. (ed.) Exploratory research
in the social sciences. pp. v–vi. Thousands Oak, CA: SAGE (2001)
Mackenzie, N., Knipe, S.: Research dilemmas: paradigms, methods and methodology. Issues Educ. Res.
16(2), 193–205 (2006)
Marlow, C.R.: Research Methods for Generalist Social Work. Thomson Brooks/Cole, New York (2005)
Mead, G.H.: The working hypothesis in social reform. Am. J. Sociol. 5(3), 367–371 (1899)
Milnes, A.G.: Structure of the Pennine Zone (Central Alps): a new working hypothesis. Geol. Soc. Am.
Bull. 85(11), 1727–1732 (1974)
Morgan, D.L.: Paradigms lost and pragmatism regained: methodological implications of combining qualitative and quantitative methods. J. Mixed Methods Res. 1(1), 48–76 (2007)
Morse, J.: The significance of saturation. Qual. Health Res. 5(2), 147–149 (1995)
O’Connor, M.K., Netting, F.E., Thomas, M.L.: Grounded theory: managing the challenge for those facing
institutional review board oversight. Qual. Inq. 14(1), 28–45 (2008)
Onwuegbuzie, A.J., Leech, N.L.: On becoming a pragmatic researcher: The importance of combining quantitative and qualitative research methodologies. Int. J. Soc. Res. Methodol. 8(5), 375–387 (2005)
Oppenheim, P., Putnam, H.: Unity of science as a working hypothesis. In: Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. II, pp. 3–36 (1958)
Patten, M.L., Newhart, M.: Understanding Research Methods: An Overview of the Essentials, 2nd edn.
Routledge, New York (2000)
Pearse, N.: An illustration of deductive analysis in qualitative research. In: European Conference on
Research Methodology for Business and Management Studies, pp. 264–VII. Academic Conferences
International Limited (2019)
Prater, D.N., Case, J., Ingram, D.A., Yoder, M.C.: Working hypothesis to redefine endothelial progenitor
cells. Leukemia 21(6), 1141–1149 (2007)
Ravitch, B., Riggan, M.: Reason and Rigor: How Conceptual Frameworks Guide Research. Sage, Beverley
Hills (2012)
Reiter, B.: The epistemology and methodology of exploratory social science research: Crossing Popper with
Marcuse. In: Government and International Affairs Faculty Publications. Paper 99. http://scholarcom
mons.usf.edu/gia_facpub/99 (2013)
Ritchie, J., Lewis, J.: Qualitative Research Practice: A Guide for Social Science Students and Researchers.
Sage, London (2003)
Schrag, F.: In defense of positivist research paradigms. Educ. Res. 21(5), 5–8 (1992)
Shields, P.M.: Pragmatism as a philosophy of science: A tool for public administration. Res. Pub. Admin.
41995-225 (1998)
Shields, P.M., Rangarajan, N.: A Playbook for Research Methods: Integrating Conceptual Frameworks and
Project Management. New Forums Press (2013)
Shields, P.M., Tajalli, H.: Intermediate theory: the missing link in successful student scholarship. J. Public
Aff. Educ. 12(3), 313–334 (2006)
Shields, P., & Whetsell, T.: Public administration methodology: A pragmatic perspective. In: Raadshelders,
J., Stillman, R., (eds). Foundations of Public Administration, pp. 75–92. New York: Melvin and Leigh
(2017)
Shields, P., Rangarajan, N., Casula, M.: It is a Working Hypothesis: Searching for Truth in a Post-Truth
World (part I). Sotsiologicheskie issledovaniya 10, 39–47 (2019a)
Shields, P., Rangarajan, N., Casula, M.: It is a Working Hypothesis: Searching for Truth in a Post-Truth
World (part 2). Sotsiologicheskie issledovaniya 11, 40–51 (2019b)
Smith, J.K.: Quantitative versus qualitative research: an attempt to clarify the issue. Educ. Res. 12(3), 6–13
(1983a)
The potential of working hypotheses for deductive exploratory… 1725
1 3
Smith, J.K.: Quantitative versus interpretive: the problem of conducting social inquiry. In: House, E. (ed.)
Philosophy of Evaluation, pp. 27–52. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco (1983b)
Smith, J.K., Heshusius, L.: Closing down the conversation: the end of the quantitative-qualitative debate
among educational inquirers. Educ. Res. 15(1), 4–12 (1986)
Stebbins, R.A.: Exploratory Research in the Social Sciences. Sage, Thousand Oaks (2001)
Strydom, H.: An evaluation of the purposes of research in social work. Soc. Work/Maatskaplike Werk 49(2),
149–164 (2013)
Sutton, R. I., Staw, B.M.: What theory is not. Administrative science quarterly. 371–384 (1995)
Swift, III, J.: Exploring Capital Metro’s Sexual Harassment Training using Dr. Bengt-Ake Lundvall’s taxonomy of knowledge principles. Applied Research Project, Texas State University https://digital.libra
ry.txstate.edu/handle/10877/3671 (2010)
Thomas, E., Magilvy, J.K.: Qualitative rigor or research validity in qualitative research. J. Spec. Pediatric
Nurs. 16(2), 151–155 (2011)
Twining, P., Heller, R.S., Nussbaum, M., Tsai, C.C.: Some guidance on conducting and reporting qualitative
studies. Comput. Educ. 107, A1–A9 (2017)
Ulriksen, M., Dadalauri, N.: Single case studies and theory-testing: the knots and dots of the process-tracing
method. Int. J. Soc. Res. Methodol. 19(2), 223–239 (2016)
Van Evera, S.: Guide to Methods for Students of Political Science. Cornell University Press, Ithaca (1997)
Whetsell, T.A., Shields, P.M.: The dynamics of positivism in the study of public administration: a brief
intellectual history and reappraisal. Adm. Soc. 47(4), 416–446 (2015)
Willis, J.W., Jost, M., Nilakanta, R.: Foundations of Qualitative Research: Interpretive and Critical
Approaches. Sage, Beverley Hills (2007)
Worster, W.T.: The inductive and deductive methods in customary international law analysis: traditional and
modern approaches. Georget. J. Int. Law 45, 445 (2013)
Yin, R.K.: The case study as a serious research strategy. Knowledge 3(1), 97–114 (1981)
Yin, R.K.: The case study method as a tool for doing evaluation. Curr. Sociol. 40(1), 121–137 (1992)
Yin, R.K.: Applications of Case Study Research. Sage, Beverley Hills (2011)
Yin, R.K.: Case Study Research and Applications: Design and Methods. Sage Publications, Beverley Hills
(2017)
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.
Smart Cities and Cyber Security: Are We There Yet?
A Comparative Study on the Role of Standards, Third Party Risk Management
and Security Ownership.
Morta Vitunskaite, Ying He*, Thomas Brandstetter and Helge Janicke
School of Computer Science and Informatics, De Montfort University, UK
Abstract
Smart cities have brought a variety of benefits aiming to revolutionise people’s lives. Those include
but are not limited to, increasing economic eciency, reducing cost and decreasing environmental output.
However, the smart city itself is still in its infancy. As it heavily relies on technologies, it opens up doors
to cyber attackers and criminals, which can lead to significant losses. An outstanding problem concerns
the social and organisational aspects of smart cities security resulting from competing interests of di↵erent
parties, high levels of interdependence, and social and political complexity. Our review shows that current
standards and guidelines have not clearly defined roles and responsibilities of di↵erent parties. A common
understanding of key security requirements is not shared between di↵erent parties. This research assessed
the smart cities and their cyber security measures, with a particular focus on technical standards and the
regulatory framework. It comprehensively reviewed 93 security standards and guidance. It then performed
a comparative case study of Barcelona, Singapore and London smart cities on their governance models,
security measures, technical standards and third party management. Based on the review and the case study,
this research concluded on a recommended framework encompassing technical standards, governance input, regulatory framework and compliance assurance to ensure that security is observed at all layers of the
smart cities.
Keywords: Smart Cities, Security Standards, Governance Models, Security Measures, Third Party
Approach.
1. Introduction
More than half of the world’s population is currently living in cities. This has meant that urban development has had to adapt to the population demands; however, frequently this has happened inadequately.
The stress on the aging cities’ infrastructure combined with excessive population has created a number of
significant problems. Chourabi et al. identifies two key types of problems that current cities are experiencing [1]. The first problem concerns physical and material aspects of the city, which encompasses waste
management, scarcity of resources, pollution, human health, and trac congestions. The second problem
concerns social and organisational issues, which a↵ect the current cities - multiple and diverse stakeholders, high levels of interdependence, competing objectives and values, and social and political complexity.
However, current research has placed an imbalanced focus on the former than the latter.
⇤Corresponding author: ying.he@dmu.ac.uk
1
Large amount of research has been done about smart cities physical issues and how the new technologies
can facilitate them [2–5]. These benefits have been seconded by smart city examples of Barcelona (smart
lighting, transport, waste management), Stockholm (smart waste management system), Manchester (real
time water monitoring solution) and other cities.
However, there is less research work about the social and organisational aspects. An outstanding problem concerns the social and organisational aspects of smart cities security resulting from competing interests
of di↵erent parties, high levels of interdependence, and social and political complexity. Existing work shows
that current standards and guidelines have not clearly defined roles and responsibilities of di↵erent parties
[6]. A common understanding of key security requirements is not shared between di↵erent parties. There
are some exiting work exploring the complexity of knowledge sharing, governing shared resources and addressing shared goals within network organisations [7, 8], it is yet to be appropriately transposed to fit the
smart city ecosystem, in particular within the cyber security context.
This research fills in this gap by analysing cyber security challenges of smart cities with particular focus
on the smart city ecosystem risks, technical and security standards related to smart cities, and security regulatory framework. In order to validate our findings, this research also performs a comparative case study
of Barcelona, Singapore and London smart cities and assesses their governance models applied, security
measures implemented, security standards used and third party approaches adopted. This research finally
proposes an appropriate framework to ensure that cyber security is embedded across all layers of the smart
city ecosystem whilst preserving the innovative nature of the technology at hand.
This research makes the following contributions,
• reviews and analyses a full list of 93 currently available technical and security standards relevant to
smart cities and identified the security elements covered in relation to smart cities.
• performs a comparative case study of Barcelona, Singapore and London smart cities on their governance models, security measures, technical and security standards and third party management.
• proposes a smart city security framework to ensure that cyber security is embedded across all layers
of the smart city ecosystem.
The article is set out as follows: section 2 introduces the related work of smart cities, smart city ecosystem, and the key security concerns; section 3 reviews and analyses a full list of 93 currently available
technical and security standards related to smart cities and the regulatory framework currently in place and
their defeciencies and gaps; section 4 reviews and assesses the smart cities using case studies of Barcelona,
Singapore and London; section 5 consists of discussion and a recommended framework for smart city development to ensure that cyber security is embedded by design; and section 6 summarises conclusions and
future work.
2. Related work
2.1. Smart City Ecosystem and Risks
The term of smart city has been used freely and encapsulates a number of varying definitions [1]. Some
definitions focus on collective intelligence [9], some on sustainability [4] and others on smart computing
technologies [10]. In this paper, the Washburn and Sindhu definition will be adopted, which reads: “The
use of Smart Computing technologies to make the critical infrastructure components and services of a
2
city-which include city administration, education, healthcare, public safety, real estate, transportation, and
utilities - more intelligent, interconnected, and ecient” [10].
The smart city is a large infrastructure with a number of key and non-key actors. The complexity
arises from the city being a public entity, however placing significant reliance and integration on private
companies and end users. The complexity of the ICT supply chain has also been recognised by Lu et al.
[11]. It includes suppliers, buyers, manufacturers, warehouse and transportation managers, wholesalers,
retailers and customers. A disruption at any one side can mean tremendous consequences for the whole
ecosystem [11].
Figure 1: The Ecosystem of a Smart City
Figure 1 illustrates how intertwined the ecosystem of a smart city is. It highlights the high number
of di↵erent stakeholders and in turn additional security risks. Kennedy has noted that many traditional
organisations su↵er security incidents stemming from inadequately managed third party or supplier risk [6].
Moreover, the third party risk is increasing due to Internet of Things (IoT) and Cloud prevalence as noted by
Ponemon Institute report [12, 13]. It is frequent that access to critical organisation assets and information
is given to third parties with little or no security review prior [6]. The reason for such an approach within
traditional companies is to speed up the delivery of service and facilitate integration and interoperability.
These are the foundational features of a successful smart city and IoT, however if not done right could also
lead to being the foundational security weaknesses.
However, the real diculty for securing the wider smart city ecosystem stems from fourth and fifth
parties’ involvement in the ecosystem. These include the companies producing end-user devices, which are
then directly plugged into the ecosystem by the consumer. The management of the smart city is powerless
against these security risks and have to purely rely on their own defences and take on full responsibility if a
breach takes place.
Unfortunately, even though the cyber attack or data breach may originate from the third party, the primary organisation is responsible and pays the price. Whilst the liability can often be managed contractually,
3
the responsibility and reputational damage will fall on the parent organisation. This can be illustrated by the
Target incident where a breach originating from its third party vendor lead to $162 million loss, excluding
the cost of legal fees and other mitigating measures [14]. Another example of third party failure is Stuxnet
worm penetration of the Siemens industrial control systems for nuclear power plants in Iran. Similarly, the
airliner Boeing 787 was grounded across the world due to failure of the batteries, which were produced in
Japan [15]. Whilst the examples may not be directly applicable to the IoT or the smart city, the risks and
principles of organisational responsibility are still valid. It reiterates the diculty of security risk management in a highly complex organisation such as a smart city due to the number of actors and stakeholders
involved.
Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) has been used for the smart city management to transfer and clearly
define the responsibility if the risk is materialised. However, there are a number of disadvantages that are
noted against the PPP, primarily a potential rise in cost for the consumers to ensure sustainability. Further,
they require careful consideration during the contract drafting to ensure the full benefits for the city [16].
The rhetoric of a ‘private city’, ‘corporate smart city’ has been used by academia to note the potential
drawbacks of the private involvement in public services [17]. These include neglecting public and citizen
needs and requirements, limited level of involvement and a profit-above-all approach [17].
2.2. Security of Smart Cities
The key enabling technologies for smart cities are smart computing technology citehollands2008will,
IoT [18] and wireless identification, sensing, localisation and connectivity [19]. The IT infrastructure for
the smart city consists of fibre-optic channels, wireless networks and hotspots and other information systems, which are the traditional elements of the IT system. Explicitly to the smart city, the infrastructure
includes sensors, end point devices and allows for user devices to be connected to the outer layers of the
infrastructure. Whilst technology is the key component, it also introduces a number of security risks. The
possible impacts on the a↵ected city can be but are not limited to: power outage resulting in loss of economic activity, water pollution due to an attack on a water treatment facility, trac incidents; financial loss,
loss of sensitive information and even endangering of life through building control system manipulation.
Li et al. has recognised that the key weak link for smart cities is the security and trustworthiness of
data [18]. The trustworthiness of data is fundamental to a successful operation of the smart city; however
a potential cyber attack could alter or generate misleading data [18]. As a result, falsified reports on smart
grid or trac could lead to inappropriate controls to the systems. This could have far reaching and even
life-threatening implications, such as car accidents or inappropriate water treatment. Additional security
challenges that IoT is facing are vulnerable and error-prone transmission mediums, which rely on radio
frequency, and an ever-changing network topology [18]. Whilst Li et al. [18] recognises the appropriate
technical diculty in ensuring the security, the author did not acknowledge the stakeholder complexity
and diculties within the supply chain, third parties and other involved actors. As di↵erent products and
services will be governed and produced by di↵erent manufacturers, ensuring appropriate level of security
across all layers may prove dicult. This is due to competing interests and di↵erent operational approaches
to security and risks that supply chain and stakeholders have.
However, the data is not the only security concern for smart cities. According to a study conducted
by International Data Corporation, 212 billion “things” will be installed based on IoT technology with an
estimated market value of $8.9 trillion in 2020, which translates to 212 billion potential attack doors [20].
IoT devices can be compromised in a number of ways e.g. connected into a botnet, made inoperable by a
worm or used to penetrate the inner networks and systems. This has been evidenced by one of the key cyber
attacks in 2016, where IoT appliances were connected into a botnet sending DDoS attacks [21]. This threat
derives from the internet connectivity, which allows for a remote attack and code execution. The threat is
4
amplified by the inherent accessibility of technology used such as TCP/IP or Zigbee protocols. Information
on the protocols’ vulnerabilities and attack tools are easily accessible via a basic search browser. As TCP
relies on a unique user’s IP address, an attacker may easily trace to specific individuals [22].
In addition to the inherent vulnerabilities of various protocols, the devices are commonly deployed with
little security measures and default generic passwords. The information concerning connected to the Internet
devices is accessible using the Shodan search engine. The National Crime Agency (NCA) has highlighted
that this security problem concerns a number of manufacturers and IoT appliances [21]. Specific examples
include botnets such as Mirai targeting insecure IoT devices and connecting them to a botnet [23]; Persirai,
connecting internet protocol cameras [24]; and Brickerbot, a worm rendering insecure IoT devices unusable
[25]. As a result, a number of IoT devices get consistently recalled [21].
The above analysis evidences the significant amount of threats that the city may experience. Unsurprisingly, the attacks do not require sophisticated skill to cause significant damage. Figure 2 provides an
illustration and an overview of threats to smart city.
Figure 2: Smart City Threat Landscape
It is dicult to adequately quantify the impact of cyber threats on public city infrastructure due to
lack of real-time data. However, in 2015 a cyber incident on a Ukrainian energy distribution companies
showcased the disruption and the impact that attacks on smart city infrastructure may bring [21]. It draws
an appropriate perspective on the damage that can be caused economically and to the citizens themselves.
As a result of a cyber attack on the company’s network and industrial control systems (ICS), approximately
225000 people have lost electricity and companies lost automated control of their systems [21].
Due to a critical impact of cyber attacks on smart cities and their probable likelihood caused by a high
5
number of end-point devices, the security of smart cities must be at the forefront of a smart city strategy. The
vast evidence reviewed above suggests that the threats to a smart city are extremely common and can lead to
a significant damage. Also untargeted attacks, which are not designated primarily against smart cities may
pose nonetheless a significant risk in the sense of collateral damage, if they exploit vulnerabilities in core
technology building blocks or platforms. This was shown in 2017 through the NotPetya destructive ransomware outbreak, that although designated mainly against specific systems in the Ukraine, spread globally
and a↵ected e.g. the transportation and logistics sector heavily, creating harsher supply conditions problems
especially in cities. Therefore, the key question is to ensure that security by design is embedded across all
layers of the ecosystem, including private companies, the supply chain, as well as the lifecycle of smart
city elements which may range from months to decades. This requires appropriate industry standards and
regulations. The current framework of standards and regulation will be discussed in the next section.
3. Review of Smart City Related Standards and Regulatory Framework
3.1. Smart City Related Standards
The section above has highlighted the issue that the smart cities require e↵ective technical and security
standards. This view has also been seconded by the British Standards Institution (BSI) report on smart city
data, which highlighted that smart cities across the world are dealing with di↵erent problems and require
standards/data to facilitate the decision making [26]. We have reviewed a full list of 93 currently available
IoT and security standards (See Appendix 1). The evaluation exercise has found a number of standards,
which have been defined by industry and standard bodies, technology companies, researchers and cities.
Among the 93 standards, 13 out of 93 cover cyber security elements, listed in Table 1. We found that one
out of 93 is currently being developed to address security and privacy of wireless consumer devices [27].
A high number of technical standards are pre-existent and apply to the infrastructure technology of smart
cities. Standards are tailored and address either a specific industry or specific component of infrastructure.
British Standards Institution (BSI) is leading the development of smart city standards in the UK. To date
it has developed eight standards/guidelines. We noted that all standards facilitate the development and
conceptualisation of smart cities and their strategy, but o↵er little guidance on security of the infrastructure.
IEEE is a major player in defining technical and security elements for the IoT. A number of standards
had been defined prior the term IoT or smart city was even coined. In addition to pre-existent standards,
IEEE is leading the project IEEE P2413 - Standard for an Architectural Framework for the Internet of
Things (IoT), with a sub-group focused on end-to-end approach to ensuring protection, security, privacy
and safety of IoT technology [28]. In addition, IEEE has taken steps to standardize physical and medium
access control layers, wireless networks and wireless devices with end-to-end security in mind.
There is a strong input of standards derives from Europe (DIN, NEN, CEN, CENELEC, ETSI). The
leaders within the technical standards are ISO and IEC. American input is mainly via ANSI and IEEE
standards. Russia has developed some standards and they are mainly released via GOST R [29]. A number
of standards are tailored to specific industries. For example, NERC-CIP was developed for electric utility
industry; NIST Cybersecurity framework was developed for financial, energy, healthcare and other systems
[30].
As the findings above suggest, there are a number of technical standards developed or currently in development globally for IoT technology and industries. Yet, despite the numerous attempts coming from
di↵erent bodies to provide clarity and standardize the model, the smart city remains an ambiguous playground [31]. The review also showed that the standards are not comprehensive and often focused on very
specific technical features. Whilst 13 standards cover security to some extent, few o↵er a comprehensive
set of principles to ensure security by design.
6
The standards have not yet been adopted by the industry and have not been noted as mandatory requirements. Application of these standards will be further assessed by the case studies in Section 4. Lack of
adaptation and poor security can be further illustrated by a study conducted by HP of 10 IoT devices in
use today for security vulnerabilities. The study found that on average a device had 25 vulnerabilities, totalling 250 vulnerabilities across 10 IoT devices [32]. The study has initiated and contributed to the OWASP
Internet of Things (IoT) Project [33].
UK has released guidance on key security principles for connected and automated vehicles for manufacturers to ensure the security by design for smart transportation in the UK and a security characteristic for
smart metering and communications hub[34, 35]. Automated vehicle guidelines are so far the most comprehensive and prescriptive approach to security-in-depth released by a national government. It recognises
the complexity of multi-stakeholder environment and aims to provide a benchmark to all parties involved in
the manufacturing and supply chain.
Governmental and non-governmental bodies have released security guidance for transport. Whilst the
British guidance is particularly comprehensive and it is first to acknowledge the real complexity of security
due to the multi-stakeholder environment, it is limited to smart vehicles only and will require time embed. At
the moment, the guidance is not mandatory and there is no information available showing the manufacturers
will embrace it. However, at this point it is clear that the industry is leading the way and thus shaping the
standards rather than the other way around. Whilst some proprietary solutions or frameworks may become
the de facto benchmark for others to follow, the standards will require time and appropriate approach from
the city councils in order to bring the desired e↵ect to the field of secure IoT.
7
Table 1: Security Elements covered by Security Standards
Standard Description Security Elements covered
EIA TSB 4940 Smart device communications - Security aspects The standard series cover security aspects of device communications, with particular focus on protocols in use [36].
NEN 7512:2005 nl Health informatics - Information security in the
healthcare sector - Basis for trust for exchange of
data
The standard is specific to healthcare sector in the Netherlands. It
is focused on ensuring the security of data exchange [37].
PAS 555:2013 Cyber security risk - Governance and management -
Specification
UK based standard issued by the BSI, aimed at ensuring appropriate cyber security government and management at an organisation. The standard is not specific to smart cities or IoT [38].
SS-ISO/IEC 27005:2013 Information technology - Security techniques - Information security risk management This ISO standard is focused on information security risk man- agement. The standard is not specific to smart cities or IoT [39].
IEEE P24151-1-4 Standard for Smart Transducer Interface for Sensors,
Actuators and Devices - eXtensible Messaging and
Presence Protocol (XMPP) - currently being developed, specifically addresses security
N/A - has not been released yet. The standard will cover security
features of sensors, actuators and devices that use XMPP protocol
[40].
IEEE P1912 Standard for Privacy and Security Architecture for
Consumer Wireless Devices - currently being developed
N/A - has not been released yet. The standard will cover privacy
and security aspects of end user devices [27].
IEEE 802.1AE-2006 EEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks: Media Access Control (MAC) Security; Security capabilities expanded by IEEE 802.1AEbw2013. These series of standards are focused on networks security, with particular focus on MAC security [41].
IEEE 802.21a-2012 IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area
Networks: Media Independent Handover Services -
Amendment for Security Extensions to Media Independent Handover Services and Protocol
These series of standards are focused on security mechanisms to
protect media independent handover services and mechanisms to
use MIH to assist proactive authentication to reduce the latency
due to media access authentication and key establishment with
the target network [42].
IEEE 1888 series IEEE Standard for Ubiquitous Green Community
Control Network Protocol and its security
The standard series identify gateways for field-bus networks, data
storage for archiving and developing data sharing platforms, and
application units as important system components for developing
digital communities, i.e., building-scale and city-wide ubiquitous
facility networking infrastructure. [43]
8
Table 1: (continued)
Standard Description Security Elements covered
IEEE 692-2013 IEEE Standard for Criteria for Security Systems for
Nuclear Power Generating Stations
Criteria for the design of an integrated security system for nuclear
power generating stations are provided in this standard. Requirements are included for the overall system, interfaces, subsystems,
and individual electrical and electronic equipment. This standard
addresses equipment for security-related detection, surveillance,
access control, communication, data acquisition, and threat assessment [44].
IEEE C37.240-2014 IEEE Standard Cybersecurity Requirements for
Substation Automation, Protection, and Control
Systems
The standards presents a balanced approach to security of automation, protection and controls systems [45]
IEEE 1686-2013 IEEE Standard for Intelligent Electronic Devices
Cyber Security Capabilities
The functions and features to be provided in intelligent electronic devices (IEDs) to accommodate critical infrastructure protection programs are defined in this standard. Security regarding
the access, operation, configuration, firmware revision and data
retrieval from an IED are addressed. Communications for the
purpose of power system protection (teleprotection) are not addressed in this standard [46].
9
3.2. Regulatory Framework
Legal regulation and policy tend to take time to catch up with the innovation and new technology. The
key legal regulation currently in place is Computer Misuse Act 1990, which introduced criminal o↵ences
for incidents regarding unauthorised access to computer material, commission of o↵ences using computers
or unauthorised modification of computer material. This act will remain valid in the emergence of smart
cities and will capture any intentional security incidents regarding smart city technology. However, this
o↵ers a very traditional view to cyber crime/attacks. The act is unable to encompass the emerging legal
issues from the IoT and smart cities due to their inherent complexity.
Dowden has noted where potential legal challenges may arise. To date, there is no guidance found
on liabilities concerning a product failure, i.e. a crash involving a self-driving car or failure to administer
medication due to a cyber breach [47]. This suggests that in cases where incidents are caused by a fault or
vulnerability in a third party product, there is no law to ensure that the manufacturer presumes responsibility. As a result, this places the end user with no guarantees to be compensated. In cases where a third
party product is directly embedded in the smart city infrastructure, the responsibility and damages will be
absorbed by the smart city council.
There have not yet been any cases regarding product liability in the IoT/smart city context; therefore
it is hard to predict how the courts would react. However, due to lack of specific regulations in place for
product failure, the courts are likely to invoke the contractual duty of care, as defined in the landmark case
of AC 562 [48]. The case established that a manufacturer owes a duty of care if it is reasonably foreseeable
that a failure in ensuring product’s safety would lead to harm of the user. However, this would only apply
to individual end users as organisations, including the smart cities would have contractual agreements in
place taking precedence over the duty of care. It is dicult to determine whether this would be a cause of
action or whether the courts may see IoT/smart city as a completely di↵erent issues, however it may render
a possible remedy to a↵ected users.
Another area of uncertainty lays with data privacy, in particular ownership, processing, use and security
of data generated by the IoT devices in view of multiple commercial and public stakeholders. The Data
Protection Act (DPA) 1998 is the data protection regulation that is currently in place in the UK. The key take
away from the DPA is its duty to notify users of any loss of personal data. The act is a direct transposition
of a EU data protection Directive 95/46/EC.
However, the 1995 Directive has been superseded by the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
which comes into force in 2018 May. As it is a Regulation rather than a Directive, it does not require
a local transposition into laws but rather is e↵ective immediately. It applies to all businesses and bodies
dealing with personal data. GDPR is applicable to both controllers and processors of data. Information
Commissioner’s Oce (ICO) has defined the controller as a body that defines how and why personal data is
processed and the processor as the body that acts on the controller’s instructions [49]. Essentially, it requires
that all parties involved in data handling (storage and transfer included) comply with the Regulation.
Contrary to the DPA, the Regulation ascertains significantly more liability to the processor of data rather
than placing the responsibility and liability for breaches on the controller entirely. The processor is required
to maintain records of data and the processing that has taken place. However, where the processor is deemed
to be responsible for the breach, this will not alleviate the controller from responsibility. The Regulation
puts forward additional requirements on the processor to ensure that the contracts comply with the GDPR
[49].
UK has now confirmed that it will uphold the GDPR despite leaving the EU. Lack of compliance with
the regulation will mean not only reputational damage but also a ground-breaking 4% of the annual turnover
in financial fines. This regulation is a step forward in defining the ownership of security and data protection
10
for Smart City and IoT. It clearly sets out the importance of clear contractual agreements and demands
compliance with the regulation by all parties involved. However, it also reiterates that the contracting party,
in this case, the City, will always bear some level of responsibility when breaches happen. Importantly, this
Regulation applies internationally, where the data processed is of EU nationals. This will allow ascertaining
some level of liability to third parties operating outside the EU, but serving the citizens within the EU [49].
In addition to the liability challenges, further issues regarding security and data protection stem from
public-private partnerships and the involvement from the commercial actors. The overall concepts of privacy
by design, which are being presented by the GDPR, seem contrary to the idea of Smart City, where big data
and its analytics are the key enablers for the IoT and Smart City initiatives. More importantly, due to the
cloud prevalence and data storage worldwide, it is debatable whether privacy and data security are even
feasible in practice [47].
To illustrate the complexity, the EU is persistent on consent when it comes to data sharing and data
privacy. Requirement of consent was introduced as part of the e-Privacy Directive (2002/58/EC), which
solidified into a click-through consent to cookie tracking on websites. Questions are raised regarding how
the equivalent would be addressed in the field of IoT, in particular wearable technology which may film or
record outsiders and process data on the streets [50].
Another aspect of law, which may require a reshu✏e, is privacy law. The landmark decision of Von
Hannover [51] concerning photographs of the princess playing tennis, which were later published, constitutes a breach on the grounds of expectation of privacy. Questions are raised regarding how such principles
will be transformed to accommodate data collected in the smart city or even in a smart home.
These legal questions currently remain unanswered. Whilst there is no specific regulation or ocial
guidance that directly apply to IoT and smart cities, it can only be speculated what approach will be taken
to stretch the current regulations into the digital space. The complexity arises where the government is
keen to protect its critical assets and the industry continues desiring to operate freely and without imposed
restrictions [52]. However, due to the immense data and privacy implications that the smart cities bring, it is
important that the regulators start thinking about these challenges and help shape innovation ensuring that
privacy and security are observed by design, without stifling it.
4. Case Studies: Barcelona, Singapore and London
4.1. Research Method
A quantitative case study of Barcelona, Singapore and London using publicly available information has
been conducted. The goal of this study is to quantify and confirm findings identified by the literature review
and analysis above. We selected Barcelona, Singapore and London as these cities have been reported as
the most developed smart cities [53]. Factors such as adoption of smart grid technologies, smart lighting,
smart trac, Wi-Fi access points, use of smartphones and available applications were assessed as part of
this research. In addition, these cities are at the forefront of smart city development and therefore will have
the most publicly available data for the study.
The research method consists of review and inspection of publicly available information including
academic articles, ocial websites, news reports focusing on (1) governance model applied, (2) security
measures implemented, (3) standards used in the development and (4) third party approach adapted. The
purpose of this study is to provide first hand evidence to support the above-identified findings. Specifically,
the study will provide insight into how smart cities are being developed; whether the governance approach
is defined at the beginning of the development; whether technical standards have been upheld or adhered to,
noting the leading standards if any; and finally it will show whether security and risk within the third party
11
management has been assessed and appropriate measures taken on the onset. The data is collected using a
search of academic databases and the open source.
4.2. Barcelona
Barcelona is deemed as one of the smart city pioneers. Barcelona’s smart city project started in 2012
with the deployment of IoT technology across public transit, parking, street lighting and waste management
[54]. The overall initiative consisted of 83 individual projects and utilized the fiber optic internet across the
city. It serves as the key enabler for the integrated IoT systems. Barcelona has a defined strategy in place
and considers the following [55],
• To define the city model “mantra” ;
(“mantra” is defined as “a city of productive neighbourhoods, at human speed, interconnected, ecoecient, re-naturalized, energetically self-sucient, and regenerated at zero emissions, inside a highspeed interconnected Metropolitan Area” )
• To analyse the structure of the city and define action plans;
• To rethink the systems of the city;
• To develop the economy of the city services along with the ecosystem;
• To make the city more resilient and promote long-term investment;
• To make the city liveable, increasing public space for people;
• To change the organisation, breaking the “silos” ;
• To work with other cities and to be part of the City Protocol Society.
To date, the project has resulted in significant cost savings and increased quality of life for the citizens.
It is estimated that the ‘smartification’ has led to $58 million on water savings, boosted parking revenues
by $50 million and savings of $37 million due to smart lighting a year [54]. Barcelona’s key smart city
innovations are focused on its transport system, smart shelters and bus stops, smart bicycle sharing system,
smart parking, pneumatic waste management, smart lighting, use of renewable energy and use of apps for
urban mobility [56]. Barcelona Smart city aims to define, design and develop a reference model of a network
management platform and sensor data for a Smart city and validate it in a major city [57]. It relies on open
source rather than proprietary platforms.
4.2.1. What governance model has been applied?
Gasco has analysed Barcelona’s management and organisation following Chourabi’s integrated framework [55]. The analysis has showed that Barcelona’s management is part of a broader model, which encourages territorial decentralization, service externalization and the adoption of managerial tools.
The Mayor of the city has actively supported the development of the city. Specific oces have been
established to deal and develop the strategy. Those are Urban Habitat, The Computer Municipal Institute,
and Smart City Personal Management Oce. Further, Barcelona has involved a number of stakeholders in
the development and defining of the strategy, including businesses and universities. However, the leadership
lies in the hands of the City Council. Gasco noted that public-private partnerships played a key role in
developing the city [55].
12
The city has been set up to ensure that citizens are involved and the governance model is transparent.
This model is expressed via a citizens’ complaints bureau, Bustia Ciutadana, which allows reporting breakages or making suggestions. It also has developed an application named IDBCN, which enables citizens
to digitally and remotely identify themselves. Further, Open Data Barcelona is accessible to all, which
contains data on election, population, economy and other, which facilitates citizens with inception of new
services and businesses [56].
4.2.2. What security measures have been implemented?
Review of available data (in English) has not indicated what security measures have been adapted by the
City. Further, our review of the open source documents noted that cyber security does not feature frequently
in a high level discourse of the Barcelona smart city.
4.2.3. What standards have been used in the development?
Review of available data has not indicated what specific standards have been used in the development
of the Barcelona smart city. In addition, no specific standards have been mandated going forward. The
study has found that one of the key lessons from Barcelona’s smart city projects is in fact lack of standards;
this has been corroborated by the development of an open source solution rather than relying on proprietary
solutions. Furthermore, lack of standards for data handling and encoding has resulted in a diculty, especially due to a number of invested interests and requirements - public administration, citizens and third
parties [57].
4.2.4. What third party approach has been adapted?
The city’s strategy suggested that programmes and projects should be implemented as part of the publicprivate partnerships, including academia and other research centres [55]. Barcelona places a lot of emphasis
on innovation by the citizens and enterprises. This can be evidenced by the 22@Barcelona. 22@Barcelona
is a regeneration project and it provides a space for urban planning and entrepreneurialism. It is a space for
municipal leaders to collaborate with the private sector, universities and communities to speed up innovation. For example, the city’ irrigation system is a joint venture [58].
Other examples of public-private partnerships include Barcelona GIX project, the Integrated Management of Municipal IT Networks. Due to the public-private partnership, the project was well governed and
the cost was found to be lower. Similarly, Worldsensing and its smart parking system is also a joint venture
between the city and a private enterprise, which was developed at 22@Barcelona. The city provided space
for developing and allowed for the product to be piloted on Barcelona streets [58].
Whilst this approach is highly collaborative and fosters innovation, review found little data to suggest
a comprehensive assurance model towards third parties. This view can be corroborated by previously discussed and self-identified issue of lack of encoding and data handling standards.
4.3. Singapore
Singapore has taken a slightly di↵erent approach towards ‘smartification’. Specifically, it aims to involve the full government and the full nation in developing it [59]. Singapore’s smart city project dubbed
as ‘Smart Nation’ initiative is coordinated by the Smart Nation and Digital Government Oce in the Prime
Minister’s Oce, with support of other governmental agencies. It aims to transform five key domains:
• Transport
• Home & Environment
13
• Business productivity
• Health and enabled ageing
• Public sector services
The project was established in 2014 [60]. It involves universities, cultivates a community of start-ups,
partners with the industry and corporations to sponsor labs and R&D. Further, it is enabling the population with the skills necessary for the Smart Nation [59]. The examples of the initiatives that have been
implemented by Singapore include smart home technologies, autonomous road transport, and healthcare.
Similarly to Barcelona, it has an open data platform, which is accessible by the public and private companies, and a Living Laboratory - a district designed for fostering innovation and piloting solutions [61]. To
achieve these initiatives, the city is implementing an advanced info-communications infrastructure and has
created a platform for data sharing, which is accessible by all.
4.3.1. What governance model has been applied?
The city governance lies in the hands of the Government. Singapore has established the Smart Nation
and Digital Government Group (SNDGG), a centralised agency, under the Prime Minister’s Oce to deal
with agencies involved in Singapore’s digital transformation [62]. The SNDGG consists of the Smart Nation
and Digital Government Oce (SNDGO) and GovTech. SNDGO is responsible for policy formation and
GovTech is responsible for policy implementation. SNDGO consists of Smart Nation Programme Oce,
Digital Governance Directorate (MOF) and Government Technology Policy Department (MCI). Singapore
government aims to digitise public service delivery through its ‘e-government’ drive. It aims to implement and supply the infrastructure, policies and enablers to foster innovations, encouraging the citizens and
businesses to get involved [60].
Singapore as a smart city is slightly di↵erent to other cities due to its deregulated economic market. As
a result, it is willing to experiment and does so in an agile way [23]. However, Singapore is also taking a
di↵erent approach to data handling and management. Rather than setting up a Data Operation Centre, it is
aiming to develop policies and regulations supported by a common platform for data, which in turn can be
used by di↵erent governmental agencies [63].
Singapore has observed some challenges due to the di↵ering stakeholder interests. For example, Seng
has stated that whilst both the police and transport could use CCTV cameras, steps must be taken to
break down the silos, understand how duties of maintenance and data connectivity should be shared /citeseng2016singapore. Research suggests that measures that could facilitate such management have not been
implemented yet.
4.3.2. What security measures have been implemented?
Singapore has addressed the need for cyber security and recognises that everyone has a part to play
[61]. Singapore has developed a clear cyber security strategy, which underpins four core pillars: resilient
infrastructure, a safe cyberspace, creation of cyber security ecosystem and strong international partnerships.
This approach is seen as a fundamental part in becoming a truly smart city [59]. As such, one of the
key measures coming out of this strategy is strengthening and expansion of the National Cyber Incident
Response Team and the National Cyber Security Centre [64].
In addition to the Singapore’s cyber security strategy, the city has also established a Cyber Security Lab
as a joint venture by University of Singapore and Singtel. The lab has two key objectives: to develop a
more advanced data analytics techniques and a novel approach to design and implementation of systems
that observe a ‘Security by design’ approach. The lab will work across four di↵erent areas of network, data
14
and cloud security; predictive security analytics; IoT and Industrial Control Systems and cyber security
based on quantum technology [65].
Whilst the cyber strategy is a huge step forward and indicates Singapore’s seriousness towards having
a secure smart city, however, review of available data including academic papers, cyber security strategies
and other publicly available documentation and news reports have provided little detail on what security
measures have been adopted by Singapore.
4.3.3. What standards have been used in the development?
The study found no data to suggest that specific standards have been adhered to as part of the development to date. As a result, Singapore has recognised a necessity for technical standards to ensure that data
flows seamlessly and all involved actors speak the common language and operate in harmony. Information
Technology Standards Committee (ITSC) and Internet of Things Technical Committee (IoTTC) have roles
to play in defining the technical specifications for the Smart Nation. The committees work to identify what
standards need to be defined alongside the strategy [59]. So far it has developed and defined technical
reference documents for the sensor network (TR 38 and TR 40). The standards, once defined, will be applicable to public and private bodies and will help to improve the collaboration. The final goal is to develop
standards that will cover the end-to-end IoT architecture [66].
In addition, Singapore has taken steps to release a new Cyber Security Act. The act will be made
mandatory for the operators to take cyber security steps and report incidents. In addition, it will empower
the Cyber Security Agency and will help raise the standards of cyber security across all layers. The Act will
focus on providing a set of standards, protocols and rules for organisations providing services to the city. It
has not yet established how it is best to enforce the rules [64].
Whilst the study suggests that few measures may have been implemented as part of the initial initiative,
it is strongly evidenced that Singapore takes cyber security seriously and is taking all steps necessary to
embed ‘security by design’ approach.
4.3.4. What third party approach has been adapted?
Singapore stands out as a city placing significant reliance on private companies to innovate and the
government itself presumes the role of an enabler and supporter, rather than an innovator itself [60]. It
thrives and encourages an attitude of creating and innovating together, with an involvement of its citizens
and the private sector [61].
As part of this, Singapore has developed a start up ecosystem, where venture capitalists and entrepreneurs
may work and experiment. As a result, Singapore has been ranked as No. 1 for ease of doing business by
the World Bank [60].
Whilst this approach is great for collaboration, the review has found little data to suggest a comprehensive assurance approach to data and service integration. However, as discussed above, the city has taken
steps to establish regulations and laws, dictating that standards must be followed by all parties involved in
the development. As such, this approach will facilitate and help reduce the third party risks.
4.4. London
London smart city initiative was started with the opening of an extensive open data store in 2010 and
was fully embedded with the inception of the Smart London Board in 2013. The Mayor of London formed
the Smart London Board. The board created the Smart London Plan [67] and define a vision for a smarter
London [31]. The strategic smart city plan included a number of smart initiatives for citizen engagement,
15
data and innovation enhancement. This has been supplemented by a number of labs and innovation districts [31]. The notable successful projects include widespread Wi-Fi, smart transport and prevalent use of
applications.
4.4.1. What governance model has been applied?
Smart London Board is the key advisor on the smart city matters. The Board comprises of academics
(e.g. from University College London, Imperial College London, etc.), businesses and entrepreneurs (e.g.
from Siemens, McKinsey, Accenture Health and Public Service, etc.). The Board does not have any government representative. They are responsible for advising the smart city matters for Greater London Authority.
The board also advises on how technology could influence the mayoral strategies and policies. It also helps
improve existing public services and create opportunities for new digital public services. The smart city
plan as devised by the Board covers key seven areas [68],
• Placing Londoners at the heart of the innovation
• Having open and accessible data
• Utilising London’s research abilities and talent
• Networking amongst city’s stakeholders
• Developing smart infrastructure
• Having better and more integrated City Hall services
• Enabling smarter London experience for all
The plan is focused on the implementation of projects and initiatives and does not provide guidance
on stakeholder management or security. However, it places focus on the bottom-up approach. Similarly to
Singapore, it sees the citizens, businesses and entrepreneurs as key partners for innovation and suggests a
cooperative climate [68].
The projects are promoted via the government sites, however they have little detail on how they are
managed or run. The key challenges for the overall initiatives have been identified as connecting people and
creating communities, navigation and transportation, capturing and using data [69].
4.4.2. What security measures have been implemented?
UK has released a national cyber security strategy for 2016-2021. The strategy did not include the cyber
security requirements specific to smart cities [34]. Review of other publicly available documentation and
news reports have provided little detail on what security measures or requirements have been observed as
part of the Smarter London initiative. Contrary to Singapore, cyber security does not feature significantly
in the rhetoric of Smart London.
4.4.3. What standards have been used in the development?
United Kingdom and London have a few bodies, which have taken the lead with defining technical
standards relevant to the Smart City and IoT. Specifically, a joint collaboration of Cities Standards Institute
(CSI) and British Standards Institute (BSI) has so far released four standards. These are:
• PAS 181, Smart City Framework Guide to establish strategies for smart cities and communities
16
• PAS 182, Smart City Concept Model Guide to establish a model for data interoperability
• PAS 183, Smart Cities Guide to establish a decision-making framework for sharing data and information services
• PAS 184, Smart Cities Guide to develop project proposals for delivering smart city solutions
As reviewed above in section 2, these standards are high level and provide a more operational or projectbased guidance, rather than dictate what technical or cyber security elements must be observed. In addition
to the BSI-CSI standards, UK government has released cyber-security focused principles for connected and
automated vehicles and a security specification for smart metering. The guidance is the most comprehensive
in the industry so far, however it is yet to be embedded. Via a review of available documentation, the author
found little information on what technical standards were complied with during the research period.
4.4.4. What third party approach has been adapted?
London is aiming to support the innovation by o↵ering facilities such as ultra-fast broadband, digital
and physical space to small and medium enterprises. The smart city approach includes the support of
commercialisation of technology innovation [68].
However, there is little information publicly available that can shed some light on how London is managing its third party risk. The key development, as discussed above, is the guidance on automated vehicles.
The principles are applicable to manufacturers and other actors of the supply chain, which should provide
some level of assurance regarding the security. However, the principles are limited to automated cars and
are yet to be embedded.
4.5. Key findings and discussion on case studies
The comparative case study of smart cities quantifies the identified findings. The case study findings are
summarised in Table 2. This will lead to the formulation of the recommended framework for secure smart
city development in section 5.
17
Table 2: Case Study Findings
Governance Model Security Measures Technical Standards Third Party Management
Barcelona • Leadership is at the hands of the City Council
• Part of the broader model of
governance
• Encourages decentralisation
• Specific governmental offices created to lead the initiative
• Citizens and innovators at
the core of the initiative
• Utilisation of PPPs
• No data to suggest preexistent measures
• No data to suggest the ‘goforward’ approach
• No data to suggest preexistent measures
• No data to suggest the ‘goforward’ approach
• Recognised as a key challenge
• Private innovation is at the
heart of the initiative;
• No data to suggest that the
city has implemented a comprehensive assurance model
towards third party risk
Singapore • Whole government, whole nation approach
• The government is the enabler and sets policies and
regulations
• Citizens and innovators at
the core of the initiative
• Utilisation of PPPs
• No data to suggest preexistent measures
• Cyber Security heavy ‘goforward’ approach defined
• Cyber Security Strategy
• Cyber Security Act
• Cyber Security Lab
• No data to suggest preexistent measures
• ‘Go-forward’ approach includes end-to-end architecture IoT standards
• Standards committee has developed two standards thus
far
• Private innovation is at the
heart of the initiative;
• No data to suggest that the
city has implement a comprehensive assurance model
towards third party
• Third party risk will be reduced by the introduction of
the new Cyber Security Act
18
Table 2: (continued)
Governance Model Security Measures Technical Standards Third Party Management
London • Smart London Board acts as an advisor to the Greater
London Authority
• Little data available to suggest how projects are run
• No data to suggest preexistent measures
• Principles for cyber security
of automated cars have been
released by the Government
• Security characteristic for
smart metering has been released by the Government
• No data to suggest preexistent measures
• Two bodies working on developing standards
• 4 standards developed thus
far; however high level and
project focused
• Private innovation is at the
heart of the initiative;
• No data to suggest that the
city has implement a comprehensive assurance model
towards third party
• The risk will be reduced to
some extent by the implementation of cyber security
principles for automated vehicles and smart meters
19
The case studies have showed that many cities fail to have comprehensive and long-term smart city
strategies in place [68]. The strategies in place do not take into account management of security risks, use
of standards or a comprehensive approach towards third party risk management. However, the study has
showed that the cities do start thinking about these risks as they become more and more developed. All cities
have specific bodies in place that drive the initiatives. However, all three cities had a di↵erent approach.
Governance Model. Barcelona had a single governmental department responsible for the wider initiative; Singapore has a ‘fully in’ approach in place, which means that the whole government is involved
and driving the ‘smartification’; Barcelona and Singapore placed citizens and innovations at the core of the
smart city initiative while little information was available regarding this aspect for London; finally, London
has a Smart London Board in place which advises the Greater London Authority on smart city matters.
Interestingly, the Board heavily consists of big corporate leaders, some academia and no government representatives. This is slightly worrisome as such a one-sided approach may steer London to a corporate city
side rather than a smart city for all citizens.
Security Measures. Among the three cities studied, Singapore appeared as the most collaborative and
the most advanced in its approach to cyber security. Whilst still in its infancy, it forms Singapore’s long-term
approach to embedding cyber security by design. Specifically, the committee it has in place alongside the
Cyber Security Act is building a base of rules and standards that third parties and other private companies
must adhere to. Contrary to Singapore, Barcelona and London do not seem as vocal about what cyber
security measures are being implemented or what the strategy going forward is. Although UK has released
a national cyber security strategy for 2016-2021, the strategy did not include the cyber security requirements
specific to smart cities [34].
IoT and Security Standards Relevant to Smart Cities. Review of available data has not indicated what
specific standards have been used in the development of the Barcelona smart city. Singapore takes cyber
security seriously and is taking all steps necessary to embed ‘security by design’ approach. It has developed
two standards for the sensor network (TR 38 and TR 40). London has two bodies, CSI and BSI, taking
the lead with defining technical standards relevant to the Smart City and IoT. They released four standards;
however these standards are high level and provide a project-based guidance. Whilst all cities are taking
steps to define the standards, they are high level and lack the technical aspects that are so necessary for a
security-by-design approach. Further, little information was available to show what standards all three cities
have already implemented or used as part of their infrastructure development. This corroborates with the
previously identified findings regarding non-existent and inconsistent use of technical standards.
Third Part Management. Barcelona places an emphasis on innovation by the citizens and enterprises,
evidenced by the 22@Barcelona. Whilst this approach is highly collaborative and fosters innovation, review
found little data to suggest any risk reduction strategies towards third parties. Singapore has taken steps to
establish regulations and laws, which will facilitate and help reduce the third party risks. The key development in London is the guidance on automated vehicles. The principles are applicable to manufacturers
and other actors of the supply chain, which should provide some level of assurance regarding the security.
However, the principles are limited to automated cars and are yet to be embedded. All three cities are focused on a highly collaborative approach and see the citizens and businesses at the heart of its innovation.
However, limited information was available to demonstrate those cities have implemented a comprehensive
assurance model towards third party risk. This can be explained by either a lack of a defined process or by
a limitation of data available. These findings combined with the literature review, which has showed that
little attention is being paid to managing the stakeholders and third party appropriately, suggest that smart
cities studied are yet to define an appropriate process.
To conclude, the above analysis and the case studies have showed that unless the ecosystem for the smart
20
city is highly cooperative and collaborative, the innovation will be stifled and the smart city idea will not
succeed. Lee and Whang has recognised the diculty between the flexible integration and security among
third parties in the more traditional supply chain context [70]. However, this complexity is ever increasing
in the smart city framework as illustrated by the literature review and the case studies above. Therefore
there are two key points, which have to be satisfied to render a valid security framework for smart cities:
a) easy collaboration and data sharing amongst the ecosystem; and b) security is observed at all levels and
stages of the ecosystem without slowing down the collaboration.
5. Recommendations
As the industry is still in its infancy, the smart cities globally and the City Councils behind them learn
as they go. Experiment and by trial and error find ways that prove e↵ective and ecient in developing the
initiatives. Unsurprisingly, the academia and technical standards trail behind whilst the industry are creating
de facto frameworks and guidelines to follow. However, whilst in some cases this may prove appropriate,
it often neglects the security by design and puts the infrastructure and its citizens at risk of cyber-physical
breaches. Furthermore, lack of appropriate framework could lead to the city being overly centralized or
overly privatised, resulting in an imbalanced approach, stifled innovation or an uncontrolled environment,
placing the infrastructure and citizens at risk. Therefore, it is paramount that the right balance is struck
ensuring that responsible innovation continues at a speed whilst observing security by design principles
(Hoe, 2016). As the government is the main owner, it is important it takes appropriate steps to ensure
security and minimise liability in cases incidents happen.
5.1. Technical Standards
The case study shows that the standards have not yet been adopted by the industry and have not been
noted as mandatory requirements. IEEE has also noted that security elements are often not developed as
part of the initial design, but rather is considered as an afterthought of the IoT initiatives [71]. Prescriptive standards are paramount to smart cities as the tech vendors contributing and providing solutions will
frequently be small and medium enterprises and start ups. Kaspersky lab has noted that 57% of small businesses do not invest into security solutions [72]. This could lead to a compromise of a whole platform or a
smart city. A study conducted by HP of 10 IoT devices in use today shows that on average a device had 25
vulnerabilities, totalling 250 vulnerabilities across 10 IoT devices [32].
Pishva stated that the security issues cannot be dealt with by a single vendor or manufacturer [22];
instead, an adherence to certain standards must become as the norm of smart city appliance development.
As the analysis has showed, there are a high number of technical standards that are related to the IoT or
Smart City. The variety of standards is overwhelming, they are not suciently comprehensive and there is
little guidance on which standards are key. Therefore, it is paramount that a set of baseline security standards
is drafted, which apply principles rather than rules, ensuring they can be scaled up or down, depending on
the product or service. It is important that technical standards provide coverage for application and code
development to embed the security by design principles.
5.2. Government Input
The NCA report on cyber threat to business has noted that the government has a part to play in embedding the ’security by design’ principles. This has materialised to an extent and resulted in the development
of a standard by the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) and the Department for Business, Energy &
Industrial Strategy on a secure smart metering system. This is one of the first steps for the government
21
on the road to ‘secure by design’ destination [21]. However, to date, there has not been an appropriately
defined strategy in place for smart cities in the UK [73].
The government should define a harmonised cyber security framework, which includes all stakeholders
including operators, manufacturers and other actors. The government should act as a coordinator and the
framework would integrate cyber security standards and an appropriate risk management approach [74].
Specifically it should,
• Whilst the government is able to release specific security standards it may not always be best equipped
to do so. Therefore, it is important the government sets out clearly which standards are mandatory
for all actors of the ecosystem of smart city.
• Following the identification and definition of key standards, the government should define the standard operating processes for data management and handling for smart city. These guidelines should
be mandatory and apply to all actors of the ecosystem of smart city.
• As the owner of the smart city, the government must also define a set of procedures for the supply chain. Specifically, defined timely assurance requirements and clear contractual agreements are
paramount to ensure that only secure third party providers are integrated in the critical smart city
infrastructure.
• The government should also define the minimum security requirements or a security level for all
smart home and personal devices and require for that level to be clearly noted on the packaging to
appropriately inform the user. As it is impossible to enforce specific security standards to fourth or
fifth parties, labelling may be an appropriate step to allow end users to make choices when it comes
to purchasing gadgets and technology. As a result, the government must also produce clear guidance
for the end user to secure their internal networks. As IEEE has noted, it is the responsibility of the
owner to train its citizens to protect first their data and secondly the integrity and security of the smart
city as a whole.
• It must specifically define the responsibilities of the senior management in cyber security at the framework level. It must also define the requirements of a well-equipped Security Operations Centre and a
Cyber Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT). This would allow increasing the readiness against
the cyber attacks [74].
• Roles and responsibilities of every actor within the smart city ecosystem must be identified at both
business-as-usual state and in a cyber attack case. This would allow the actors to better understand
the rights and duties and ensure business continuity and safety of the citizens [74]
• Finally, it must ensure that cyber knowledge and information of breaches are shared within the ecosystem in a collaborative and timely manner to ensure that the e↵ect of such incidents is minimised.
The framework must consist of principles rather than guidelines to ensure that new technologies are
captured and it can be scaled easily. However, where certain standards are defined, adherence to them
should be strict and mandatory.
5.3. Regulatory Framework
Whilst the regulators should start thinking how the current regulatory framework could be adapted, it is
likely it will change organically on a case-to-case basis. Currently, there seems to be sucient regulation
in place regarding data protection; however the diculty may arise with the extensive data handling and
consent that inevitably will come with IoT and Smart city.
22
5.4. Compliance Assurance
Finally, compliance testing and certifications should form part of the cyber security framework for smart
cities. As adherence to technical standards should start at the application or code development stages, it
should lead to security by design approach in all products that will form the smart city ecosystem. However,
to confirm compliance the third parties should complete annual testing and certification. An independent
party, such as an internal or external auditor, should perform testing and certification. This would give a
reasonable level of assurance to the regulator that all key smart city ecosystem actors observe security by
design.
6. Conclusion and Future Work
Not that long ago smart cities seemed like a utopian dream. However, with the technology improving
faster than ever before, it is no longer just a dream but a reality. Whilst still in its infancy, it promises
to revolutionise the lives of the people, increase economic eciency and decrease environmental output.
However, with all these significant benefits, there also come security risks. As the smart cities are entirely
reliant on technology, this opens up more doors to cyber attackers and criminals, leading to significant
material, economic and at times even fatal losses. As such, it is paramount to observe cyber security at all
layers of the city.
Collaboration, open innovation as well as acertain a agility despite complex intertwined structure is fundamental to the success of any smart city. However, as the analysis has shown, this is also often the culprit
of security deficiencies. The real diculty for observing security stems from the complexity of the smart
city ecosystem and involvement of a high number of competing actors and stakeholders. As the cities are
still developing, many fail to take these risks into account and develop an appropriate third party management approach. One of the key symptoms of this deficiency is lack of appropriate standards and guidance,
clearly defined roles and responsibilities and a common understanding of key security requirements.
The case studies of Barcelona, Singapore and London has emphasised and corroborated the importance
of technical standards, cyber security measures and an e↵ective third party management approach. In turn,
this paper has suggested a framework of recommendations to ensure that security is observed by design
from the onset of the smart city development.
The framework suggests that the government acts as a policy setter and a coordinator in order to define
and mandate the technical standards and define the minimum security requirements. Further, the government should require a clear definition of roles and responsibilities, key processes and procedures for data
handling and management and a set of procedures and requirements for third party and supply chain management. Introduction of the suggested framework would allow and encourage collaboration in a secure
capacity without unnecessarily stifling any innovation. It would lead to security being observed by design
and drive good security practices in other companies and manufacturers.
Smart cities are the way forward, however as they are still amidst their infancy, steps should be taken to
ensure that they are secure, robust, resilient and managed continuously during operations. Only if security is
observed by design, will smart cities improve the lives of the citizens and deliver on the promised benefits.
The research conducted is based on publicly available information review. As smart cities may not share
information openly, a field study or interviews with developers of the smart cities will compliment and
confirm our findings, which will be our next stage work.
23
References
[1] H. Chourabi, T. Nam, S. Walker, J. R. Gil-Garcia, S. Mellouli, K. Nahon, T. A. Pardo, H. J. Scholl, Understanding smart
cities: An integrative framework, in: System Science (HICSS), 2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on, IEEE, 2012,
pp. 2289–2297.
[2] J. Borja, Counterpoint: Intelligent cities and innovative cities, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya (UOC) Papers: E-Journal on
the Knowledge Society 5.
[3] J. Marceau, Innovation in the city and innovative cities, Innovation: Management, Policy, & Practice 10 (2-3) (2008) 136–
146.
[4] D. Toppeta, The smart city vision: how innovation and ict can build smart,“livable”, sustainable cities, The Innovation
Knowledge Foundation 5 (2010) 1–9.
[5] E. Kabalci, A smart monitoring infrastructure design for distributed renewable energy systems, Energy Conversion and
Management 90 (2015) 336–346.
[6] J. Kennedy, Cyber risk management of third party suppliers and partners, http://www.continuitycentral.com/index.
php/news/technology/1220-cyber-risk-management-of-third-party-suppliers-and-partners, [Accessed
2 Aug 2017] (2016).
[7] S. S. Dawes, A. M. Cresswell, T. A. P. COMMENTATORS, L. B. BINGHAM, S. L. CAUDLE, From “need to know” to “need
to share”: Tangled problems, information boundaries, and the building of public sector knowledge networks, in: Debating
public administration, Routledge, 2012, pp. 93–114.
[8] E. P. Weber, A. M. Khademian, Wicked problems, knowledge challenges, and collaborative capacity builders in network
settings, Public administration review 68 (2) (2008) 334–349.
[9] C. Harrison, B. Eckman, R. Hamilton, P. Hartswick, J. Kalagnanam, J. Paraszczak, P. Williams, Foundations for smarter
cities, IBM Journal of Research and Development 54 (4) (2010) 1–16.
[10] D. Washburn, U. Sindhu, S. Balaouras, R. A. Dines, N. M. Hayes, L. E. Nelson, Helping cios understand “smart city”
initiatives: defining the smart city, its drivers, and the role of the cio. cambridge, ma: Forrester research, Inc. Retrieved April
12 (2010) 2014.
[11] T. Lu, X. Guo, B. Xu, L. Zhao, Y. Peng, H. Yang, Next big thing in big data: the security of the ict supply chain, in: Social
Computing (SocialCom), 2013 International Conference on, IEEE, 2013, pp. 1066–1073.
[12] P. Institute, Data risk in the third-party ecosystem, https://www.ponemon.org/local/upload/file/Data\%20Risk\
%20in\%20the\%20Third\%20Party\%20Ecosystem\_BuckleySandler\%20LLP\%20and\%20Treliant\%20Risk\
%20Advisors\%20LLC\%20Ponemon\%20Research\%202016\%20-\%20FINAL2.pdf, [Accessed 2 Aug 2017] (2016).
[13] P. Institute, Tone at the top and third party risk, https://sharedassessments.org/summit/
SA-2016-Ponemon-Study-Tone-At-The-Top-And-Third-Party-Risk-Final.pdf, [Accessed 2 Aug 2017]
(2016).
[14] I. Magazine, Target hackers may have gotten in through the air conditioner, https://www.infosecurity-magazine.
com/news/target-hackers-may-have-gotten-in-through-the-air/, [Accessed 2 Aug. 2017] (2017).
[15] B. Sarlioglu, C. T. Morris, More electric aircraft: Review, challenges, and opportunities for commercial transport aircraft,
IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification 1 (1) (2015) 54–64.
[16] F. R. Medda, G. Carbonaro, S. L. Davis, Public private partnerships in transportation: Some insights from the european
experience, IATSS research 36 (2) (2013) 83–87.
[17] R. G. Hollands, Will the real smart city please stand up? intelligent, progressive or entrepreneurial?, City 12 (3) (2008)
303–320.
[18] W. Li, H. Song, F. Zeng, Policy-based secure and trustworthy sensing for internet of things in smart cities, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal 5 (2) (2018) 716–723.
[19] J. Ma, Internet-of-things: Technology evolution and challenges, in: Microwave Symposium (IMS), 2014 IEEE MTT-S International, IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–4.
[20] L. Dignan, Internet of things: $8.9 trillion market in 2020, 212 billion connected things, October 3 (2013) 2013.
[21] N. C. Agency, The cyber threat to uk business, National Crime Agency (2016).
[22] D. Pishva, Internet of things: Security and privacy issues and possible solution, in: Advanced Communication Technology
(ICACT), 2017 19th International Conference on, IEEE, 2017, pp. 797–808.
[23] Wired.com., What the uk can learn from singapore’s smart city, http://www.wired.co.uk/article/
sara-watson-singapore-smart-cities, [Accessed 6 Sep. 2017] (2017).
[24] G. Masters, New iot bot persirai ensnaring ip cameras, https://www.scmagazine.com/
new-iot-bot-persirai-ensnaring-ip-cameras/article/655875/, [Accessed 10 Jul 2017] (2017).
[25] J. Biggs, Brickerbot is a vigilante worm that destroys insecure iot devices, https://techcrunch.com/2017/04/25/
brickerbot-is-a-vigilante-worm-that-destroys-insecure-iot-devices/, [Accessed 10 Jul. 2017] (2017).
[26] B. S. Institution, City data survey report, London: BSI Standards Limited, [Accessed 31 Jul. 2017 (2015).
24
[27] I. S. Association, et al., Privacy and security architecture for consumer wireless devices working group (com/sdb/p1912 wg).
[28] T. Cherry, Security and iot in ieee standards — ieee standards university, https://www.standardsuniversity.org/
e-magazine/march-2016/security-and-iot-in-ieee-standards/, [Accessed 31 Jul 2017] (2017).
[29] I. C. London, Mapping smart city standards, https://www.bsigroup.com/LocalFiles/en-GB/smart-cities/
resources/BSI-smart-cities-report-Mapping-Smart-City-Standards-UK-EN.pdf, [Accessed 21 Jul. 2017]
(2017).
[30] A. Grau, Iot security standards–paving the way for customer confidence, IEEE Standard University.
[31] L. Anthopoulos, Smart utopia vs smart reality: Learning by experience from 10 smart city cases, Cities 63 (2017) 128–148.
[32] D. Miessler, Hp study reveals 70 percent of internet of things devices vulnerable to attack, Retrieved June 30 (2014) 2015.
[33] owasp.org., Owasp internet of things project - owasp, https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP\_Internet\_of\
_Things\_Project, [Accessed 8 Sep 2017] (2017).
[34] P. Hammond, National cyber security strategy 2016 to 2021 (2016).
[35] C.-E. S. Group, Cpa security specification: Smart metering - communications hub, https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/content/
files/protected\_files/document\_files/SMLT\%20SC0003\%20Communications\%20Hub\%20v1-1.pdf, [Accessed 8 Sep. 2017] (2017).
[36] Global.ihs.com, Smart device communications; protocol aspects; introduction, https://global.ihs.com/doc\_detail.
cfm?\&csf=TIA\&item\_s\_key=00601371\&item\_key\_date=861031, [Accessed 7 Sep 2017] (2017).
[37] NEN, The cyber threat to uk business, https://www.nen.nl/NEN-Shop/Norm/NEN-75122005-nl.htm, [Accessed 8 Sep
2017] (2017).
[38] B. S. Institution, Pas 555:2013 cyber security risk, Governance and management, [Accessed 8 Sep. 2017] (2017).
[39] ISO/IEC, Iso/iec 27005:2018 - information technology – security techniques – information security risk management, https:
//www.iso.org/standard/75281.html, [Accessed 13 Jan. 2019] (2018).
[40] Standards.ieee.org., P21451-1-4 - standard for smart transducer interface for sensors, actuators and devices - extensible
messaging and presence protocol (xmpp) - currently being developed, specifically addresses security, https://standards.
ieee.org/project/21451-1-4.html, [Accessed 8 Sep 2017] (2012).
[41] Standards.ieee.org., Ieee sa - 802.1ae-2006 - ieee standard for local and metropolitan area networks: Media access control (mac) security, https://standards.ieee.org/findstds/standard/802.1AE-2006.html, [Accessed 8 Sep 2017]
(2006).
[42] Standards.ieee.org., Ieee sa - 802.21a-2012 - ieee standard for local and metropolitan area networks: Media independent
handover services - amendment for security extensions to media independent handover services and protocol, https://
standards.ieee.org/findstds/standard/802.21a-2012.html, [Accessed 8 Sep 2017] (2012).
[43] Standards.ieee.org., Ieee std 1888.2-2014 : Ieee standard for ubiquitous green community control network: Heterogeneous
networks convergence and scalability, (electronic resource), https://standards.ieee.org/standard/1888-2014.
html, [Accessed 13 Jan 2019] (2013).
[44] Standards.ieee.org., 692-2013 - ieee standard for criteria for security systems for nuclear power generating stations, https:
//standards.ieee.org/standard/692-2013.html, [Accessed 13 Jan 2019] (2013).
[45] Standards.ieee.org., Ieee sa - c37.240-2014 - ieee standard cybersecurity requirements for substation automation, protection, and control systems, https://standards.ieee.org/findstds/standard/C37.240-2014.html, [Accessed 8
Sep 2017] (2017).
[46] Standards.ieee.org., Ieee sa - 1686-2013 - ieee standard for intelligent electronic devices cyber security capabilities, https:
//standards.ieee.org/findstds/standard/1686-2013.html, [Accessed 8 Sep 2017] (2013).
[47] M. Dowden, Rise of the machines, New Law Journal 166 (7714).
[48] D. v Stevenson, Donoghue v stevenson (1932) (1932).
[49] I. C. Oce, Overview of the general data protection regulation (gdpr), https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/
data-protection-reform/overview-of-the-gdpr/, [Accessed 20 Aug. 2017] (2017).
[50] R. Corbet, Internet of things - where are we now?, Privacy and Data Protection (2015).
[51] N. Nohlen, Von hannover v. germany. app. no. 59320/00.2004-vi eur. ct. hr, American Journal of International Law 100 (1)
(2006) 196–201.
[52] K. S. Review, Securing the smart city, http://harvardkennedyschoolreview.com/securing-the-smart-city/,
[Accessed 21 Jul. 2017] (2017).
[53] S. Sorrell, Worldwide smart cities: Energy, transport & lighting 2016-2021, Tech. rep., Tech. report, Juniper Research, 2016.
42 (2016).
[54] L. Adler, How smart city barcelona brought the internet of things to life, Retrieved from Data Smart City Solutions:
http://datasmart. ash. harvard. edu/news/article/how-smart-city-barcelona-brought-the-internet-ofthings-to-life-789.
[55] M. Gasco, What makes a city smart? lessons from barcelona, in: System Sciences (HICSS), 2016 49th Hawaii International ´
Conference on, IEEE, 2016, pp. 2983–2989.
25
[56] B. D. City, Barcelona digital city, http://ajuntament.barcelona.cat/digital/en, [Accessed 6 Sep. 2017] (2017).
[57] T. Gea, J. Paradells, M. Lamarca, D. Roldan, Smart cities as an application of internet of things: Experiences and lessons
learnt in barcelona, in: Innovative Mobile and Internet Services in Ubiquitous Computing (IMIS), 2013 Seventh International
Conference On, IEEE, 2013, pp. 552–557.
[58] L. Laursen, City saves money, attracts businesses with smart city strategy, https://www.technologyreview.com/s/
532511/barcelonas-smart-city-ecosystem/, [Accessed 2 Aug 2017] (2017).
[59] C. E. Seng, Singapore’s smart nation program—enablers and challenges, in: System of Systems Engineering Conference
(SoSE), 2016 11th, IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–5.
[60] Smartnation.sg., About smart nation — enablers, https://www.smartnation.sg/about-smart-nation/enablers,
[Accessed 6 Sep. 2017] (2017).
[61] S. L. Hoe, Defining a smart nation: the case of singapore, Journal of Information, Communication and Ethics in Society
14 (4) (2016) 323–333.
[62] J. J. Woo, Singapore’s smart nation initiative–a policy and organisational perspective, Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy,
National University of Singapore.
[63] S. Keon, H. Rain, H. Cho, J. Kim, D. Lee, International case studies of smart cities–singapore, republic of singapore, interamerican development bank, Recuperado de https://publications. iadb. org/handle/11319/7723.
[64] C. NewsAsia, National cybersecurity strategy aims to make smart nation safe: Pm lee, http://www.channelnewsasia.
com/news/singapore/national-cybersecurity-strategy-aims-to-make-smart-nation-safe-p-7743784,
[Accessed 8 Sep. 2017] (2017).
[65] S. C. World, Cyber security lab opens in singapore, https://smartcitiesworld.net/news/news/
cyber-security-lab-opens-in-singapore-1047, [Accessed 7 Sep 2017] (2017).
[66] S. Singapore, Setting the standard worldwide: intelligent city, smart nation.
[67] S. L. Board, Smart london plan, Retrieved August.
[68] M. Angelidou, Four european smart city strategies, Int’l J. Soc. Sci. Stud. 4 (2016) 18.
[69] S. L. I. Networks, The challenges – smart london innovation networks, http://smarterlondon.co.uk/
the-challenges/, [Accessed 7 Sep. 2017] (2017).
[70] H. L. Lee, S. Whang, Information sharing in a supply chain, International Journal of Manufacturing Technology and Management 1 (1) (2000) 79–93.
[71] I. S. Association, Internet of things (iot) ecosystem study, [Accessed 24 Jun. 2015] (2015).
[72] I. Global, Security risks survey 2015: The current state of play [ ], : http://media. kaspersky. com/en/business-security/itsecurity-risks-survey-2015. pdf (11.01. 2017).
[73] Phys.org., ‘worrying lack of strategy’ for u.k. smart cities, https://phys.org/news/
2017-05-lack-strategy-uk-smart-cities.html, [Accessed 24 Jun 2017] (2017).
[74] D. BACHLECHNER, M. FRIEDEWALD, T. MITCHENER-NISSEN, M. LAGAZIO, A. KUNG, Cyber security for
smart cities, https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t\&rct=j\&q=\&esrc=s\&source=web\&cd=2\&cad=rja\
&uact=8\&ved=0ahUKEwiulIX3qI7VAhVsJsAKHQHeCmIQFggoMAE\&url=https\%3A\%2F\%2Fwww.enisa.europa.
eu\%2Fpublications\%2Fsmart-cities-architecture-model\%2Fat\_download\%2FfullReport\&usg=
AFQjCNF20NtjlM8qwPL7n7QXIoeJRyzVqQ, [Accessed 16 Jul 2017] (2017).
Appendix A. Standards Related to IoT or Smart Cities
26
Table A.3: Standards Related to IoT or Smart Cities
No. Document ID Title Body
1. ANSI/ASQ E 4 Specifications and guidelines for quality systems for environmental data collection and environmental technology programs ANSI
2. BS EN 14908-5:2009 Open data communication in building automation, controls and building management implementation guideline - Control network protocol - Implementation CEN
3. BS EN 60730-1:1992 Specification for automatic electrical controls for household and similar use -
General requirements
CEN
4. BS ISO 14813-1:2007 Intelligent transport systems - Reference model architecture(s) for the ITS sector - ITS service domains, service groups and services ISO
5. CR 205-006:1996 en Home and building electronics system (HBES) - Technical report 6: Protocol
and data integrity and interfaces
NEN
6. CSN ISO/IEC TR 15067-3 Information technology - Home electronic system (HES) application model -
Part 3: Model of an energy management system for HES
ISO/IEC
7. CWA 14947:2004 en European eConstruction architecture (EeA) CEN
8. CWA 15264-3:2005 User requirements for a European interoperable eID system within a smart
card infrastructure
CEN
9. DD CEN/TS 13149-6:2005 Public transport - Road vehicle scheduling and control systems - CAN message
content
CEN
10. DIN SPEC 33440 Ergonomic design of user-interfaces and products for smart grid and electromobility DIN
11. DS/EN 61970-1 Energy management system application program interface (EMS-API) - Part
1: Guidelines and general requirements
IEC
12. EIA TSB 4940 Smart device communications - Security aspects EIA
13. ETSI GS OSG 001 V 1.1.1 Open smart grid protocol (OSGP) ETSI
14. ETSI TR 102935 V 2.1.1 Machine-to-Machine communications (M2M) - Applicability of M2M architecture to smart grid networks - Impact of smart grids on M2M platform ETSI
15. GOST R 55060 Automatized control systems of buildings and structures. Terms and definitions GOST R
16. IEC 62290-1 Railway applications - Urban guided transport management and command/control systems Part 1: System principles and fundamental concepts IEC
17. IEEE 1851 IEEE standard for design criteria of integrated sensor-based test applications
for household appliances
IEEE
27
Table A.3: (continued)
No. Document ID Title Body
18. ISO 15118-1 Road vehicles - Vehicle to grid communication interface - Part 1: General
information and use-case definition
ISO
19. ISO 16484-5 Building automation and control systems - Part 5: Data communication protocol ISO
20. ISO/PAS 22720 Association for standardization of automation and measuring systems open
data services 5.0
ISO
21. ISO/TS 24533 Intelligent transport systems - Electronic information exchange to facilitate the
movement of freight and its intermodal transfer - Road transport information
exchange methodology
ISO
22. ITU-T X.207 Information technology - Open systems interconnection - Application layer
structure
ITU
23. NEMA SG-AMI 1 Requirements for smart meter upgradeability NEMA
24. NEN 7512:2005 nl Health informatics - Information security in the healthcare sector - Basis for
trust for exchange of data
NEN
25. NEN-EN-ISO 24534-3:2013 Intelligent transport systems - Automatic vehicle and equipment identification
- Electronic registration identification (ERI) for vehicles - Part 3: Vehicle data
CEN
26. NPR-CEN/TR 16427:2013 en Intelligent transport systems - Public transport - Traveller information for visually impaired people (TI-VIP) CEN
27. OEVE B/EN 60555-1/1987 Disturbances in supply systems caused by household appliances and similar
electrical equipment - Part 1: Definitions
OVE
28. PAS 1018 Essential structure for the description of services in the procurement stage DIN
29. PAS 1090 Demands on information systems for collecting, communicating and serving
of relevant service information within the technical customer service
DIN
30. PAS 555:2013 Cyber security risk - Governance and management - Specification BSI
31. SS-ISO 15784-1:2008 Intellligent transport systems (ITS) - Data exchange involving roadside modules communication - Part 1: General principles and documentation framework of application profiles (ISO 15784-1:2008, IDT) ISO
32. UTE C15-900U*UTE C15-900 Coexistence between communication and power networks - Implementation of
communication networks
UTE
33. VDI 3814 Blatt 7 Building automation and control systems (BACS) - Design of user interfaces VDI
28
Table A.3: (continued)
No. Document ID Title Body
34. VDI 4201 Blatt 1 Performance criteria on automated measuring and electronic data evaluation
systems for monitoring emissions - Digital interface - General requirements
VDI/DIN
35. BS ISO 20121 Event sustainability management systems - Requirements with guidance for
use
ISO
36. ASTM E 1121 Standard practice for measuring payback for investments in buildings and
building systems
ASTM
37. BIP 2207 Building information management - A standard framework and guide to BS
1192
BSI
38. BS 8587:2012 Guide to facility information management BSI
39. BS 8903:2010 Principles and framework for procuring sustainably - Guide BSI
40. CAN/CSA-ISO/TS 14048:03
(R2012)
Environmental management - Life cycle assessment - Data documentation format CSA
41. CWA 15666:2007 en Business requirement specification - Cross industry e-Tendering process CEN
42. CWA 15971-1 Discovery of and access to eGovernment resources - Part 1: Introduction and
overview
CEN
43. CWA 16649:2013 en Managing emerging technology-related risks CEN
44. CWA 50487:2005 en SmartHouse Code of Practice CEN
45. DS/ISO/IEC 18012-2 Information technology - Home electronic system - Guidelines for product
interoperability - Part 2: Taxonomy and application interoperability model
ISO/IEC
46. ISO 16484-1 Building automation and control systems (BACS) - Part 1: Project specification and implementation ISO
47. ITU-T L.1410 Methodology for the assessment of the environmental impact of information
and communication technology goods, networks and services
ITU
48. NEN-ISO 29481-2:2012 en Building information models - Information delivery manual - Part 2: Interaction framework ISO
49. NPR-ISO/TR 12859:2009 en Intelligent transport systems - System architecture - Privacy aspects in ITS
standards and systems
ISO/TR
50. RAL-UZ 170 Basic criteria for award of the environmental label - Energy services provided
under guaranteed energy savings contracts
RAL G¨ute
51. SS-ISO/IEC 27005:2013 Information technology - Security techniques - Information security risk management ISO/IEC
29
Table A.3: (continued)
No. Document ID Title Body
52. VDI 3814 Blatt 5 Building automation and control system (BACS) - Advices for system integration VDI
53. VDI 4466 Blatt 1 Automatic parking systems - Basic principles VDI
54. VDI 7000 Early public participation in industrial and infrastructure projects VDI
55. VDI/GEFMA 3814 Blatt 3.1 Building automation and control systems (BACS) - Guidance for technical
building management - Planning, operation, and maintenance - Interface to
facility management
GEFMA
56. BS ISO 37120 Sustainable development and resilience of communities - Indicators for city
services and quality of life
ISO
57. BS ISO/TR 37150 Smart community infrastructures - Review of existing activities relevant to
metrics
ISO
58. ABNT NBR 14022 Accessibility in vehicles of urban characteristics for public transport of passengers ABNT
59. BIP 2228:2013 Inclusive urban design - A guide to creating accessible public spaces BSI
60. BS 7000-6:2005 Design management systems - Managing inclusive design - Guide BSI
61. BS 8904:2011 Guidance for community sustainable development BSI
62. CLC/FprTR 50608 Smart grid projects in Europe CENELEC
63. CWA 15245 EU e-Government metadata framework CEN
64. CWA 16030:2009 Code of practice for implementing quality in mobility management in small
and medium sized cities
CEN
65. CWA 16267:2011 Guidelines for sustainable development of historic and cultural cities - Qualicities CEN
66. DIN SPEC 91280 Ambient assisted living (AAL) - Classification of ambient assistant living services in the home environment and immediate vicinity of the home DIN
67. GOST R 54198 Resources saving - Industrial production - Guidance on the application of the
best available technologies for increasing the energy eciency
GOST R
68. PAS 181:2014 Smart city framework - Guide to establishing strategies for smart cities and
communities
BSI
69. UNI 10951:2001 Systems of information for the maintenance management of buildings - Guidelines UNI
70. Z762-95 (R2011) Design for the environment (DFE) CSA
30
Table A.3: (continued)
No. Document ID Title Body
71. IEEE 1363 series Standards define specifications for public key cryptography IEEE
72. IEEE 1619 series Standards define specifications for encryption in storage media IEEE
73. IEEE P24151-1-4 Standard for Smart Transducer Interface for Sensors, Actuators and Devices -
eXtensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP) - currently being developed, specifically addresses security
IEEE
74. IEEE 1451/21450/21451 Series of standards for sensors and actuators IEEE
75. IEEE 2410-2015 IEEE standard for Biometric Open Protocol IEEE
76. IEEE P1912 Standard for Privacy and Security Architecture for Consumer Wireless Devices
- currently being developed
IEEE
77. IEEE 802.1X-2020 IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks-Port-Based Network
Access Control
IEEE
78. IEEE 802.1AE-2006 IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks: Media Access
Control (MAC) Security; Security capabilities expanded by IEEE 802.1AEbw2013.
IEEE
79. IEEE 802.1AR-2009 Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks - Secure Device Identity IEEE
80. IEEE 11-2012 series IEEE Standard for Information technology-Telecommunications and information exchange between systems Local and metropolitan area networks-Specific
requirements Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and
Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications
IEEE
81. IEEE 802.15.4-2015 IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks-Part 15.4: Low-Rate
Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-WPANs)
IEEE
82. IEEE 802.21a-2012 IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks: Media Independent Handover Services - Amendment for Security Extensions to Media Independent Handover Services and Protocol IEEE
83. IEEE 1888 series IEEE Standard for Ubiquitous Green Community Control Network Protocol
and its security
IEEE
84. IEEE 692-2013 IEEE Standard for Criteria for Security Systems for Nuclear Power Generating
Stations
IEEE
85. IEEE C37.240-2014 IEEE Standard Cybersecurity Requirements for Substation Automation, Protection, and Control Systems IEEE
86. IEEE 1686-2013 IEEE Standard for Intelligent Electronic Devices Cyber Security Capabilities IEEE
31
Table A.3: (continued)
No. Document ID Title Body
87. PAS 180 Smart city terminology BSI
88. PAS 182 Data concept model for smart cities BSI
89. PAS 184 Project proposals for delivering smart city BSI
90. PD 8100 Smart city overview document BSI
91. PD8101 Smart city planning guidelines document BSI
92. BS ISO/IEC30182:2017 Smart city concept model BSI
93. PD ISO/TR 37121:2017 Standard on inventory of existing guidelines and approaches on sustainable
development and resilience in cities
BSI
32
University of South Carolina
Scholar Commons Scholar Commons
Senior Theses Honors College
Spring 2021
The Evolution of Cyber Risk and the Cyber Insurance Market
Abigail Chase
University of South Carolina - Columbia
Follow this and additional works at: https://scholarcommons.sc.edu/senior_theses
Part of the Insurance Commons
Recommended Citation
Chase, Abigail, "The Evolution of Cyber Risk and the Cyber Insurance Market" (2021). Senior Theses. 412.
https://scholarcommons.sc.edu/senior_theses/412
This Thesis is brought to you by the Honors College at Scholar Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in
Senior Theses by an authorized administrator of Scholar Commons. For more information, please contact
digres@mailbox.sc.edu. 
1
The Evolution of Cyber Risk and the Cyber Insurance Market
By
Abigail Chase
Submitted in Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements for
Graduation with Honors from the
South Carolina Honors College
May 2021
2
Table of Contents
THESIS SUMMARY............................................................................................................. 3
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................................. 4
HISTORY OF CYBERSECURITY AND CYBER RISK......................................................... 4
How Y2K Changed Cyber Risk ............................................................................................................5
The Interconnectivity of Systems..........................................................................................................6
The Rise of Cyber Insurance .................................................................................................................6
The Cyber Insurance Solution...............................................................................................................8
CYBER RISK IN THE HEALTHCARE SECTOR............................................................... 11
The Digitization of the Healthcare Industry ......................................................................................11
Issues in Common Healthcare Cybersecurity Practices ...................................................................12
Multi-Factor Authentication Protection.............................................................................................14
Sophistication: A Dynamic Threat......................................................................................................16
TRANSPORTATION SECTOR........................................................................................... 17
Autonomous Vehicles: An Evolving Risk...........................................................................................18
Cyber Risk in the Aviation Industry...................................................................................................19
Cyber Risk in the Rail Industry ..........................................................................................................20
Cyber Risk in the Trucking Industry .................................................................................................21
Cyber Risk in the Freight Industry.....................................................................................................22
ELECTIONS....................................................................................................................... 24
Election Security in Countries Outside the United States.................................................................30
Misinformation and Disinformation...................................................................................................33
Reliability of Online Content...............................................................................................................34
COVID-19........................................................................................................................... 36
Vaccine Vulnerabilities: A Complex Supply Chain ..........................................................................37
CONCLUSION ................................................................................................................... 38
REFERENCES................................................................................................................... 40
APPENDICES.................................................................................................................... 62
Appendix I: Healthcare........................................................................................................................63
Appendix II: Transportation sector....................................................................................................67
Appendix III: Election Sector..............................................................................................................70
3
THESIS SUMMARY
Insurance and hedging instruments can help corporations manage many of the operational
and financial risks they face. Yet, additional complexities are introduced now that many risks are
increasingly interdependent and thus strongly correlated, making them more challenging to
manage. Few risks illustrate this challenge better than cyber risk.
This thesis will focus on the increasing attention that the management of cyber risks
receives in corporations, institutions and industries, and the role that insurance and risk
management strategies play in mitigating this risk. The decision to focus on cyber risks and the
financing and management of those risks is directly related to the exponential increase in cyber
threats throughout the global economy. Thirty years ago, few would have predicted the
magnitude of damage that cyber-attacks would routinely inflict upon organizations of all sizes
with the potential for far more severe losses looming ever larger. The rapid evolution and
escalation of cyber threats along with their ubiquitous nature has led to a comprehensive
reassessment of how organizations manage risks of all types. Insurers have been meeting the
changing risk management needs of these organizations through innovations in product design,
which now commonly include elements of loss control and post-event mitigation in addition to
traditional loss financing.
This thesis begins with a historical review of cyber threats and proceeds to examine the
varied nature of cyber threats impacting several key industries. Data on major attacks for each
industry examined in this thesis were researched, collected and analyzed, and are displayed in the
database included in the appendix to this paper. For the discussion of early-stage cyber threats, I
will trace the evolution of cyber threats from relatively simplistic denial-of-service attacks, to
early computer viruses, to phishing emails, and to the multiplicity of sophisticated threats seen 
4
today, such as ransomware. The objective is to provide those who are unfamiliar with cyber risk
(i.e., students or other professionals) with an increased awareness of the threats, as well as an
understanding of how organizations can mitigate such threats.
INTRODUCTION
Cyber-attacks can have long lasting impacts for organizations and companies. The
financial consequences are potentially substantial both in terms of direct costs to manage the
Cyber-attacks can also negatively
ublic and customers. In the case of healthcare, for
example, individuals want assurance that their personal and private information is protected; any
actual or perceived cyber threat against a healthcare institution will jeopardize the presumption
of privacy and may lead clients to seek healthcare elsewhere.
Vulnerability to cyber risks is increasing exponentially. Digitization and
interconnectedness are proceeding at a pace that is faster than what can be realistically managed.
The rapid progression and evolution of cyber risks are central themes of this thesis. Specifically,
I will analyze past examples of cyber-attacks for trends in each of three significantly impacted
industries: healthcare, transportation, and electoral systems. The research will examine
vulnerabilities among organizations affected by these attacks. Cyber risk management protocols
in place at the time of the attacks will be assessed to ascertain the degree and nature of
vulnerabilities. Opportunities for enhancing cyber risk management will also be identified.
HISTORY OF CYBERSECURITY AND CYBER RISK
The rapid evolution, spread, and dependence on digital technologies over the past 25
years has resulted in an exponential increase in cyber risk. Management of cyber risks is now a
C-suite and board level issue, with an increasingly sophisticated portfolio of cyber insurance
5
products playing a key role in managing that risk. Cyber insurance has been available since the
late 1970s, though few organizations
and the 9/11 attacks, interest in cyber insurance grew. There was a growing realization that the
virtual world did not necessarily fit within the scope of many traditional covers/classes of
[1].
How Y2K Changed Cyber Risk
In the late 1990s, Y2K and the dotcom boom were the primary drivers of increasing
awareness of cyber risk and the dangers of interconnectivit
author, John L. Peterson, a futurist specializing in long-range security implications of a rapidly
changing world. Writing in 1998, article examines societal apprehensions near the
turn of the millennium. Peterson describes the panic that ensued in the population over the
perception that the year 2000 might cause chaos for computer systems, despite the seemingly
innocuous root of the problem. Since the dawn of the computer age in the mid-twentieth century
and for decades thereafter, computer algorithms created by software engineers utilized a twodigit (rather than four digit) date format (i.e., 1960 was denoted a ), and many feared the
systems would not have the ability to properly interpret the year 2000 [2]. Peterson further
asserted at the time that the year 2000 computer problem could create chaos on an order of
magnitude we have never seen. Without a sp [3].
The turn of the millennium was an important time in history, because while cyber risks
were clearly in existence prior to Y2K, mounting concerns over Y2K beginning in the late 1990s
represent a reasonable historical starting point for the analysis of cyber risks. This is because the
Y2K period was when this risk first became universally recognized as a societal and economic 
6
threat. It is also important to point out that there was increasing recognition that the world had
[3]. The
interconnectivity of systems created a terrifying scenario, because no single system could protect
itself. In the past, many companies operated their own proprietary networks; if one company was
hacked, then that became an isolated issue which needed to be resolved. Y2K revealed that cyber
risks are a systemic risk, potentially leading to cascading failures capable of crippling basic
infrastructure and threatening the economy in general.
The Interconnectivity of Systems
Today, most companies are connected directly or indirectly to their suppliers,
vendors, customers, and many other entities and organizations including some with poor cyber
risk management protocols or worse, actual malicious intent. Connectivity brings convenience to
users, but with that convenience comes an elevated risk. This interconnectivity frequently
has led to risk management issues so large that it
has become increasingly necessary and prudent for companies to purchase a separate cyber
insurance policy to cover the losses that can arise [4].
The Rise of Cyber Insurance
Early cyber insurance policies began to gain traction with businesses as a stand-alone
product in response to Y2K concerns. Such insurance was needed to fill gaps in traditional
property and casualty products [1].
breaches involving sensitive customer information, such as credit card numbers, social security
numbers, and health records. Cyber insurance also helps with repairing damaged computer
systems, recovering compromised data, and notifying clients of the data breach [5]. Privacy 
7
regulation in the U.S. in the early 2000s served as an additional catalyst fueling increased
demand for cyber insurance. Increasingly frequent mass data breaches coupled with greater
media attention and public concern to the issue resulted in pressure for regulation. A flurry of
legislative actions ensued. California was at the vanguard of this regulatory movement with the
passage breach notification laws, which became effective on July 1,
es had to immediately disclose a breach to
[1]. Cyber insurance
products shifted in response to these new notification requirements toward compensating the
costs associated with major data breaches, including the costs of notifying customers and
regulators. The market quickly gained momentum in the U.S. as notification rules expanded
across multiple sectors and states. As major breaches began to make headlines with ever
increasing frequency, the demand for cyber insurance grew and the market took off [1]. And as
cyber-attacks become more damaging, institutions were searching for cyber coverage to protect
themselves from these risks.
The increase in frequency and severity of cyber-attacks underscores the important role of
insurance in managing and mitigating risks. High-profile cases, such as the 2013 Target data
breach, 2017 Equifax data breach, and the leak of Democratic National Committee emails during
the 2016 election made national headlines [6]. Indeed, organizations across all industries are
extremely likely to be the victim of a cyber-attack.
largest insurance brokers, in its 2019 Cyber Security Breaches Survey 2 reported that over 32%
of businesses experienced a cyber-attack within the past year [7]. Cyber insurance can help
companies by providing teams with expertise in responding to cyber incidents. According to
Willis Towers Watson, cyber insurance can also help foster a dialogue within an organization: 
8
process can help open up needed conversation
process which involves questions, advice, and input from
underwriter(s) [8]. Once these gaps are identified, they
can be analyzed for companies to make investments in cybersecurity that can help to prevent the
potential loss.
The Cyber Insurance Solution
One of the major issues with cybersecurity is the lack of awareness. Many senior
corporate executives are unaware of the risk and the extent of potential business impacts and
legal exposure cyber-attacks produce. U.S. Department of
Homeland Security and several industry entities report significant increases in the number of
cyber-attacks against industrial control systems. The sophistication of attacks is also increasing
as is the likelihood that they will be physically destructive and cause significant loss [9]. It is
crucial that organizations of all sizes act proactively and create a cyber-risk plan, rather than
waiting until after an attack. In addition to the lack of awareness, many institutions are not taking
advantage of cyber insurance offerings. Looking at the cyber insurance take-up rates for Marsh
clients in Figure 1, it is apparent that there are gaps in the cyber insurance market, with the
overall take-up rate for 2019 being only 42% [10]. The take-up rate is the percentage of all
Marsh clients that purchased the coverage. Although fewer than half of Marsh clients purchased
cyber insurance in 2019, trends in recent years suggest organizations have a heightened
appreciation of the risk. From 2017 to 2019, across all industries the take-up rate increased by
11 percentage points from 31% to 42%. Notably, the take-up rate is more than twice the 19%
recorded in 2014.
9
Take-up rates vary substantially across industries (see Figure 2 [10]). Note that Education
was the leading buyer of cyber insurance in 2019 with a 74% take-up rate. Healthcare was a
close second with a 65% take-up rate. The strong demand for coverage is a reflection of the
significant exposure to loss of personally identifiable information (PPI) and protected health
information (PHI) across the educational and healthcare sectors.
The average cost of a data breach varies per industry, with healthcare being the leader.
Figure 3 [11] displays the average total cost of a data breach by industry. The 2019 study was
conducted by the Ponemon Institute and the results were analyzed by IBM Security. The results
are based on a sample of 507 companies [11]. Again, in this study, healthcare was the leading
industry at an average per data breach being $6.45 million. Health, financial, and energy
companies are subject to more stringent regulation than industries such as media, hospitality, and
retail. The increased regulations make these industries more susceptible to higher costs per
breach.
Figure 1: US Cyber Insurance Take-up Rates (Marsh Clients) [10]
19%
22%
26%
31%
38%
42%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
10
Figure 2: US Cyber Insurance Take-up Rates by Industry [10]
Figure 3: Average Total Cost of a Data Breach by Industry [11]
31%
51% 54%
28%
63%
46%
24%
38% 36% 36%
21%
38%
51%
64%
27%
62% 57%
30%
41%
31% 31% 31%
42%
55%
74%
31%
65%
61%
41%
46%
35% 35% 36%
2017 2018 2019
$1.29
$1.65
$1.84
$1.99
$2.24
$2.59
$3.45
$3.77
$4.32
$4.62
$4.77
$5.05
$5.20
$5.20
$5.60
$5.86
$6.45
 $- $1.00 $2.00 $3.00 $4.00 $5.00 $6.00 $7.00
Public
Retail
Media
Communication
Entertainment
Education
Industrial
Energy
Health
Measured in US$ millions
11
CYBER RISK IN THE HEALTHCARE SECTOR
The digitization of health records has made many aspects of healthcare administration
and delivery more efficient, reducing costs and increasing accessibility, but it has also
dramatically increased the exposure of the healthcare sector to cyber-attacks and data breaches.
The late 2000s experienced a shift from theft of physical records to hacking of personal and
medical information within technology systems. There is a vast amount of data regarding data
breaches within healthcare organizations. Based on the data collected for this study, breaches
such as email phishing attacks, malware attacks, ransomware attacks, and other various types of
hacking methods frequently employed to target healthcare organizations. Despite measures that
providers have in place
[12]. Our analysis of the healthcare sector
exposed data is related to personal patient information. This
information includes, but is not limited to: names, addresses, dates of birth, social security
numbers, insurance contract information and numbers, debit and credit card information, phone
numbers, and medical information.
The Digitization of the Healthcare Industry
The computerization of the healthcare industry overall has increased productivity, which
has at the same time increased reliance on technology. In one of the biggest healthcare data
breaches of 2020, Universal Health Services (UHS), one of the largest health networks in the
United States, was affected at all of their U.S. sites and hospitals. Specifically, on September 27,
2020, the UHS experienced a ransomware attack which locked company computers and phone
systems across the country. The suspected cybercriminals used a strain of ransomware known as 
12
Ryuk to rely on paper and pencil for
record keeping and slowing lab work. Employees described chaotic conditions impeding patient
care -attacks can have on
productivity and operations.
The privacy of healthcare information has long been a concern of consumers. The
Healthcare Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) enacted in 1996 well before
the widespread digitization of personal health information provides for stringent safeguarding
of such information. HIPAA remains to this day the single most important piece of federal
legislation governing health information privacy concerns. The law requires that personal health
care information must be protected. In 2009, the law further evolved with the passage of the
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH) under the
Obama administration. HITECH imposed financial penalties for violations of HIPAA which
increased the cost of HIPAA noncompliance [15]. Sensitivity associated with the compromise of
health information is evident in the expensive settlements of healthcare sector cyber-attacks,
such as in the 2016 Banner Health cyberattack in which an $8.9 million settlement was paid.
The sheer size of the healthcare sector (nearly 20 percent of the GDP in 2020), the trend
toward digitization of medical records, and the rapid evolution of medical technology are just
three of many factors that attract the attention of cyber criminals. Despite many attacks in recent
years, the healthcare sector remains highly susceptible to debilitating cyber-attacks.
Issues in Common Healthcare Cybersecurity Practices
[16]. This analysis of healthcare sector data breaches strongly suggests a systemic 
13
problem with data and system security throughout this major economic sector. Violations of
privacy statutes and allegations of negligence in the wake of data breaches have led to litigation,
in which class-action lawsuits for large settlements were filed based on accusations that the
companies involved failed to implement reasonable security protocols. These settlements were so
substantial because of both the number of patients or records involved and the type of data that
was exposed. Healthcare data breaches tend to be extremely costly due to the sensitivity of the
[17]. The data that hospitals hold is
much mor
[18]. The danger in the
a certain
amount of personally identifiable information is obtained through healthcare data breaches.
Based on our dataset, it is apparent that healthcare organizations both large and small are
targeted. There has been a steady increase in the number of healthcare data breaches each year.
Figure 4 shows the number of breaches involving 500 or more records from 2009 to November
2020 [19 & 20]. 
14
Figure 4: Healthcare Data Breaches of 500 or More Records per Year [19& 20]
Victims range from large for-profit organizations to small nonprofits. Small healthcare
organizations may arguably be a more attractive target, because small providers are still
struggling with cybersecurity and frequently do not have the human or financial resources
necessary to keep pace with state-of-the art governance and risk management strategies. Small
providers struggle with even the most remedial of security protocols such as multi-factor
-up
[21].
Multi-Factor Authentication Protection
Multi-factor authentication adds an additional layer of protection against one of the most
common breaches - compromised credentials [22]. Multi-factor authentication helps to insulate
an organization against remote attacks and can prevent hackers from easily gaining access to
sensitive data. When paired with employee training, multi-factor authentication is even more
18
199 200 215
275
310
270
329
357 371
510
544
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Note: These are data breaches of 500 or more healthcare records reported to the Department of Health and
Human Services' Office for Civil Rights by HIPAA-covered entities and business associates.
*2020 is through November 2020
15
requests a verification code (often via
text message or email) in order to login. A trained employee would easily be able to recognize
activity as suspicious if they have not recently attempted to log into one of their accounts or
systems. According to ValiMail CEO Alexander Garciaperson to endanger
to these attacks because awareness about email authentication is still quite low in the sector as a
-to-medium sized healthcare providers frequently lack the resources to
implement and maintain robust cybersecurity systems. Worse still, many are overconfident in
their current risk management practices or ignorant of their vulnerabilities. Such failures can
have significant financial consequences as evidenced by a spate of recent class action lawsuits
against healthcare providers filed in response to data breaches. The lawsuits allege negligence
on the part of those providers in that they failed to take reasonable steps to protect confidential
patient information. In the case of 21st Century Oncology, the company faced a $2.3 million
lawsuit with the court finding that it failed to implement security measures to reduce risks while
also failing to apply procedures to review information system activity regularly [24].
Along with the addition of multi-factor authentication, one of the most important aspects
of risk management that a healthcare organization can introduce is employee training. According
to Michael Bruemmer, vice president of Experian Data Breach Resolutions, 80% of the incidents
Additionally, healthcare industry data breaches are commonly linked to theft and loss of laptops.
According to a Data Breach Investigations Report, in which 1,300 data breaches involving 20 
16
cause of securit
demonstrates that employee risk needs to be mitigated in order to help reduce cyber
vulnerabilities in the healthcare industry.
Sophistication: A Dynamic Threat
Cyber threats are dynamic, and the tools, techniques and strategies employed by those
with malicious intent are becoming increasingly sophisticated and ever costlier to thwart.
th year in a row, healthcare organizations had
the highest cost of a breach nearly $6.5 million on average (over 60% more than other
health information and the fact that compromised health records can produce losses for years
after a breach. Identity theft is just one such example of potentially long-lived losses. The
nature and modality of cyber-attacks is also shifting. Ransomware attacks, for example, are
becoming increasingly common. The shift away from offline backups has made companies more
vulnerable to certain types of attack. According to Raimund Genes, CTO at Trend Micro:
enterprises in all secto
incident, that is explained in Appendix I, shows that even companies with advanced
to prevent all ransomware attacks, risk can be reduced to an acceptable level with cybersecurity
solutions and securely stored backups of data will ensure ransom demands will not have to be 
17
The ever-increasing sophistication of cyber-attack strategies underscores the critical need
for healthcare organizations to implement multi-layered security systems and encryption to help
ensure that patient data cannot be accessed by unauthorized third parties [30]. This is particularly
crucial because the healthcare industry accounts for a large share of economic activity in the
United States
product [31].
Our analysis of major cyber-attacks on the healthcare industry (see appendix) reveals that
a substantial proportion of healthcare organizations were not prepared when attacked. Even those
who believed they were prepared clearly underestimated the threat. There is no question that the
confidential health data of millions of Americans remains extremely vulnerable to cyber-attack
and employee negligence. Failure to mitigate against these risks is very costly. Consequently,
data security is one of the
for the foreseeable future [32].
TRANSPORTATION SECTOR
Transportation networks are particularly vulnerable to cyber risks due to increased
digitization, vast amounts of data flowing across systems and the immediate impact disruptions
can have on travel and supply chains. As more systems and devices are connected directly or
indirectly the more vulnerable this industry becomes. Advances in communications across
electronic networks have caused the potential of disruption to become a serious concern. The
interconnected data systems of different branches of the transportation infrastructure including
automobiles, aviation, shipping, railways, and trucking compound the likelihood of cyber-attacks
causing significant interference and material economic disruption [33].
18
In the automobile industry, software and electronic components are increasingly
prevalent in modern vehicles. According to McKinsey & Company, the software market for
innovation in four areas: autonomous cars, connectivity, electric cars, and car sharing. Various
studies have analyzed the cybersecurity threats to autonomous vehicles. In general, as the degree
of vehicle autonomy increases, the increased dependence on computerized control systems
-to-vehicle and vehicle-to
Autonomous Vehicles: An Evolving Risk
The marke
from International Data Corporation (IDC), the number of vehicles capable of at least Level 1
autonomy will increase from 31.4 million units in 2019 to 54.2 million units in 2024,
representing a fivebelow for a visualization of this information. The Level 1 autonomy described here is established
by the Society of Automotive Engineers and consists ance that may assist
active steering, breaking, or acceleration; however, the driver still remains responsible and in
control of the vehicle [36]. 
19
Figure 5: Expected Growth for Autonomous Vehicles [36]
 The movement of car sales and customer data to online platforms makes the industry
increasingly susceptible to cyber-attacks. In 2019, 198 million car buyer records were exposed in
a massive data leak from a car buyer marketing database, DealerLeads. The database that
included names, email addresses, phone numbers, and street addresses, was found to be
insecurely posted online [37]. DealerLeads was able to password-protect the database once
notified, but the data had already been exposed. In reaction to the event, Jonathan Knudsen, a
internet-facing system needs: password protection, data encryption, or other fundamental
[37]. This breach highlights the necessity of an increase in security measures within
the automobile industry.
Cyber Risk in the Aviation Industry
 Further, the aviation industry faces similar challenges and susceptibility. With the
proliferation of inflight wireless networks and other systems in recent years, an increasing
31.4
54.2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2019 2024
Units in Millions
20
number of aircraft including large passenger aircraft carrying hundreds of passengers are
today connected to the internet, which raises concerns over potential cyber-attacks. Overall,
commercial aircraft have never been safer. Technical advances have reduced the chances of an
accident, but much of the improvement in aviation safety is derived from the computerization of
flight systems, both internal and external to the aircraft. These computer systems are critical to
essential operations such as inflight control and navigation systems, air traffic control, and
passenger reservations. Marsh -
enabled and automation increases, pilot practices and training will need to adapt in the event of
[33]. In 2015, LOT Polish Airlines suffered a DDoS attack
which caused the airline's computers to crash. It also destroyed its flight plan IT system. This
resulted in a 5-hour disruption that saw 10 flight cancellations, 12 flight delays, and 1,400
passengers grounded. Flights midair were luckily unaffected [38]. Due to the loss of crucial
story highlights the fact that, as more and more aspects of our lives become cyber-dependent, we
offer a greater attack surface to cybercriminals [39].
interconnected digital platforms will only amplify risks in the years ahead.
Cyber Risk in the Rail Industry
Comparably, Rail transportation IT systems require high levels of accessibility. Rail
infrastructure is particularly vulnerable due to multiple types of risks. One risk is that railway
driver assistance and control systems are highly interconnected. If these systems are infiltrated,
serious consequences could arise including loss of control of one or more trains [40]. 
21
Transportation system vulnerabilities are present throughout the world and hackers need not be
sophisticated to be successful. The public transportation in Lodz, Poland, was attacked in 2008
-year-old modified a TV remote control so that it could be used to change track
points. The teenager broke into a number of tram depots to gather the information needed to
build the device, which turned the tram system in Lodz into his own personal train set. As a
attacked, such as the ransomware attack on the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority
commuter rail operator, Keolis, and posted it online in attempt to blackmail the company. Keolis
took the systems that were affected offline, notified law enforcement, and took steps to restore
the affected systems [41]. Ticketing, rail information systems and system websites represent
additional nodes of vulnerability because of the potential for customer financial information to
be exposed. Ticket validity is also a concern and websites are vulnerable to multitude of attack
modalities [40].
Cyber Risk in the Trucking Industry
Within the trucking industry, connected systems continue to grow. In October 2019, the
Volvo Group passed the milestone of one million connected customer assets in terms of
delivered trucks, buses, and construction equipment [42]. This connectivity is expected to
increase sustainability, uptime, and traffic safety. Connectivity is expected to continue to expand
exponentially. According to a McKinsey Global Institute discussion paper, Connected World: An
evolution in connectivity beyond the 5G revolution, citing a recent International Data 
22
[43]. The more connected transportation networks become, the more vulnerable they are to cyber
risk.
Cyber Risk in the Freight Industry
Analogous to the trucking industry, the shipping industry is likewise vulnerable but on a
global scale. Ships utilize electronic navigation devices such as the Global Positioning System
(GPS) which if interfered with, can cause serious trouble for ship operators, increasing the
likelihood of crashing [44]. Additionally, maritime operations use millions of data points each
week, making it crucial for shipping lines to have this data stored securely [45]. In 2017, a cyberattack against Maersk, a global shipping company, disrupted operations for two weeks and cost
the company around $300 million. Maersk was hit by a worm named NotPetya, which locked
access to systems that the company uses to operate shipping terminals worldwide. No data was
lost, and ships operated normally throughout the period the systems were down. However, for up
to two days, the affected terminals could not move cargo, resulting in significant losses from
worldwide delays [46]. In order for maritime operators to mitigate attacks, they must have a
cybersecurity plan and take steps to strengthen firewalls to stop attacks like the Maersk attack
from happening [45].
Despite an evolving risk landscape, with cyber risk moving up the ladder, certain
companies are still choosing not t
Risk Management Survey, less than half (44%) of the transportation service companies (nonaviation) purchased cyber insurance coverage, and 35% of companies had no plan of purchasing
cyber-insurance (See Figure 6). The aviation industry is better off, with 69% who have
purchased coverage and only 19% with no plans to purchase [47]. 
23
Research and analysis reveal that transportation organizations of many different types
and sizes are targeted. Many of those attacked were not prepared at the time of the attack nor had
a plan in place of what to do after the initial attack. The development and implementation of
comprehensive cyber-risk management plans plans which include the purchase of proper
insurance coverage are critically important in the transportation sector given the extreme
interdependence of transportation risks with virtually every other major industry sectors.
24
Figure 6: Purchase of Cyber Insurance Coverage by Industry [47]
ELECTIONS
Elections are vulnerable to a wide variety of cybersecurity risks due to the rapid adoption
of and increasing reliance on digital election infrastructure. This vulnerability came to the
forefront in the United States for the first time during the 2008 presidential campaign and has
remained a consistent issue since then [48]. Specifically, during the 2008 presidential contest
69%
39%
75%
81%
49%
44%
17%
44%
29%
13%
19%
15% 3%
20%
8%
8%
21%
17%
19%
42%
10%
17%
31%
48%
75%
35%
54%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Industry
Insurance Currently Purchased Plan to Purchase Not Purchased and No Plans to Purchase
25
between Democrat Barack Obama and his Republican rival John McCain, the FBI uncovered a
massive cyberespionage operation against both campaigns. The operation was ultimately traced
back to the People's Republic of China. The goal of the campaign intrusion was thought to be to
export internal data from both campaigns. This included internal position papers and private
emails to gain leverage with the winner of the election. The intrusion into the campaign's
computer networks continued for months after first being detected by the FBI in the summer of
2008. The attack was initially delivered by a "phishing" email which contained an attachment
with sophisticated malware that infiltrated the Obama campaign's computer system [49]. This
malware allowed threat actors to exfiltrate data from both campaigns. This event was particularly
significant because it was the first time that a foreign actor had exfiltrated large quantities of
information from a United States presidential race for potential use by a foreign government
[50]. Fortunately, in the 2012 elections, there were no documented instances of digital foul play
or malicious hacking [51]. Although there was no concrete evidence of a hack from the 2012
election, that does not mean that the large potential threat was nonexistent. Indeed, it is possible
that infiltrations occurred but went undetected or were detected but not publicly revealed.
During presidential election cycle, the Obama administration
accused Russia of interference. In a joint statement from the U.S. Intelligence Community and
Community is confident that the Russian Government directed the recent compromises of emails
from U.S. persons and institutions, including from U.S. political organizations. These thefts and
[52]. Hackers created a fake
email account to send phishing emails to over 30 of Democratic nominee, Hillary
staffers. The emails included a link that directed to a document titled "hillaryclinton-favorable-
26
rating.xlsx". This led to a website operated by the hackers where they were able to use stolen
credentials to access the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee network and steal
data. They accessed 33 Democratic National Committee (DNC) computers and registered for a
[53]. Special Counsel Robert Mueller,
charged with investigating Russian interference in the 2016 election, issued an indictment 1 of
twelve Russian intelligence officers in the hacking of the DNC and the Clinton campaign. It was
hoped that the indictment would have a deterrent effect and reduce the likelihood of future
attacks [54].
While vulnerabilities in election systems certainly remain, much has been done in the
United States to strengthen the cyber defenses. Before the 2018 midterms, 40 states invested
more than $75 million of federal and state funds to secure election systems after the 2016
election. This also includes 26 states that conducted security assessments and implemented
cybersecurity upgrades, 20 states that enhanced cybersecurity training for election officials, 15
states that upgraded voting equipment, and 9 states that expanded post-election audits [55].
While it is impossible to directly assess what impact, if any, the Mueller indictments had on
reducing foreign interference in the 2020 presidential, there is clear evidence that the cyber threat
was diminished. In late November 2020, Christopher Krebs, director of the Cybersecurity and
of evidence that there was any sort of hacking or
[56]. Krebs was subsequently
fired by President Trump for speaking out against his various assertions that the election had, in
fact, been stolen. Yet state, local and national election officials appear to have taken threats
1 This indictment detailed the accusation by the American government of the Russian government interference in the
2016 election. From https://www.justice.gov/file/1080281/download. 
27
manifested in the 2016 election seriously, implementing multiple security measures to ensure the
validity and integrity of the election process.
Direct cyber-attacks are far from the only means available to perpetrators of election
interference. Misinformation and disinformation can also undermine public confidence in the
election process. Ahead of the 2020 presidential election, CISA released a resource guide
designed to counter some of the more common rumors contributing to public concerns over
security of election infrastructure and related processes [57]. This CISA guide provides an indepth analysis of voting system processes in the United States and dispels numerous false
assertions, including suggestions that election software is not reviewed or tested beforehand.
CISA went further still, issuing a joint statement in November 2020 with the Elections
Infrastructure Government Coordinating Council and other groups. The collective opinion of this
consortium of experts on election integrity, as it applies to the 2020 presidential race, is that
recounts are to be expected when elections are close. The process has built-in redundancies
(e.g., paper ballots to back up votes cast electronically) that allow for the identification and
correction of any mistakes or errors [58]. CISA and its partners conclude that despite numerous
[58].
While the 2020 election was more secure than those of the past, in October 2020,
Trustwave, a global cybersecurity company, discovered a hacker was selling personally
identifying information on 186 million American voters. Much of the data was already publicly
available, but names, email addresses, and voter registration records were found for sale on the
dark web. While voter registration data is publicly available in most states, email addresses are 
28
often not included in that public data. The databases were listed for sale by "Greenmoon2019''
and potentially enabled malicious actors to target registered Democrats or Republicans through
wrong hands, this voter and consumer data can easily be used for geotargeted disinformation
campaigns over social media, email phishing and text and phone scams before, during and after
[59].
system, one of the biggest known thefts of cybersecurity tools occurred. FireEye2
, one of the
largest cybersecurity companies in the United States, announced on December 8, 2020, foreign
government hackers with "world-class capabilities" broke into their network and stole tools that
they use to test the defenses of thousands of customers including federal, state, and local
governments. FireEye partners with a wide range of insurance companies including Marsh,
Lockton, Beazley, and Sompo International. FireEye's CEO, Kevin Mandia, released in a
statement that the attacker "primarily sought information related to certain government
customers." Mandia also stated that he has concluded that the attack was completed by a nation
with "top- [60]. The motive behind the attack remains unclear.
Just five days after the FireEye attack was announced, a much larger attack on IT
monitoring and management software SolarWinds stole the headlines. SolarWinds clients
include many of the largest technology, telecommunications and consulting firms in the world
along with many agencies of numerous national governments, including the United States. The
attacks on FireEye and SolarWinds led to a broader investigation as to whether the Russian
2 FireEye is a publicly traded cybersecurity company (FEYE). On December 8, 2020 (the day the attack was
announced) the stock was trading at 15.52 and dropped to 13.49 on December 9th, representing a decrease of 13%.
From https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/FEYE/
29
hackers had achieved in infiltrating both federal and private networks [61]. In a statement on
government data since a two-year spree in 2014 and 2015, in which Russian intelligence
agencies gained access to the unclassified email systems at the White House, the State
[61]. This
expansive hack could have long lasting potential effects on affected organizations.
There are a multitude of reasons as to why voting systems in the United States are
particularly vulnerable
oting systems is analyzed through the past elections. It asks and
to fix it? The answer, ultimately, comes down to politics and money: The voting machines are
made by well-connected private companies that wield immense control over their proprietary
software, often fighting vigorously in court to prevent anyone from examining it when things go
[62]. The risk of cyber-attacks to election infrastructure is not new. The history of Russian
theft alone of critical data from the U.S. government spans across more than two decades and
cyberwarfare force [61]. Then Secretary of State, Mike Pompeo, in a radio talk show interview
our way of life, our republic, [and]
asymmetric capabilities to try and put themselves in a place where they can impose costs on the 
30
[63]. It was not until three weeks after the realization of the attack that the United
States formally named Russia as the likely source in a joint statement issued by the FBI,
Department of Homeland Security, Director of National Intelligence, and National Security
Agency [64].
Election Security in Countries Outside the United States
Other countries are also plagued by cyber-attacks in election processes, often with
different vulnerabilities being targeted. Figure 7 displays statistics from a study in which 26
countries were asked about the likelihood and preparation for cyber-attacks on national security
information, public infrastructure, and elections in their country. A striking 74% of these
countries said that i
being accessed [65]. 
31
Figure 7: Perceived Likelihood of Cyber-attacks within 26 Countries [65]
Estonia was one of the first countries to be attacked in the first major act of cyber
warfare. In 2007, the Estonian government decided to move the Bronze Soldier, a symbol of
Soviet oppression. This decision led to protests which were exacerbated by false Russian news
reports that claimed the statue was being destroyed; when it was in reality being moved. In this
rioting, 156 people were injured, one person died, and 1,000 people were detained. Additionally,
the day after the physical destruction, cyber-attacks affected online services of Estonian banks,
media outlets, and government bodies. Also, a massive volume of spam email was sent by
botnets, generating large numbers of online requests and overloading servers. Estonians were
unable to use online banking services, government employees were unable to email, and
0.74
0.69
0.61
0.21
0.25
0.33
Our country's sensitive national
security information being accessed
Public infrastructure in our country
being damaged
Elections in our country being
tampered with
Likely
Unlikely
Note: Percentages are medians based on 26 countries. "Likely" includes those who say a cyberattack is "very" or
"somewhat" likely and those who volunteer that such attacks have already happened. 
32
newspapers could not deliver news [66]. Estonia faced lost productivity, opportunity cost,
remediation, and acquiring alternative web services at emergency rates that is estimated to have
cost billions of Euro [67]. Positively, this event transformed Estonia. Estonia was hit particularly
hard because it is heavily dependent on online processes and digital infrastructure. In 2008, it
[67]. This event was a
-up call, helping Estonians become experts in cyb [66].
leading IT experts are trained by the Ministry of Defense. The event helped to earn Estonia a
reputation today as a country with extremely strong cyber security. This example was one of the
first attacks on one nation by another. Russia has been involved in a multitude of hacks against
other nations including, most notably, the United States, Lithuania, and Kyrgyzstan [67].
Ten years later, in 2017, the French were able to successfully counter Russian electoral
interference. Two days before the final round of the French presidential elections, data hacked
gigabytes of emails and personal and business documents were posted to the site Pastebin
mixed fake documents and authentic ones to create confusion and misinformation. One of the
reasons the hack was unsuccessful was the speed at which the issue was addressed. Throughout
the campaign, the susceptibility to hacking was communicated openly and all hacking attempts
were made public. This attempt was announced within a few hours. Additionally, a few hours
after the documents were released online, the French mandated period of 48 hours of reflection
mainstream media, which the United States does not implement, helped to make the attempt
unsuccessful at deterring popular opinion of the elect. France was able to anticipate, react, and 
33
coordinate its response between the Macron campaign staff, the government, and civil society
[68].
Misinformation and Disinformation
Democratic elections rely heavily on faith in the electoral process. Therefore, the
deliberate introduction and spread of false information can increase voter confusion and devalue
a fact-based political debate. In recent years, social media has been the platform of choice for
disrupting elections through the dissemination of both misinformation and disinformation,
though other electronic methods exist including ordinary email. The result is a blurring of lines
between truth and fiction. The difference between misinformation and disinformation is
important and is based on intention. Misinformation occurs when false information is spread,
regardless of the intent to mislead [69]
dissemination of false informa
spread of misinformation and disinformation online has led many organizations to strengthen
cyber security safeguards [70].
Today, most major social media platforms invest heavily in content screening, including
political content. After the 2016 presidential election, Facebook hired thousands of third-party
moderators located in the Philippines, India, Dublin, and the United States to help bolster their
reputation. There is currently a debate as to whether content moderation is best carried out by
humans or largely through the use of artificial intelligence (AI). Mary Gray, a senior principal
bounds in artificial intelligence to take away the best tool we have: human intelligence to do the
[71]. While AI technology is increasingly reliable and is more efficient from a cost
perspective, overdependence on it can increase the risk of false information spreading across 
34
social media. Forms of disinformation vary and quickly evolve. The deception involved in
disinformation is similar to that of phishing. Facebook had nearly 15,000 contractors at 20 sites
globally hired to remove pornography, hate speech, terrorism, and other unwanted content from
its site. The screening process works to detect deception and misinformation. Due to the
coronavirus pandemic, Facebook in 2020 sent home thousands of these human moderators. The
social network must now rely more on technology to protect against misinformation [71].
Facebook along with other companies, such as Twitter, have used artificial intelligence and
algorithms, but have recognized that humans are vital to removing some of the content. The
pressure to combat misinformation regarding a multitude of subjects, including the integrity of
the 2020 general election in the United State and the COVID-19 pandemic, is high.
Overall, there does not need to be a cyber-attack in order to disrupt through online
platforms. Misinformation and disinformation can be particularly dangerous to elections, because
they can threaten democracy by spreading deceit. Disinformation campaigns are a means of
interfering with campaigns digitally which undermines confidence in democracies. Lastly,
disinformation can damage trust in the media.
Reliability of Online Content
Liability associated with content has evolved due to election integrity. With a multitude
of platforms and many posts, it can be difficult to decipher the validity of information spread
about Candidates. Recently there has been debate over whether Section 230, which helps
-six
Communications Decency Act (CDA). Section 230 was originally created after a court ruling
against the online platform Prodigy. In this case, Prodigy argued that it was not responsible for 
35
posts. While being treated like a publisher, a platform would be legally liable for
[72]. Section 230 allowed for companies to
moderate material on their platforms without being treated like a publisher under law. It says:
[73]. Therefore,
platforms cannot be held liable for what users post.
The COVID-19 pandemic caused content to be moderated more closely. Prior to the
pandemic, misinformation was generally political in nature and was not known to not cause
immediate harm. False information relating to the Coronavirus, could however, cause direct
harm. Posts claiming the virus was a hoax may have undermined the credibility of public
responses that were necessary to slow the spread of the virus and might have encouraged people
to ignore warnings and gather in groups [74]. As a result, platforms adopted stricter moderation
policies toward COVID-19 misinformation. In addition to COVID-19, political speech made
Section 230 one of the most discussed topics of 2020. Donald Trump and other republicans have
accused tech companies of censoring conservatives. Some have argued that Big Tech has gained
too much control. Two days after the 2021 storming of the United States Capital on January 6th,
Twitter suspended President Trump from its platform permanently. Social media companies have
long been tested by Pre
violence [75].
@realDonaldTrump account and the context around them we have permanently suspended the
acc 3
. Facebook and Instagram also
3 https://twitter.com/twittersafety/status/1347684877634838528
36
Dorsey, and Facebook, Mark Zuckerberg, said they are open to revising the legislation [76].
Twitter and Facebook have said their platforms balance between promoting free expression and
removing harmful content [76]. Democrats, including Joe Biden, have also spoken on the subject
of Section 230, urging Congress to revise it to help remove hate speech, election interference,
and false information.
The debated question is: should these platforms be held liable for the content it holds?
Both parties push for revision of the act, yet for different reasons. Jen Kosseff, an assistant
it
[76]. He also
mentioned it would be challenging to satisfy everyone who is upset with the big tech companies.
Repealing Section 230 would ultimately lead to more moderation, because of the increased risk
of liability of the content that users post.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated a major shift already underway prior to the
pandemic toward a more digitized workforce and world in general. Many employees are
working from home and relying on emails and other platforms to communicate with co-workers
and customers. The increased reliance on digital communications technologies increases the
probability of both malicious attacks and unintentional breaches. Consistent with the increased
vulnerability, the FBI has reported a 400 percent increase in cyber-attacks post-COVID [77],
demonstrating beyond any doubt that malicious actors are exploiting an exponential increase in
the attack surface. Heightened awareness of cyber threats even before COVID was already
driving demand for cyber insurance sharply upward. A Zurich Insurance and Advisen Ltd. study 
37
reported that the proportion of companies (all sizes) purchasing coverage grew from 34 percent
in 2011 to around 80 percent in 2020 [77]. Smaller businesses, however, appear less aware,
willing or able to mitigate the financial consequences of cyber-attacks through the purchase of
all and midsized businesses) reported not having cyber insurance coverage for their business and 5 percent
[78] (See Figure 8). Despite
a sharp increase in cyber-attacks aimed at employees working from home especially
ransomware attacks the reasons why most SMBs continue to lack cyber insurance coverage
remains unclear. This disconnect may be attributed to the lack of knowledge and cost. In the
future of digital work, business plans must prioritize cyber risk as a top business liability.
Figure 8: Small Businesses with Cyber Policies [78]
Vaccine Vulnerabilities: A Complex Supply Chain
With respect to the Covid-19 vaccine, criminals will likely try to interrupt the
distribution. The COVID-19 supply chain is extremely vulnerable to hackers and other cyber
36%
64%
Covered
Not Covered
38
security issues, such as ransomware attacks on hospitals and pharmacies. The international police
organization, Interpol, in early December 2020 issued a Global Orange Notice, which is a serious
and imminent threat to public safety [79]
governments are preparing to roll out vaccines, criminal organizations are planning to infiltrate
[80]. This has been seen within the first few weeks of distribution.
-attacks were underway that aimed at
the companies and government organizations distributing the coronavirus vaccines [81].
According to the IBM X-Force report, a global phishing campaign targeted organizations within
the COVIDof the vaccine supply chain that ensures preservation of the vaccines in a temperature-controlled
environment during both storage and transportation [82]. Nick Ross
global threat intelligence teams, said that the cyber-attacks
[81]. This attack emphasizes the need
for cybersecurity diligence at each step of the vaccine supply chain.
CONCLUSION
The evolution of cyber risk in the past 25 years has caused the risk to become extremely
Companies are increasingly dependent on technology, which increases their exposure to cyber
threats. Multiple factors affect the risks that corporations face. Three of the most afflicted sectors
of cyber risk were analyzed: healthcare, transportation, and electoral systems. Risk mitigation
continues to be the goal of corporations, with an increasing focus on cyber risk. One of the most
important aspects of mitigating cyber risk will be awareness. As businesses become more
connected and interdependent on technology, they become more vulnerable to these types of 
39
attacks. I foresee the next wave of cyber risk will be pertaining to personal medical data being
held by the companies creating apps for vaccine passports4
. With an ever-changing world that is
constantly evolving technologically, there will always be cyber risks. Cyber insurance coverage
needs to be part of every policy. I hope that companies and organizations are preparing for the
future by implementing technologies to enhance cyber resilience.
Cyber insurance coverage should be part of a multifaceted defense strategy
against cyber risks. Some other defenses that should be implemented include Multi-factor
Authentication (MFA), password protection, data encryption, and employee awareness training.
I would lastly like to thank my director, Dr. Robert Hartwig, for his outstanding role in
guiding me through this research and writing process. I would also like to thank my second
reader, Gregory Niehaus, for his time and expertise during this process.
4 Ideas on vaccination passport apps currently remain uncertain. An analog approach that does not need an app to
work would be more accessible, cheaper, and more privacy concerning. A semi-digital approach (that EU is
currently considering), with the use of paper records that are verifiable by QR code, could be hacked. From
https://www.govtech.com/security/vaccination-passport-apps-could-help-society-reopen--first-they-have-to-besecure-private-and-trusted.html
40
REFERENCES
[1] Journal of Cyber Policy, vol. 2,
no. 1, pp. 53 63, 2017.
[2] N National Geographic. National Geographics Society,
Washington, D.C., 1991.
[3] J. L. Peterson, M. Wheatley, and M. KellnerThe Futurist, vol. 32, pp. 21 28, Oct-1998.
[4] Radanliev, Petar et al. (2018): Analyzing IoT cyber risk for estimating IoT cyber insurance,
in: Living in the Internet of Things: Cybersecurity of the IoT - 2018. IET Conference
Proceedings, ISBN 978-1-78561-843-7, The Institution of Engineering and Technology,
London, pp. 1-9, http://dx.doi.org/10.1049/cp.2018.0003
[5] Nationwide. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nationwide.com/lc/resources/small-business/articles/what-is-cyber-insurance.
[Accessed: 10-Oct-2020].
[6] The Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago Fed Letter, 2019.
[7] J. Monck- -reaching impact of Cyber- Willis Towers
Watson, 03-Oct-2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.willistowerswatson.com/enUS/Insights/2019/10/the-far-reaching-impact-of-cyber-attacks. [Accessed: 11-Feb-2021].
41
[8] Willis Towers
Watson, 15-Sep-2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.willistowerswatson.com/enUS/Insights/2020/09/reassuring-the-reshoring-a-cyber-risk-management-proposal.
[Accessed: 11-Nov-2020].
[9] International
Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection, vol. 13, pp. 36 38, Feb. 2016.
[10] Cyber Insurance Purchasing Grows Again in 2019, Mar-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.marsh.com/us/insights/research/cyber-insurance-purchasing-growsagain.html. [Accessed: 10-Dec-2020].
[11]
[12 phoenixNAP
Global IT Services, 08-Jul-2019. [Online]. Available:
https://phoenixnap.com/blog/healthcare-cybersecurity-statistics. [Accessed: 15-Feb-2021].
[13] irms All US Sites Affected by Ransomware
HealthITSecurity, 05-Oct-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://healthitsecurity.com/news/uhs-health-system-confirms-all-us-sites-affected-byransomware-attack. [Accessed: 16-Dec-2020].
[14] ns ransomware assault threatens US health care system: At least 5
USA Today, 06-Nov-2020. 
42
[15] Accountable, 14-May-2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.accountablehq.com/post/history-of-hipaa. [Accessed: 16-Oct2020].
[16] , Technology Solutions That Drive
Healthcare, 30-Oct-2019. [Online]. Available:
https://healthtechmagazine.net/article/2019/10/what-happens-stolen-healthcare-dataperfcon. [Accessed: 15-Nov-2020].
[17]
Valuable I Identity Theft Resource Center, 11-Aug-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.idtheftcenter.org/data-breaches-in-the-healthcare-industry-continue-due-toavailability-of-valuable-information/. [Accessed: 15-Nov-2020].
[18] , Netcom Solutions,
10-Dec-2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.netcomsolutions.net/2018/12/why-dohackers-target-healthcareorganizations/#:~:text=In%20fact%2C%20healthcare%20credentials%20are,sector%20is%
20attacked%20by%20malware.&text=This%20makes%20it%20easier%20for,to%20the%
20hospital's%20sensitive%20information. [Accessed: 15-Dec-2020].
[19] HIPAA Journal. [Online]. Available:
https://www.hipaajournal.com/healthcare-data-breach-statistics/. [Accessed: 24-Oct-2020]. 
43
[20] HIPAA Journal, 22-Dec-2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.hipaajournal.com/november-2020-healthcare-data-breach-report/.
[Accessed: 16-Jan-2021].
[21
HealthITSecurity, 01-Jul-2019. [Online]. Available:
https://healthitsecurity.com/news/small-providers-still-struggling-with-cybersecurity-riskmanagement. [Accessed: 20-Oct-2020].
[22 - LBMC Family of Companies, 31-
Jan-2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.lbmc.com/blog/why-multi-factorauthentication-is-a-must/. [Accessed: 15-Oct-2020].
[23 s healthcare WannaCry CSO Online, 15-May-2017.
[Online]. Available: https://www.csoonline.com/article/3196827/ransomware-makeshealthcare-wannacry.html. [Accessed: 16-Dec-2020].
[24]
HealthITSecurity, 14-Dec-2017. [Online]. Available:
https://healthitsecurity.com/news/2.3m-ocr-settlement-reached-for-21st-century-oncologydata-breach. [Accessed: 16-Dec-2020].
[25 Data Breach Today, 22-Dec-2014.
[Online]. Available: https://www.databreachtoday.com/biggest-health-data-breaches-in2014-a7705#:~:text=The%20largest%20breach%20in%202014,which%20affected%204.5%20mi
44
llion%20individuals.&text=The%20Community%20Health%20Systems%20incident,breac
h%20notification%20rule%20in%202009. [Accessed: 15-Jan-2021].
[26] - TCS
Healthcare Technologies, 30-May-2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.tcshealthcare.com/healthcare-data-breaches-frequency-impact-cost/.
[Accessed: 15-Nov-2020].
[27 IBM
News Room, 23-Jul-2019. [Online]. Available: https://newsroom.ibm.com/2019-07-23-
IBM-Study-Shows-Data-Breach-Costs-on-the-Rise-Financial-Impact-Felt-for-Years.
[Accessed: 16-Nov-2020].
[28 , Bank Information Security, 20-Sep-2016.
[Online]. Available: https://www.bankinfosecurity.com/interviews/interview-raimundgenes-ransomware-virus-total-issue-i-3328. [Accessed: 08-Nov-2020].
[29 HIPAA
Journal, 04-Apr-2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.hipaajournal.com/more-than55000-patients-impacted-by-abcd-pediatrics-ransomware-attack-8753/. [Accessed: 16-Oct2020].
[30] HIPAA
Journal, 2014. 
45
[31 Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 16-Dec-2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/StatisticsTrends-andReports/NationalHealthExpendData/NationalHealthAccountsHistorical#:~:text=The%20da
ta%20are%20presented%20by,spending%20accounted%20for%2017.7%20percent.
[Accessed: 15-Jan-2021].
[32 UIC Online Health
Informatics, 08-Jul-2020. [Online]. Available: https://healthinformatics.uic.edu/blog/whydata-security-is-the-biggest-concern-of-health-care/. [Accessed: 28-Dec-2020].
[33] Marsh, 2015. [Online].
Available: https://www.marsh.com/content/dam/marsh/Documents/PDF/UKen/Cyber%20Risk%20in%20the%20Transportation%20Industry-03-2015.pdf. [Accessed:
20-Oct-2020].
[34]
McKinsey & Company, Mar-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Industries/Automotive%20and%20Assemb
ly/Our%20Insights/Cybersecurity%20in%20automotive%20Mastering%20the%20challeng
e/Cybersecurity-in-automotive-Mastering-the-challenge.pdf. [Accessed: 20-Nov-2020].
[35]
Transport Reviews, vol. 39, no.
1, pp. 103 128, 2018. 
46
[36] ecast Shows How Vehicles Will Gradually Incorporate the Technologies
IDC, 28-Sep-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS46887020#:~:text=According%20to%2
0a%20new%20forecast,(CAGR)%20of%2011.5%25. [Accessed: 17-Sep-2020].
[37] in Massive
Forbes, 16-Sep-2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/daveywinder/2019/09/15/bought-a-car-recently-198m-carbuyer-records-exposed-in-massive-data-leak/?sh=285d9b037391. [Accessed: 17-Oct2020].
[38] Aon, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://www.aon.com/getmedia/475a36e5-fae0-484b-b333-a7507c13b62b/cyber-sellsheetaviation.aspx. [Accessed: 17-Feb-2021].
[39] CNBC, 22-Jun-2015.
[Online]. Available: https://www.cnbc.com/2015/06/22/hack-attack-leaves-1400-
passengers-of-polish-airline-lotgrounded.html#:~:text=Ten%20planes%20and%20around%201%2C400,to%20the%20airc
raft%20before%20takeoff. [Accessed: 17-Oct-2020].
[40] dustry in the connected era: promising potential versus cyber
Stormshield, 23-Mar-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.stormshield.com/news/the-rail-industry-in-the-connected-era-promisingpotential-versus-cyber-risks/. [Accessed: 17-Sep-2020]. 
47
[41] Boston Herald, 22-Oct2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.bostonherald.com/2020/10/22/mbta-commuter-railoperator-hit-by-ransomware/. [Accessed: 17-Nov-2020].
[42]
Volvo, 03-Oct-2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.volvogroup.com/en-en/news/2019/oct/news-3436058.html. [Accessed: 17-
Oct-2020].
[43] revolution, McKinsey
Global Institute, Feb-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Industries/Technology%20Media%20and
%20Telecommunications/Telecommunications/Our%20Insights/Connected%20world%20
An%20evolution%20in%20connectivity%20beyond%20the%205G%20revolution/MGI_C
onnected-World_Executive-summary_February-2020.pdf. [Accessed: 17-Dec-2020].
[44] Cybersecurity
Insiders, 13-Jan-2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.cybersecurityinsiders.com/shipping-companies-are-extremely-vulnerable-to-cyber-attacks/. [Accessed:
17-Oct-2020].
[45] and The Importance of Cyber Security
Intelligence, 31-Jul-2018. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cybersecurityintelligence.com/blog/cosco-cyber-attack-and-the-importanceof-maritime-cybersecurity-
48
3622.html#:~:text=Maritime%20operations%20cough%20up%20millions,there%20is%20
a%20cyber%20attack. [Accessed: 09-Sep-2020].
[46]
Los Angeles Times, 17-Aug-2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-maersk-cyberattack-20170817-story.html.
[Accessed: 17-Sep-2020].
[47] - Aon, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.aon.com/getmedia/8d5ad510-1ae5-4d2b-a3d0-e241181da882/2019-AonGlobal-Risk-Management-Survey-Report.aspx. [Accessed: 29-Oct-2020].
[48] -
Kroll.com, 09-Jun-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.kroll.com/en/insights/publications/cyber/protecting-2008-us-presidentialelection-obama-campaign-cyber-attacks. [Accessed: 21-Dec-2020].
[49]
NBCNews.com, 07-Jun-2013. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nbcnews.com/id/wbna52133016. [Accessed: 05-Jan-2021].
[50] Council on Foreign Relations, Nov2008. [Online]. Available: https://www.cfr.org/cyber-operations/compromise-uspresidential-campaigns-2008. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021]. 
49
[51] , CNN, 03-Nov-2012. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cnn.com/2012/11/03/tech/innovation/electronic-vote-security/index.html.
[Accessed: 23-Dec-2020].
[52]
with elections, The Washington Post, 07-Oct-2016. [Online]. Available:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/us-government-officiallyaccuses-russia-of-hacking-campaign-to-influence-elections/2016/10/07/4e0b9654-8cbf11e6-875e-2c1bfe943b66_story.html. [Accessed: 03-Jan-2021].
[53] CNN, 28-Oct2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.cnn.com/2016/12/26/us/2016-presidentialcampaign-hacking-fast-facts/index.html. [Accessed: 15-Jan-2021].
[54] The
New York Times, 13-Jul-2018. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/13/us/politics/mueller-indictment-russian-intelligencehacking.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=storyheading&module=a-lede-package-region®ion=top-news&WT.nav=top-news. [Accessed:
21-Dec-2020].
[55]
CSIS.org, 29-Oct-2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.csis.org/analysis/csis-electioncybersecurity-scorecard-outlook-2018-2020-and-beyond. [Accessed: 23-Nov-2020].
50
[56]
ABC News, 01-Dec-2020. [Online]. Available: https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/trumpcampaign-lawyer-calls-fired-dhs-election-security/story?id=74479123. [Accessed: 10-Feb2021].
[57] cisa.gov, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cisa.gov/rumorcontrol. [Accessed: 04-Jan-2021].
[58]
cisa.gov, 12-Nov2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.cisa.gov/news/2020/11/12/joint-statementelections-infrastructure-government-coordinating-council-election. [Accessed: 16-Feb2021].
[59]
NBCNews.com, 21-Oct-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2020-election/cybersecurity-firm-finds-hacker-sellinginfo-148-million-u-s-n1244211. [Accessed: 19-Dec-2020].
[60]
Nation- The New York Times, 08-Dec-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/08/technology/fireeye-hacked-russians.html. [Accessed:
18-Feb-2021].
[61] into The
New York Times, 13-Dec-2020. [Online]. Available: 
51
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/13/us/politics/russian-hackers-us-government-treasurycommerce.html. [Accessed: 23-Feb-2021].
[62] The New York Times, 26-Sep-2018. [Online].
Available: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/26/magazine/election-security-crisismidterms.html. [Accessed: 12-Jan-2021].
[63]
cyberattack after secretary of state says Russia 'pretty clearly' chicagotribune.com,
19-Dec-2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.chicagotribune.com/nation-world/ct-nwrussia-hacking-cyberattack-20201219-l5mgq3q7mncgjb2fe7csbkbdiu-story.html.
[Accessed: 03-Jan-2021].
[64] cyber-attack; scope of hacking
USA Today, 06-Jan-2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2021/01/05/u-s-formally-links-russiamassive-cyberattack-hackongoing/6552803002/?itm_source=AMP&itm_medium=UpNext. [Accessed: 23-Jan2021].
[65]
Pew Research Center, 09-Jan-2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2019/01/09/international-publics-brace-forcyberattacks-on-elections-infrastructure-national-security/. [Accessed: 02-Mar-2021]. 
52
[66] cyber-attack BBC News, 27-Apr-2017.
[Online]. Available: https://www.bbc.com/news/39655415. [Accessed: 03-Feb-2021].
[67] Executive Central and Eastern European
Online Library, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.ceeol.com/search/gray-literaturedetail?id=804501. [Accessed: 23-Jan-2021].
[68] csis.org, 21-Jun-2018. [Online].
Available: https://www.csis.org/analysis/successfully-countering-russian-electoralinterference. [Accessed: 08-Dec-2020].
[69] on Dictionary.com,
19-Jan-2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.dictionary.com/e/misinformation-vsdisinformation-get-informed-on-the-difference/. [Accessed: 08-Feb-2021].
[70]
ndi.org, 13-May-2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ndi.org/publications/disinformation-and-electoral-integrity-guidancedocument-ndi-elections-programs. [Accessed: 21-Mar-2021].
[71]
The Washington Post, 24-Mar-2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/03/23/facebookmoderators-coronavirus/. [Accessed: 21-Feb-2021]. 
53
[72] - here's what
CNBC, 28-May-2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.cnbc.com/2020/05/28/what-is-section-230.html. [Accessed: 24-
Jan-2021].
[73] -
Legal Information Institute. [Online]. Available:
https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/47/230. [Accessed: 08-Jan-2021].
[74] Cato
Institute, 02-Nov-2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.cato.org/blog/year-contentmoderation-section-230. [Accessed: 19-Jan-2021].
[75] CNN, 09-Jan-2021. [Online].
Available: https://www.cnn.com/2021/01/08/tech/trump-twitter-ban/index.html.
[Accessed: 17-Feb-2021].
[76]
USA Today, 04-Jan-2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2021/01/04/trump-biden-pelosi-section-230-repealfacebook-twitter-google/4132529001/. [Accessed: 24-Dec-2020].
[77] -19 and Cyber Insurance - Gen Re
Perspective, 09-Dec-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.genre.com/knowledge/blog/ransomware-covid-19-and-cyber-insurance-thebig-disconnect-
54
en.html?utm_campaign=Subscription+Management+Center&utm_medium=email&_hsmi
=102359540&_hsenc=p2ANqtz--zI3-
zcAuYMeLDmnTnkPluMe5oXRri1n9uaq5P6UBzWWCOE8XLUzP8OLQA3GxUk89pejPIFQumBgUgRYDVM4TnNvaBkTT0-
LPk7DdoM6xtPQaGwo&utm_content=102359540&utm_source=hs_email. [Accessed:
16-Jan-2021].
[78] www.CyberScout.com,
2020. [Online]. Available: https://go.cyberscout.com/rs/746-PTV-801/images/CS-2020-
SMB-Cybersecurity-Survey.pdf. [Accessed: 01-Jan-2021].
[79] -
The Wall Street Journal, 03-Dec-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.wsj.com/articles/virus-vaccines-are-liquid-gold-to-organized-crime-interpolwarns-11607000854?st=8z9oxew6bm6l41y&reflink=article_email_share. [Accessed: 08-
Feb-2021].
[80] reat to COVID- Interpol, 02-Dec-2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.interpol.int/en/News-andEvents/News/2020/INTERPOL-warns-of-organized-crime-threat-to-COVID-19-vaccines.
[Accessed: 04-Feb-2021].
[81] erattacks Discovered on Vaccine Distribution
The New York Times, 03-Dec-2020. [Online]. Available: 
55
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/03/us/politics/vaccine-cyberattacks.html. [Accessed:
11-Jan-2021].
[82] rs Global Phishing Campaign Targeting the
COVID- Security Intelligence, 03-Dec-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://securityintelligence.com/posts/ibm-uncovers-global-phishing-covid-19-vaccinecold-chain/. [Accessed: 21-Jan-2021].
[83 NBCNews.com, 23-
Jun-2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/anthem-payrecord-115m-settle-lawsuits-over-data-breach-n776246. [Accessed: 11-Mar-2021].
[84] J. Davis -
HealthITSecurity, 31-Jul-2019. [Online]. Available:
https://healthitsecurity.com/news/insurer-dominion-national-reports-server-hack-thatbegan-august-2010. [Accessed: 11-Jan-2021].
[85]
HIPAA Journal, 15-Mar-2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.hipaajournal.com/more-than-600000-michigan-residents-affected-bywolverine-solutions-breach-warns-ag-nessel/. [Accessed: 08-Feb-2021].
[86]
MedCity News, 29-Nov-2018. [Online]. Available:
https://medcitynews.com/2018/11/atrium-health-billing-vendor-patients/. [Accessed: 11-
Mar-2021]. 
56
[87] DataBreaches.net, 10-
Jul-2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.databreaches.net/msk-group-notifying-patientsof-data-security-incident/. [Accessed: 08-Feb-2021].
[88] HIPAA Journal, 08-Feb-2019. [Online].
Available: https://www.hipaajournal.com/analysis-of-healthcare-data-breaches/.
[Accessed: 04-Feb-2021].
[89]
Becker's Hospital Review, 01-Oct-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.beckershospitalreview.com/cybersecurity/piedmont-cancer-institute-emailphishing-incident-exposes-5-226-patients-info.html. [Accessed: 04-Mar-2021].
[90]
HealthITSecurity, 29-Jun-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://healthitsecurity.com/news/unitypoint-health-reaches-2.8m-settlement-over-2018-
data-breach. [Accessed: 01-Mar-2021].
[91] Healthcare
Information Security, 18-Aug-2014. [Online]. Available:
https://www.healthcareinfosecurity.com/china-hackers-suspected-in-health-breach-a-7204.
[Accessed: 11-Feb-2021].
[92] The
Daily Swig | Cybersecurity news and views, 09-Oct-2020. [Online]. Available: 
57
https://portswigger.net/daily-swig/us-healthcare-provider-pays-5-million-in-2014-databreach-settlement. [Accessed: 11-Jan-2021].
[93]
HealthITSecurity, 03-May-2017. [Online]. Available:
https://healthitsecurity.com/news/report-finds-16.6m-affected-by-2016-healthcare-databreaches#:~:text=The%20largest%20healthcare%20data%20breach,occurred%20on%20Ju
ne%2017%2C%202016. [Accessed: 05-Jan-2021].
[94]
HealthITSecurity, 24-Apr-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://healthitsecurity.com/news/judge-approves-8.9m-banner-health-settlement-over2016-data-breach. [Accessed: 23-Mar-2021].
[95] HIPAA
Journal, 04-Apr-2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.hipaajournal.com/more-than55000-patients-impacted-by-abcd-pediatrics-ransomware-attack-8753/. [Accessed: 04-Feb2021].
[96] DataBreaches.net, 29-
Aug-2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.databreaches.net/ny-arc-of-erie-county-fined200000-for-online-securitybreach/#:~:text=The%20Arc%20of%20Erie%20County,Social%20Security%20numbers%
20and%20other. [Accessed: 02-Feb-2021]. 
58
[97] tack - Hancock Regional Hospital, 30-Apr2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.hancockregionalhospital.org/2018/01/cyber-attackpov-ceo/. [Accessed: 03-Mar-2021].
[98] HIPAA
Journal, 15-Dec-2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.hipaajournal.com/2-3-million21st-century-oncology-hipaa-settlement-agreed-ocr/. [Accessed: 24-Feb-2021].
[99]
HealthITSecurity, 19-Jul-2019. [Online]. Available:
https://healthitsecurity.com/news/mailing-error-for-inmediata-while-reporting-health-databreach. [Accessed: 02-Feb-2021].
[100]
HealthITSecurity, 19-Jul-2019. [Online]. Available:
https://healthitsecurity.com/news/michigan-attorney-general-looking-into-inmediatabreach-mailing-error. [Accessed: 03-Feb-2021].
[101] -Infected Emai HIPAA Journal, 10-May2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.hipaajournal.com/23k-patients-mayfield-clinicsent-malware-infected-email-3422/. [Accessed: 18-Jan-2021]. 
59
[102] ast 5
USA Today, 06-Nov-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://amp.usatoday.com/amp/6065612002. [Accessed: 19-Feb-2021].
[103] Bank Information
Security, 02-Mar-2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.bankinfosecurity.com/ransomware-attacks-economic-impact-67-million-a16095. [Accessed: 30-Mar-2021].
[104] The New York
Times, 19-May-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/19/business/easyjet-hacked.html. [Accessed: 04-Feb2021].
[105] BBC News, 08-Jul-2019.
[Online]. Available: https://www.bbc.com/news/business-48905907. [Accessed: 23-Jan2021].
[106]
Lufthansa Flyer, 13-Apr-2015. [Online]. Available:
https://lufthansaflyer.boardingarea.com/lufthansa-miles-damage-minimal-no-data-stolen/.
[Accessed: 11-Mar-2021].
[107] -San Francisco's Muni hack: A case study in prepping for
ransomware attacks. Information for Rail Career Professionals from Progressive
Progressive Railroading, Jan-2017. [Online]. Available: 
60
https://www.progressiverailroading.com/security/article/San-Franciscos-Muni-hack-Acase-study-in-prepping-for-ransomware-attacks--50602. [Accessed: 03-Mar-2021].
[108] SFMTA, 28-Nov-2016. [Online].
Available: https://www.sfmta.com/blog/update-sfmta-ransomware-attack. [Accessed: 01-
Apr-2021].
[109] -
BostonGlobe.com, 23-Oct-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.bostonglobe.com/2020/10/23/metro/commuter-rail-operator-hit-withransomware-attack/. [Accessed: 12-Feb-2021].
[110] FreightWaves, 25-Aug2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.freightwaves.com/news/files-from-tfis-canparleak-after-ransomware-attack. [Accessed: 09-Feb-2021].
[111] Supply Chain Dive, 30-Jul2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.supplychaindive.com/news/COSCO-cyberattackrestores-service/528897/. [Accessed: 08-Mar-2021].
[112] - BBC News, 20-Sep-2017. [Online].
Available: https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-41336086. [Accessed: 17-Jan-2021].
[113]
Infosecurity Magazine, 09-Dec-2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.infosecuritymagazine.com/news/vietnamese-hackers-compromised-bmw/. [Accessed: 02-Feb-2021]. 
61
[114] The New York Times, 27-
Oct-2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/27/technology/trumpcampaign-website-defaced-hackers.html. [Accessed: 11-Mar-2021].
[115]
FireEye, 08-Dec-2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.fireeye.com/blog/products-and-services/2020/12/fireeye-shares-details-ofrecent-cyber-attack-actions-to-protect-community.html. [Accessed: 08-Feb-2021].
[116] with The New
York Times, 08-May-2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/08/world/europe/macron-hacking-attack-france.html.
[Accessed: 16-Jan-2021]. 
62
APPENDICES
63
Appendix I: Healthcare
Entity, Date, and
Type of Attack
Summary Records Lost Financial
Loss/Impact
Resolution (date) Adjustments to Cyber Risk
Management
Breach
Type: Data
1/29/15
Cross Blue Shield
Anthem Blue
numbers, addresses, emails, and income information
information such as names, birthdays, social security
An unknown hacker accessed a database that had personal
[83].
information
personal
policyholders'
78.8 million
$115 M
Lawsuit of
2017).
to settle lawsuits (June
Anthem paid out $115 M Anthem provided free credit
monitoring and identity
protection services to all who
years.
were affected for up to two
Data breach
Type: Medical
6/1/2019
National
Dominion
as
access to computer servers that breached data from as early
An internal alert notified Dominion National of unauthorized
August 2010. This data varied, but included names, Social
account and routin
Security numbers, taxpayer identification numbers, bank
g numbers, member ID numbers, group
[84].
numbers, subscriber numbers, addresses, and email addresses
information
personal
patient's
2.96 million
Steph
Tousley Brain
going) filed by
Lawsuit (on
Class Action
ens for
data.
handling of the
the negligent
Individuals were notified
(investigation ended
April 2019).
receive
the FBI. All of the patients
reported the security incident to
software. Dominion National
monitoring and alerting
The insurer has enhanced its
d two years of credit and
fraud protection services.
Attack
Ransomware
Type:
9/23/18
Solutions Group
Wolverine
medical information
contract information and numbers, phone numbers, and
addresses, dates of birth, social security numbers, insurance
several attacks. The exposed information includes names,
download of the Emotet Trojan, which has been used in
data. The attack is believed to have started with the
Ransomware encrypted files that contained protected health
[85].
patients
600,000 Wolverine issued
notifications to affected
individuals (notified by
March 2019).
Affected patients received free
identity theft protection services
access to credit monitoring and
.
Solutions,
AccuDoc
Inc.
(third party
Incident
Type: Hacking/IT
9/22/18
Health)
vendor of Atrium
In October of 2018, Accudoc informed that an unauthorized
numbers,
included names, addresses, dates of birth, social security
AccuDoc Solutions in late September. Impacted information
party gained access to Accudoc's third party vendor,
etc. [86].
individuals
2.65 Million Individuals were notified
(starting October 2018).
monitoring
exposed were offered free credit
Those whose SSNs were
They also contacted the FBI.
firm to help secure its database.
Accudoc brought on a forensic
and identity
protection services.
Incident
Type: Hacking/IT
5/7/18
MSK Group
experienced a security event. After investigation, they d
MSK Group discovered that its computer networks
id not
believe records containing personal information were
removed from the computer network; however, there was
information
unauthorized access to the network that stored personal
such as driver's licenses, SSNs, insurance, and
medical information [87].
patients
566,000
[88].
2018).
(approximately July 9,
Individuals were notified
services.
free identify theft protection
Offered individuals one year of 
64
Entity, Date, and
Type of Attack
Summary Records Lost Financial
Loss/Impact
Resolution (date) Adjustments to Cyber Risk
Management
phishing
Type: Email
9/15/20
Institute, P.C.
Piedmont Cancer
September
The institute began notifying over 5,000 patients in
2020 that their personal health information was
exposed during an email phishing incident. An unauthorized
email account between April 5
individual gained access to a Piedmont Cancer's employee
and May 8. Personal
information
financial account information, and debit and credit card
information that was exposed includes names, birthdays,
[89].
5226 patients
(September 2020).
Individuals were notified Piedmont implemented
multifactor authentication across
security awareness training
its emails and added additional
.
3/2020
UnityPoint
- 5/2020
phishing
Type: Email executive within
targeted phishing emails that appeared to be sent from an
The health system's email system was hit by a series of
UnityPoint. An employee fell for the email
The hacked accounts' data that wa
were likely attempting to divert vendor or payroll payments.
March 14 to April 3, 2018. It was found that the hackers
thereby giving hackers access to internal email accounts from
s exposed included names,
insurance information, payment cards, and SSNs
addresses, medical data, treatment information, lab results,
[90].
patients
1.4 Million
settlement
dollar
$2.8 million
the breach
The settlement provided
victims with
monetary relief,
including 1 year of
monitoring
comprehensive credit
and identify
(June 2020).
theft protection services
identify suspicious emails,
employees, added secure tools to
added phishing education for
to the compromised accounts,
UnityPoint reset the passwords
and
implemented multi-factor
authentication.
attack
Type: Malware
August 2014
Inc.
Health Systems,
Community
and transfer information out of the
Community Health System's Security and was able to copy
Attackers used a sophisticated malware to bypass
system. The compromised
numbers, and SSNs
information included names, addresses, birthdays, phone
[91].
patients
6.2 Million
settlement
lawsuit
$5 million
six
practices. They faced a
reasonable security
failed to implement
Attorney General, CHS
According to Iowa's
-year lawsuit relating
(October 2020
to this wrongdoing
) [92].
prevent future security failure.
LQIRUPDWLRQVHFXULWSURJUDPWR
maintain a comprehensive
CHS agreed to "implement and
at
Cybersecurity
Type:
6/17/16
Banner Health
tack card numbers,
targeting payment card data including cardholder names,
beverage outlets were affected in the attack. The attack was
process payment card data at certain Banner Health food and
Banner reported that their computer servers and systems that
expiration dates and internal verification
and SSNs were affected in the data breach
identification numbers, National Provider Identifier numbers,
codes. For the providers: names, addresses, birthdays, Tax
[93].
individuals
3.6 Million
laws
$8.9 million
uit
settlement [94]
against risks
and harden their systems
thoroughly investigate
Banner failed to
victims claiming that
Lawsuit was due to
(April
2020).
the security of its syst
65
Entity, Date, and
Type of Attack
Summary Records Lost Financial
Loss/Impact
Resolution (date) Adjustments to Cyber Risk
Management
attack
Ransomware
Type:
2/6/2017
ABCD Pediatrics
Dharma. The encryption process was stopped by the anti
encrypt data. The attack involved a ransomware called
unauthorized access to its servers and used ransomware to
ABCD Pediatrics discovered that someone gained
-
virus solution used by ABCD Pediatrics, isolating the
medical r
information, SSNs, insurance billing information, and
patients' names, addresses, phone numbers, demographic
information that was potentially compromised includes
affected servers and taking them offline. The type of
ecords [95].
impacted
patients
55,447 N/A
individuals receive
notified; impacted
Individuals were
d
services for
identity theft protection
credit monitoring and
one year
2018).
(notified after March
as state
additional security solutions such
source of the attack and
The investigation found the
-of-the-art network cyber
ABCD's security measures.
monitoring were added to
County (Non
Arc of Erie
-
7/2015
profit)
-2/2018
client information
Type: Breach of
publicly
An investigator found that clients' personal information was
available on the internet from July 2015 to February
2018 [96].
3,751 clients
state
penalty to the
$200,000
a one
They were provided with
were formally notified.
In Match, 2018, clients
-year subscription
County pa
Russell. The Arc of Erie
Bureau Chief, Clark
and Technology Deputy
the Bureau of Internet
The case was handled by
against identity theft.
to LifeLock to protect
id $200,00 in
HIPAA
fees for violating
(August 2018).
The Arc of Erie County
announced that it will review its
equipment and data systems.
vulnerabilities of all electronic
policies and analyze its
attack
Ransomware
Type:
1/11/2018
Hospital
Hancock Health
Europe obtained the log in
A criminal group that is believed to be located in Eastern
credentials of a vendor that
files associated with this
by the hospital. SamSam malware was used to encrypt data
provides hardware for one of the information systems used
system. Messages appeared on the
hospital PC screens saying that the system was encrypted
made within seven days or
using SamSam ransomware, it also demanded a payment be
there would be permanent
o
encryption of the data. The CEO decided to pay the ransom
f four bitcoin to retrieve the private encryption keys. It
hospital's network
appears patient data was not transferred outside of the
[97].
data
take patient
payment, not
a ransom
was to obtain
N/A purpose 4 Bitcoin in
ransom paid
Friday evening, Hancock
the four-bitcoin
Monday
systems were restored by
attackers. Critical
private keys from the
transaction to receive the
(1/14/2018).
brought ba
information systems were
files were deleted, and
were safely recovered, encrypted
Hancock validated that the files
ck online.
66
Entity, Date, and
Type of Attack
Summary Records Lost Financial
Loss/Impact
Resolution (date) Adjustments to Cyber Risk
Management
10/3/2015
Oncology
21st Century
-
Type: Data breach
12/13/2015 from an
databases. It was accessed by a Remote Desktop Protocol
accessed and stole information from one of their patient
It was discovered by the FBI that an unauthorized individual
exchange server that contained protected health
information of over two million individuals [98].
individuals
2,213,597 $2.3 millionsettlement dollar agreed to pay 21st Century Oncology the Human
(December 2017).
standards of HIPAA
to bring its policies up to
corrective plan of action
million and to adopt a
Civil Rights (OCR) $2.3
6HUYLFHV2IILFHIRU that included revising its policie
adopt a corrective action plan
21st Century Oncology agreed to
s
train
violations of HIPAA rules, and
and procedures or reporting
ing staff on the new
policies, and conducting an
organization-wide risk
assessment.
breach
exposure data
Type: Web
January 2019
Group
Inmediata Health Officials discovered that some electronic health information
was found to include patient names, addresses, birthda
webpage was then deactivated, and the compromised data
search engines to index Inmediata's internal webpages. The
was left online that was exposed y a webpage that allowed
ys,
copying or saving of the files
gender, and medical claims data. There was no evidence of
[99].
impacted
patients
1.56 million
investigations
action
Facing class
there
2019. It was found that
beginning April 22,
Individuals were emailed
were mailing
mistakes, and some
patients
addressed to other
receive multiple letters
patients claimed to
(ongoing
lawsuits) [100].
of similar nature.
security to avoid future incidents
procedures, as well as additional
new server and database
The company has implemented
emails
Ransomware
Type:
February 2016
Mayfield Clinic
they needed to pay a
ransomware onto the patients' devices. The victims were told
email that contained an attachment which downloaded
Patients of the Mayfield Clinic of Cincinnati were sent an
ransom to unlock the encryption. No
list the same day
Mayfield was able to alert many of the people on the email
personal or medical data was accessed, just the emails.
[101].
patients
23,000
all rec
protection service, and
computer virus
Mayfield used a
ipients of the
ransomware viru
software to remove the
information to download
email were sent
s
(February 2016).
and provided anti
Mayfield assessed its controls
-scanning
of electronic newsle
also discontinued the distribution
updates to employee emails. It
tters.
attack
Ransomware
Type:
September 2020
Services
Universal Health
Chaotic conditions were described
paper and pencil for record keeping, which slowed lab work.
as Ryuk. This attack forced doctors and nurses to rely on
suspected cybercriminals use a strain of ransomware known
systems across UHS facilities in the United States. The
on September 27. This attack locked computers and phone
Universal Health Services experienced a ransomware attack
[102].
impacted
not directly
records were
medical
Electronic
impacted;
were
States sites
All United
[103]
$67 million
restored
UHS IT Network was
further destruction. The
shut down to prevent
and the network was
quickly disconnected,
The systems were
(10/5/2020).
process
The recovery and restoration
were enacted by UHG,
explicitly announced.
no
67
Appendix II: Transportation sector
Entity, Date, and
Type of Attack
Summary Records Lost Financial
Loss/Impact
Resolution (date) Adjustments to Cyber Risk
Management
May
EasyJet
2020
Type: Cyberattack
EasyJet (a low-cost airline based in England) was the target
card
customers. Around 2,000 of the customers had their credit
email addresses and travel plans of about 9 million
of a "highly sophisticated" cyberattack which exposed the
details stolen [104].
customers
9 million
airline
whether the
investigating
Office (ICO) is
Commissioner's
Information
UK's
had
This will
its customers.
personal data of
protected the
properly
likely
fine.
result in a heavy
individu
The company contacted
als affected by
the end of May 2020.
computer security
that helps companies avoid
Centre, a British organization
the National Cyber Security
The airline got in contact with
threats and
&RPPLVVLRQHUV
the Information
Office
data breaches).
(British agency that reviews
Type: Data breach
June 2018
British Airways
information
A variety of information was compromised including log in
, payment cards, and travel booking details of
about 500,000 customers [105]. information
FXVWRPHUV
500,000
information.
customer
personal
failing to protect
Office (ICO) for
&RPPLVVLRQHUV
Information
the UK's
($25.9M) from
pound fine
20 million
the airline's financ
reduced to 20m due to
fine from the ICO was
The 183 million pound
ial
customer's data (7/2019).
place to protect its
security measures in
failed to put sufficient
British Airways had
investigators found that
circumstances. The
British airways planned to
the attack
security of their systems since
make improvements to the
.
attack
Type: Cyber
4/1/2015
Lufthansa
According to Lufthansa, the damage was
purchases using miles on users' frequent flyer accounts.
used for the airline's online portal. Hackers then made
Hackers used a botnet to decipher customer login credentials
limited to a few
the right
'Bots' trying to use usernames and passwords until obtaining
department identified fraudulent activity and discovered
stolen were returned to their owners. Lufthansa's IT
hundred accounts. The miles and travel vouchers that were
combinations [38].
pages
customer
Hundred
Several N/A
username
members to change their
numbers and contacted
changed the account
reimbursed them and
affected, Lufthansa has
For the accounts
s and
[106]
passwords (April 2015)
.
al
The account information of
l customers was changed.
was explicitly 
68
Entity, Date, and
Type of Attack
Summary Records Lost Financial
Loss/Impact
Resolution (date) Adjustments to Cyber Risk
Management
attack
Ransomware
Type:
April 2015
Agency (SFMTA)
Transportation
Municipal
San Francisco
SFTMA's computer
On Black Friday 2016, a cryptic message blocked access to
screens reading "You hacked, ALL Data
and gained access to physical ticketing machines
malware infected about 1/4 of SFTMA's computer systems
($73,000) from SFTMA for the release of its symptoms. The
Encrypted." The hacker's goal was to obtain 100 bitcoins
. SFTMA
the bus drivers resorted to hand
was forced to give free rides to passengers that weekend, and
-written routes. SFTMA
own. By Sunday, the systems were restored
denied paying the ransom and restored the systems on their
[107].
systems
computer
8,000
SFTMA's
2,000 of
day
$599,000 each
approximately
was
expected loss
Agency
SFMTA
was unable to
collect fares.
By Sunday the computer
systems were restored,
contained, and we
situation is now
were compromised. The
transaction information
customer privacy nor
Muni Metro. Neither
operation of buses and
impacts to the safe
and there were no
service was unaffected
was released: "Transit
and an official statement
have
(11/27/2016)
RSHUDWLRQDO
systems to be fully
prioritized restoring our
[108].
obtaining this information.
prevention of future attackers
Not explicitly stated in
It
was mentioned that SFMTA
would reach out to staff to
c
remind them of the impacts of
licking on links and opening
sources.
emails from unfamiliar
Keolis in Boston
attack
Ransomware
Type:
10/10/2020
commuter rail operator,
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA)
Hackers obtained personal information from workers for the
Keolis, and posted it online to
attempt to blackmail the company. Keolis took the systems
that were affected offline, notified law enforcement, and took
steps to restore the systems [109].
disclosed.
released not
employee data
Amount of N/A
Keolis
For impacted employees,
provided credit
2020).
theft protection (October
monitoring and identity
Not explicitly mentioned.
(DDoS) Attack
Denial of Service
Type: Distributed
June 2015
Airlines
LOT Polish
flight plan IT system. This resulted in a
caused the airline's computers to crash. It also destroyed its
In 2015, LOT Polish Airlines suffered a DDoS attack which
5-hour disruption
[38].
passengers grounded. Flights midair were luckily unaffected
that saw 10 flight cancellations, 12 flight delays, and 1,400 [3
grounded
passengers
1,400 airline
9].
N/A
on lat
passengers affected flew
data was obtained. The
No direct access to the
er flights or were
(June 2015).
put up in hotels by LOT
attention
have to give it more
wider scale, and for sure we
industry problem on a much
HPSKDVL]HG7K
69
Entity, Date, and
Type of Attack
Summary Records Lost Financial
Loss/Impact
Resolution (date) Adjustments to Cyber Risk
Management
attack
Ransomware
Type:
August 2020
Canpar Express
TFI subsidiary
able to ope
courier subsidiaries. The ransom was not paid, and TFI was
targeted this Canadian trucking and logistic company's
and leaked onto the dark web after a ransomware attack
Files were stolen from TFI International's Canpar Express
rate normally after a few days [110].
attacks.
ransomware
targeted in the
reported being
subsidiaries
and courier
four parcel
FRPSDQV
and the
documents,
three
consisted of
The leak
pay the ranso
decided not to
TFI likely
suggested that
The data release
m.
needs,
most customer shipping
"We continue to meet
themselves. They said
ransomware attack
comment further on the
TFI declined to
and we are not
our clients aware
caution we want to make
of an abundance of
client information. Out
aware of any misuse of
of the
(August 2020).
experiencing any issues
incident, should you be
aware of the incident.
other than making the clients
Not explicitly mentioned
attack
Type: Malware
June 2017
Maersk
operate shipping terminals worldwide. No data was
which locked access to systems that the company uses to
In early April, Maersk was hit by a worm named NotPetya,
lost, and
were down. Although, for
ships operated normally throughout the period the systems
up to two days, the affected
terminals could not move cargo [46].
shutdown
Temporary
of
terminal.
largest cargo
Los Angeles'
the Port of
$200-$300
million. workarounds
There were many
to keep
business going. After
2017).
back to normal (June
two weeks, business was Maersk to improve upon.
behavioral weaknesses for
technological, procedural, and
The attack was able to exploit
attack
Type: Cyber
7/24/2018
COSCO Shipping On July 24, 2018, a cyber-attack took place on the shipping
American region. This affected the
agency's digital assets affecting communication in the
FDUULHUV ability to
communicate with vessels, customers, and marine terminals
[45].
U.S, Cana
Systems in
da,
attack.
disabled in the
Uruguay were
Chile, and
Brazil, Peru,
Argentina,
Panama,
$250
Caused a loss of
-$300
million.
applications
that "its network
Shanghai headquarters
advisory from its
announced in a customer
incident, Cosco
About 5 days after the
in the
[111].
UHFRYHUHG
Americas had been fully
Americas.
uninterrupted service to the
remote access, to ensure
conduct its operations via
Cosco mentioned it would
attack
Type: Petya cyber
June 2017
FedEx A subsidiary of Fed Ex, TNT Express fell victim to the Petya
cyber-attack. TNT's operations in Europe were disrupted by
the attack causing significant financial loss due to lowerthan-expected results in first quarter earnings [112].
data los
No breach or
s
attack.
affected in the
the systems
recover all of
able to
may not be
the company
occurred, but
$300 million
restore
Customer volumes were
still be inaccessible.
due to the email system
internal communication
to using WhatsApp for
In August, TNT resolved
d to expected
levels (September 2017).
insti
They mentioned the plan to
ll confidence with
cu
70
Entity, Date, and
Type of Attack
Summary Records Lost Financial
Loss/Impact
Resolution (date) Adjustments to Cyber Risk
Management
attack
Type: Cyber
December 2019
BMW OceanLotus (aka APT32), believed to be a Vietnam-backed
group that targets threats, targeted BMW in 2019. This
Munich, Germany
The attackers did not breach the central data center in
on machines. The hackers were blocked in December 2019.
software installed a Cobalt Strike testing tool to remotely spy
[113].
No sensitive
leaked.
data was
N/A BMWVFEHUVHFXULW
December.
out the attackers in
activity, before kicking
PRQLWRUWKHJURXSV
the attack and carefully
team was able to notice
(December 2019)
event of an incident"
reconstruct, and recover in the
allow us to quickly detect,
access to our systems and
risk of unauthorized external
processes that minimize the
implemented structures and
statement saying, "We have
BMW made a general
[113].
Appendix III: Election Sector
and Type of
Entity, Date,
Attack
Summary Records Lost Financial Loss/Impact Resolution (date) Adjustments to Cyber
Risk Management
attack
Type: Cyber
October 2020
Campaign
The hackers were seeking cryptocur
conversations of the president" and classified information.
devices which gained them access to "internal and secret
hacked. Hackers claimed to have compromised multiple
It was discovered that Trump's campaign website was
rency. The site visitors
were invited to donate cryptocurrency to two different funds:
one labeled "Yes, share the data" and the other "No, do not
which is a difficult to trace cryptocurrency. The mes
share the data". The payments solicited were in Monero,
sage also
said, "After the deadline, we will compare funds and execute
sensitive data because none of it is stored on the site
Trump campaign, confirmed that there was no exposure of
the will of the world." Tim Murtaugh, a spokesman for the
[114].
was restored
N/A; website N/A
restored,
The website was
and the
2020).
of the attack (October
investigate the source
authorities to
with law enforcement
they were working
Trump campaign said
closely monitor
Intelligence agencies
ed
may
hacking groups that
attem
71
and Type of
Entity, Date,
Attack
Summary Records Lost Financial Loss/Impact Resolution (date) Adjustments to Cyber
Risk Management
attack
Type: Phishing
April 2016
Campaign
directed to a
to over 30 Clinton staffers. The emails included a link that
Hackers created a fake email account to send phishing emails
document titled "hillaryclinton-favorablestealing data Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee network, The hackers were able to use stolen credentials to access the rating.xlsx". This led to a website operated by the hackers. [53].
33
They accessed
DNC
documents.
publicize the
leaks to
called DC
a website
registered for
computers and
N/A
Nationa
of the Democratic
officers in the hacking
Russian intelligence
an indictment of 12
2016 election issued
interference in the
investigating Russian
The counsel
l Committee
[54].
Campaign (July 2018)
and the Clinton
They worked with the
process.
electoral voting
FBI to safeguard the
attack
Type: Cyber
October 2020
Trustwave
the data is
was selling information on 186 million U.S. voters. Much of
Trustwave, a global cybersecurity company, says a hacker
publicly available, but names, email addresses,
web. While voter registration data is
and voter registration records were found for sale on the dark
publicly available in
data. The databases were list
most states, email addresses are often not a part of the public
ed for sale by "Greenmoon2019"
Republicans
addresses of only registered Democrats or only registered
which would allow for malicious acts by targeting email
[59].
data
other personal
records of
245 million
records and
U.S. voter
186 million N/A Trustwave said in a
FBI is closely
They assured that the
during the election.
investigating fraud
committed to
statement that they are
working
the voting
partners to safeguard
state, and local
with their federal,
process
(October 2020).
safeguard
Working with FBI to
the electoral
voting process.
Cyberespionage
Type:
12/8/2020
FireEye One of the largest cybersecurity companies in the United
government hackers with "world
States, FireEye, said that on Tuesday, December 8th, foreign
-class capabilities" broke
a
defenses of thousands of customers including federal, state,
into their network and stole tools that they use to test the
nd local governments. FireEye's CEO, Kevin Mandia,
information related
released in a statement that the attacker "primarily sought
to certain government customers."
Mandia also stated that he has concluded that the attack was
completed by a nation with "top-tier offensive capabilities"
[60].
security
test customer
tools used to
assessment
Team
certain Red
Accessed
customers
Potential loss of
. Stock price
reveal of the attacks.
went down after the
and Micros
attack with the FBI
investigating the
FireEye is
oft Corp.
ongoing)
(December 2020 and
tools that were stolen
help to neutralize the
information that can
They are publishing
[115].
threat actors.
protect customers from
innovate and adapt to
FireEye is working to 
72
and Type of
Entity, Date,
Attack
Summary Records Lost Financial Loss/Impact Resolution (date) Adjustments to Cyber
Risk Management
phishing attack
through a
Cyberespionage
Type:
2008
campaigns
presidential
McCain
Obama and
operation against the 2008 presidential
The United States traced the massive cyberespionage
campaigns of Barack
China. The goa
Obama and John McCain back to the People's Republic of
l of the campaign intrusion was to export
computer networks continued for months af
winner of the election. The intrusion into the campaign's
position papers and private emails to gain leverage with the
internal data from both campaigns, including internal
ter first being
with sophisticated malware that
delivered by a "phishing" email that contained an attachment
detected by the FBI in the summer of 2008. The attack was
infiltrated throughout the
Obama campaign's computer system [49].
inte
number of
A large
rnal files
compromised
were
around $300 billio
be costing the U.S.
(mostly from China) to
estimated this theft
Ambassador to China
former U.S.
Director Blair and the
the former Intelligence
money. A report from
property costs the U.S.
Theft of intellectual
n per
year.
any role in
officials have denied
computers. Chinese
to cleanse the infected
Solutions to Chicago
Kroll Advisory
security team from
dispatched a computer
The campaign
cyberattacks against the
(2013)
private enterprise
U.S. government and
[49].
since this attack.
and improved upon
measures were taken
More cyber security
disinformation)
and spreading
(releasing data
Cyberattack
Type:
May 2017
campaign
Macron's
Emmanuel
Pasteb
personal and business documents were posted to the site
team were released online. Nearly 14.5 gigabytes of emails,
HOHFWLRQVGDWDKDFNHGIURP0DFURQVSUHVLGHQWLDOFDPSDLJQ
Two days before the final round of the French presidential
in through links to more than 70,000 files. Officials
misinformation
documents and authentic ones to create confusion and
IURP0DFURQVSDUWVDLGWKDWWKHDWWDFNHUVPL[HGIDNH
[116].
and emails
of documents
14.5 gigabytes N/A
influen
The attack failed to
ce the electoral
anticipation
Factors such as
won the election.
process. Macron still
and
(May 2017)
Russian influence
resisting the attempted
be attributed to
mainstream media can
civil society and
staff, government, and
Macron campaign
reaction by the
[68].
prevention
The
73
and Type of
Entity, Date,
Attack
Summary Records Lost Financial Loss/Impact Resolution (date) Adjustments to Cyber
Risk Management
Type:
April 2007
Government
Estonian
Cyberattack and
disinformation
rioting, 156 people
reports that claimed the statue was being destroyed. In this
led to protests which were exacerbated by false Russian news
Bronze Soldier, a symbol of Soviet oppression. This decision
In 2007, the Estonian government decided to move the
were injured, one person died, and 1,000
cyber
people were detained. The day after the physical destruction,
-attacks affected online services of Estonian banks,
that was sent by botnets generated large
media outlets, and government bodies. The massive spam
amounts of online
to email, and newspapers could not deliver news.
online banking services, government employees were unable
requests, overloading servers. Estonians were unable to use
The attacks
came from Russian IP addresses and Russian language was
used. The attacks continued until May 19, 2007 [67].
e
websites and
financial
political, and
governmental,
Estonian
-services
were targeted. emergency r
web services at
acquiring alternative
remediation, and
opportunity cost,
productivity,
Estonia faced lost
ates are
billions of Euro.
estimated to have cost
(5/19/2007)
responsible hackers
indicted one of the
Estonian government
January 2008, the
May 19, 2007. In
The attacks ceased on
[67].
Defense
Estonian Ministry of
In May 2008, the
implemented a
National Cyber
Security Strategy [66]. 
Factors influencing cyber insurance
adoption in South Africa industry
Nkosinathi Sphiwe Mbatha
A research report submitted to the Faculty of Commerce, Law and
Management, University of the Witwatersrand, in partial fulfilment of the
requirements for the degree of Master of Management in the field of
Digital Business
Johannesburg, 2020
(Version 2019-2020)
ii
Organisations are benefiting from the use of emerging digital technologies for
improved efficiencies. These technologies are vulnerable to cyber-attacks
resulting in breaches on organisational assets. Cyber-attacks necessitates
boards and top management to strategically rethink their cybersecurity
approaches to managing cyber risks. The purpose of the study was to explore
the factors influencing cyber insurance adoption in the South African industry.
The study adapted Technology-Organisation-Environment (TOE) theoretical
framework to investigate cyber insurance adoption relevant to the South African
context. The review of literature focused on the cybersecurity, cyber risk
management, and cyber insurance phenomenon to understand the global and
developing world landscape. The research design followed the systemic
collection of qualitative data through semi-structured interview questions on the
purposefully selected sample of professionals in the public and private sectors of
the South African industry. The analysis and interpretation through categorisation
of patterns of data collected enabled presentation and discussion of emerging
themes resulting in findings. The key findings relate to effective cybersecurity
awareness, organisational approach to managing cyber risks, as well as the
nature of industry and compliance with legislation. The study established that the
combination of effective cybersecurity awareness, the relationship between the
strategic organisational approach to cybersecurity and top management support
towards cyber risk management as well as compliance with legislation are the
factors influencing cyber insurance adoption in the South African industry. In
order to meet the research objectives, various conclusions were made. The study
concluded that effective cybersecurity awareness must be viewed as a strategic
imperative to enable organisations to operate securely. The study also concluded
that organisations must proactively approach cybersecurity strategically thereby
ensuring effective top management buy-in. The study concluded that the POPI
Act is the primary driver of cyber insurance adoption in the South African industry.
KEY WORDS
Cybersecurity, cyber risk, cyber insurance, cybercrime, cyber-attack.
iii
I, Nkosinathi Sphiwe Mbatha, declare that this research report is my own work
except as indicated in the references and acknowledgements. It is submitted in
partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Management in
the field of Digital Business at the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg.
It has not been submitted before for any degree or examination in this or any
other university.
Name:Nkosinathi Sphiwe Mbatha Signature:
6LJQHGDW
iv
The research report is dedicated to my late mother, Ms Hilda Nonhlanhla
Mthethwa, who passed on 23 years ago. As a domestic worker, she did not have
the opportunity to study at the university. I, therefore, dedicate this
degree to her for believing in the value of education as an instrument to transform
my life, family and broader society. In memory of my late mother, I aspire to share
my learnings, experiences and the knowledge gained through mentorship and
coaching of youth coming from disadvantage communities.
v
I would like to give thanks to God Almighty for He is my light and comfort for
everything spiritual. Without God, the Master of Management in Digital Business
(MMDB) would not be possible. I would like to thank my family, my wife Sophia
Moraka and daughter Sphesihle Mbatha for being my pillar of strength and
encouraging me to pursue this qualification. My family suffered the most neglect
due to my absence as I was swallowed by the studies. At times, I felt
overwhelmed; however, I consistently reminded myself why I enrolled for this
qualification in the first place. This was the most difficult initiative I have ever done
in my life However I am thankful for persevering till the end.
A big THANK YOU to my supervisor Mr Mthandeni Langa for his guidance,
support, and passion for research, which lifted my spirit during points of
breakdown. I have learned to be resilient during this challenging period. My friend
Monwabisi Kula for your wisdom and deep intellectual prowess that motivated me
when my energy was low. To Yoav Tchelet, my former boss (CIO), for
encouraging me to pursue a master's qualification and always providing support.
Thank you to my MMDB classmates for walking this challenging journey with me,
in particular, Mr Samuel Mahlangu for always being authentic, supportive and
understanding. I would like to thank the research participants who provided
insightful responses during interview sessions, without whom this research would
not be possible.
Last but not least, to my father, Mr Thembinkosi Joshua Mbatha, THANK YOU
for raising and teaching me the responsibility of being a man. Ngiyabonga
Ndabezitha Shandu kaNdaba.
vi
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT.....................................................................................ii
DECLARATION..............................................................................iii
DEDICATION .................................................................................iv
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT..................................................................v
LIST OF TABLES...........................................................................ix
LIST OF FIGURES ..........................................................................x
LIST OF ACRONYMS ....................................................................xi
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION....................................................12
1.1 PURPOSE OF THE STUDY .................................................................. 12
1.2 CONTEXT OF THE STUDY................................................................... 13
1.3 RESEARCH PROBLEM ....................................................................... 14
1.4 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES.................................................................... 15
1.5 SIGNIFICANCE OF THE STUDY ............................................................ 15
1.6 DELIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY........................................................... 16
1.7 DEFINITION OF TERMS ...................................................................... 17
1.8 ASSUMPTIONS ................................................................................. 17
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW .........................................19
2.1 INTRODUCTION ................................................................................ 19
2.2 BACKGROUND.................................................................................. 19
2.3 THE TECHNOLOGY ORGANISATION ENVIRONMENT FRAMEWORK.......... 21
2.4 LINKING CYBERSECURITY TO DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY............................. 22
2.4.1 INCREASE IN ELECTRONIC DATA ............................................................................ 23
2.4.2 INCREASE IN MOBILE DEVICES ............................................................................... 24
2.4.3 INCREASE IN ORGANISED CYBERCRIME GROUPS..................................................... 26
2.4.4 INCREASE OF INTELLIGENT EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL IT SECURITY THREATS............ 28
2.4.5 THE DIFFICULTY OF TRACING THE ATTACKERS........................................................ 29
2.4.6 LIMITED CYBERCRIME LAWS .................................................................................. 30
2.4.7 LIMITED IT SECURITY KNOWLEDGE AMONG INTERNET USERS .................................. 31
2.4.8 PROPOSITION 1.................................................................................................... 33
2.5 CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT................................................................ 33
2.5.1 CYBER INSURANCE AS A MECHANISM TO MANAGE CYBER RISK ................................ 35
2.5.2 CYBER RISK IN SOUTH AFRICA .............................................................................. 38
vii
2.5.3 PROPOSITION 2.................................................................................................... 39
2.6 CYBER INSURANCE MARKET .............................................................. 39
2.6.1 TYPES OF CYBER INSURANCE LIABILITY COVERS..................................................... 42
2.6.2 DRIVERS OF CYBER INSURANCE ............................................................................ 45
2.6.3 CHALLENGES OF CYBER INSURANCE...................................................................... 47
2.6.4 PROPOSITION 3.................................................................................................... 49
2.7 CONCLUSION OF THE LITERATURE REVIEW ........................................ 49
2.7.1 PROPOSITION 1.................................................................................................... 50
2.7.2 PROPOSITION 2.................................................................................................... 50
2.7.3 PROPOSITION 3.................................................................................................... 50
CHAPTER 3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY..............................51
3.1 INTRODUCTION ................................................................................ 51
3.2 RESEARCH APPROACH ..................................................................... 51
3.3 RESEARCH DESIGN .......................................................................... 52
3.4 DATA COLLECTION METHODS ............................................................ 53
3.5 POPULATION AND SAMPLE................................................................. 53
3.5.1 POPULATION ........................................................................................................ 53
3.5.2 SAMPLE AND SAMPLING METHOD........................................................................... 54
3.6 THE RESEARCH INSTRUMENT ............................................................ 55
3.7 PROCEDURE FOR DATA COLLECTION.................................................. 56
3.8 DATA ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION ............................................... 57
3.9 LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY............................................................... 58
3.10 TRANSFERABILITY AND DEPENDABILITY .............................................. 58
3.10.1 TRANSFERABILITY............................................................................................. 58
3.10.2 DEPENDABILITY ................................................................................................ 58
3.10.3 CREDIBILITY ..................................................................................................... 59
3.10.4 CONFIRMABILITY............................................................................................... 59
3.11 DEMOGRAPHIC PROFILE OF THE RESPONDENT .................................... 60
3.12 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS................................................................ 61
CHAPTER 4. FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION ..............................62
4.1 INTRODUCTION ................................................................................ 62
4.2 DISCUSSION PERTAINING TO PROPOSITION 1...................................... 65
4.2.1 EFFECTIVE CYBERSECURITY AWARENESS.............................................................. 65
4.3 DISCUSSION PERTAINING TO PROPOSITION 2...................................... 73
4.3.1 AN ORGANISATIONAL APPROACH TO MANAGING CYBER RISK ................................... 73
4.4 DISCUSSION PERTAINING TO PROPOSITION 3...................................... 82
4.4.1 CYBER INSURANCE ADOPTION IN SOUTH AFRICA INDUSTRY .................................... 82
4.5 CONCLUSION................................................................................... 89
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS & RECOMMENDATIONS ...........91
5.1 INTRODUCTION ................................................................................ 91
5.2 CONCLUSIONS REGARDING RESEARCH OBJECTIVE 1 ........................... 92
viii
5.3 CONCLUSIONS REGARDING RESEARCH OBJECTIVE 2 ........................... 92
5.4 CONCLUSIONS REGARDING RESEARCH OBJECTIVE 3 ........................... 93
5.5 RECOMMENDATIONS ........................................................................ 95
5.6 SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH ........................................... 95
REFERENCES ..............................................................................97
APPENDIX A Semi-structured Interview Questions .............121
I) SETTING THE SCENE .................................................................................................. 121
II) CYBER SECURITY ...................................................................................................... 121
III) TECHNOLOGY........................................................................................................... 122
IV) ORGANISATION ........................................................................................................ 124
V) ENVIRONMENT......................................................................................................... 124
APPENDIX B Participant Information Sheet..........................126
ix
Table 1: Comparison of cyber insurance policies Source.......................... 41
Table 2: Cyber insurance challenges 48
Table 3: Profile of respondents..................................................................... 54
Table 4: Demographic profile of respondents ...... 59
Table 5: Consistency matrix.......................................................................... 62
Table 6: Cybersecurity perception ............................................................. 654
Table 7: Cyber insurance perception ........................................................... 72
Table 8: Cybersecurity approach and management support................... 754
Table 9: Cyber insurance adoption .............................................................. 81
Table 10: Cyber insurance in the public and private sectors..................... 82
x
Figure 1: Cybersecurity ................................................................................. 19
Figure 2: TOE Framework.............................................................................. 20
Figure 3: Anticipated Projection of global Datasphere............................... 23
Figure 4: Global IP traffic, wired and wireless............................................. 24
Figure 5: Internet users in selected countries in Africa ............................. 25
Figure 6: Federal cyber-security survey ...................................................... 27
Figure 7: Value-vulnerability grid ................................................................. 33
Figure 8: Cyber insurance decision ............................................................. 34
Figure 9: Proposed cyber insurance claims process ................................. 36
Figure 10: Most covered losses.................................................................... 42
Figure 11: Policy exclusions......................................................................... 43
Figure 12: Cyber insurance premium........................................................... 44
Figure 13: Cyber protection .......................................................................... 47
Figure 14: Summary of research design...................................................... 51
xi
4IR 4th Industrial Revolution
AIG American International Group
CIA Confidentiality Integrity Availability
CIO Chief Information Officer
CISO Chief Information Security Officer
EU European Union
GDPR General Data Protection Regulation
ICT Information and Communications Technology
IP Internet Protocol
IT Information Technology
IoT Internet of Things
ISO International Organisation of Standardisation
POPI Protection of Personal Information
SA South Africa
SME Small Medium Enterprise
US United States
12
CHAPTER 1.
This chapter introduces the research study to investigate factors influencing
cyber insurance adoption in South Africa. The purpose and significance of the
study are elucidated and contextualised in the public and private sectors of the
South African industry. The research problem is unpacked in detail thus leading
to research objectives. Key constructs that are out of the scope of this study are
discussed in this chapter. The study investigates individuals that are positioned
at strategic, tactical and operational levels in organisations. These levels are
operationalised through organisational cross cutting constructs such as
technology, processes and sytems to drive organisational objectives.
1.1 Purpose of the study
The origin of the cyber insurance market can be traced back to the 1970s from
the technology risk or technology errors and omissions (E&O) (Camillo, 2017).
All industries, public and private, are susceptible to cyber risks (Kopp,
Kaffenberger, & Jenkinson, 2017). This has resulted in the elevation of
cybersecur
wherein the executives and boards perceive it as a strategic imperative Kopp et
al. (2017). This suggests that executives are cognisant of the impact of the lack
of sound cybersecurity practices within organisations. Thus, the consistent
increase in cyber-attacks is developing awareness for cyber insurance to provide
relief in the event the organisation is attacked (Toregas & Zahn, 2014).
Completely eliminating cybersecurity risks is a challenging task albeit the latest
cybersecurity defence technologies and implementing security policies to
mitigate the likelihood of a cybersecurity breach (Tabansky, 2017). This suggests
that no matter how strong the protection technology and security practices are,
there is a possibility that an intruder can gain access to the
and data assets. Also, there may be gaps in terms of internal employee skillset
as well as cybersecurity levels of awareness which usually lags sophisticated
intruders (Addington & Manrod, 2019). Generally, this reality is particularly
prevalent in most organisations due to lack of resources and capabilities to 
13
effectively deal with cyber risks (Sommerrock, Madnick, Siegel, Pulido, Coden,
Bartol, & Bernaski, 2018).
In addition, residual cybersecurity risks cannot be entirely mitigated through the
deployment of technical controls only (Rohmeyer & Bayuk, 2019). As such,
sound cyber resilience is achieved through a combination of technical,
procedural, financial and human interventions (Toregas & Zahn, 2014). Cyber
insurance fills the gaps left by inadequate technology, skills, and effective levels
of cybersecurity awareness to enhance cyber resilience (Tiirmaa-Klaar, 2016).
Therefore, the desired outcome of this study was to scrutinise the factors
influencing cyber insurance adoption in both the public and private sectors of the
South African industry.
1.2 Context of the study
Cybersecurity breaches are growing at exponential rates and organisations are
seeking to explore methods to lower the effect of cybersecurity breaches
(Addington & Manrod, 2019). The advent of increasing internet penetration
fuelled by mobile devices, protecting organisational assets such as data,
systems, applications, and intellectual property becomes elevated on the
Information Technology (IT) and business executives agenda (ISACA, 2016). In
2017, it was estimated that there is 20.35 billion connected Internet of Things
(IoT) devices and the figure is likely to increase (Silva et al., 2019). Mitigating the
risk that emanates from such connectivity is becoming an overwhelming duty for
most Cyber Security professionals as the threat landscape has intensified
significantly (IDC, 2018).
Most organisations are digitalising their operations to take advantage of the 4th
industrial revolution (4IR) that has a potential to expose the organisation to
hacking if cybersecurity risk is inadequately managed (Leitner & Stiefmueller,
2019). According to an IBM study conducted on 477 organisations in 13 different
countries including 2634 individuals, it was estimated that the average cost of a
data breach could exceed $3.86 million by 2019.
14
Furthermore, the introduction of regulations such as the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) for South African organisations operating in the European
Union (GDPR, 2019) and more specifically in the context of South Africa, the
Protection of Personal Information Act (POPIA), becomes the drivers for
enhanced cybersecurity posture for organisations (POPIA, 2013). This is due to
stringent rules that emanate from the aforementioned regulations to secure data.
A breach of IT systems could result in lasting reputational damage, revenue loss,
and fines to the organisation of any size (ISACA, 2016). Customers could also
sue companies in the event their personal information is accessed by an
unauthorised party during the breach (North & Pascoe, 2016). Cybersecurity
attacks have become sophisticated and therefore require a different approach to
mitigating cyber risks (Camillo, 2017). Thus, over and above implementing
technical controls, companies must explore cyber insurance to enhance cyber
resilience to systems and data (Kesan & Hayes, 2017).
Whilst cyber insurance is not a silver bullet or replacement for improved
cybersecurity from people, process and technology perspective; skills, training,
policies, and procedures, as well as technology, are still required (Sommerrock
et al., 2018). Therefore, cyber insurance can provide a financial shield to ensure
operations are resumed speedily post cyber breach in the South African industry.
1.3 Research problem
Cybersecurity is a topical issue at the board level due to the impact it has on the
reputation and therefore sustainability of the business of any size (ISACA, 2016).
The absence of a systemic approach to cyber defence that takes into account the
use of best practice frameworks, internal controls, cyber risk management and
understanding of ever-changing cybersecurity landscape can be a challenge to
organisations (Kshetri, 2015b). Coordination efforts to mitigate cyber threats such
as the inability to access critical business systems, unauthorised modification of
data as well unavailability of systems is required (Skopik et al., 2016).
Cybersecurity threats can be exploited as a result of unpatched machines, weak
passwords, and lack of periodic antimalware updates (Süzen, 2020) as well as 
15
employee negligence or failure to backup mission-critical systems (Nikolov &
Slavyanov, 2018). Cyber-attacks such as ransomware, brute-force, and denial of
service and leakage/loss of sensitive information by employees who have access
to data could result in revenue loss, reputational damage, regulatory fines, and
penalties as well as customer ligation suits (Tabansky, 2017).
To ensure confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) of information assets and
in light of the rising cyber-attacks, companies must consider adding cyber
insurance to mitigate against cyber risks (Sommerrock et al., 2018). Therefore,
what are the factors influencing cyber insurance adoption in South Africa
industry?
1.4 Research objectives
The objective of this research is to investigate factors influencing cyber insurance
adoption in South Africa industry from the perspective:
i. Technology about the awareness and
effectiveness of cybersecurity technologies.
ii. Organisation about cyber risk management and
management support.
iii. Environment about government regulations and
the nature of the industry.
1.5 Significance of the study
Cyber insurance is a growing industry in developed markets such as the United
States (US) and European Union (EU) (N. Shetty et al., 2010; Wang, 2019). The
significance of the study is to identify factors pertinent to the adoption of cyber
insurance within the South African industry context. Due to the criticality of sound
cyber resilient practices for South African organisations, cyber insurance can be
an added layer of cyber risk management that ensures sustainability (Huang et
al., 2018).
16
Cyber insurance enables organisations to focus on key strategic objectives such
as increased revenue, customer satisfaction, and compliance with applicable
laws thereby contributing to the long term viability of the organisation (Brangetto
& Aubyn, 2015). However, investment in cyber insurance does not translate to
revenue generation or growth for an organisation (Camillo, 2017). The customer
concerns with privacy and the introduction of legislation regulating the security of
customer data is no longer a nice to have for organisations (King & Raja, 2012),
it is a regulatory requirement (GDPR, 2019; POPIA, 2013).
Management of cyber risks can improve organisational performance and improve
compliance with internal processes as well as external legislative and regulatory
frameworks for improved cybersecurity posture (Contreras et al., 2012; Daud et
al., 2018). D s main concern in ensuring
reasonable cybersecurity by firms of all sizes (Brangetto & Aubyn, 2015).
In the developing world, cyber insurance has proven to enhance value to
business by ensuring the swift resumption of operations albeit, at a higher cost,
which lowers the demand for adoption (Kshetri, 2015b). Therefore, the study will
add local findings to the pool of existing knowledge on the factors influencing the
adoption of cyber insurance in the South African industry. As such, relationships
between cybersecurity, cyber risk management, and cyber insurance concepts
are explored to ground the study into the South African context.
1.6 Delimitations of the study
The research study will focus on organisations that operate in the South African
industry both public and private sectors. The study will consider employees in the
strategic, tactical and operational levels to ascertain their views and experiences
on cyber insurance phenomenon. The study will exclude the following aspects:
a) Cyber insurance premium calculations
b) Cyber risk modelling
c) Accumulation risk
d) Insurability of organisations
e) Cyber insurance modelling 
17
f) Cyber insurance pricing
g) Quantification of the value cyber attacks
1.7 Definition of terms
Cyber insurance refers to insurance contracts designed to mitigate liability
issues, property loss and theft, data damage, loss of income from network outage
and computer failures, Web-site defacement, and cyber extortion
(Bandyopadhyay et al., 2009).
Cyber risks are defined as operational risks to information and technology assets
that have consequences affecting the confidentiality, availability, or integrity of
information or information systems (Eling & Wirfs, 2015).
Cybersecurity is the collection of tools, policies, security concepts, security
safeguards, guidelines, risk management approaches, actions, training, best
practices, assurance and technologies that can be used to protect the cyber
(R. von Solms & van Niekerk,
2013, p. 1).
Vulnerability refers to weak points that are built-in properties of a defined system
(Tabansky, 2011).
1.8 Assumptions
The research made the following assumptions:
a) Participants will be available and co-operate to ensure that the research
study is complete.
b) Participants will provide relevant perspectives based on their
understanding of the concepts.
c) Participants have an understanding of cybersecurity, cyber risk, and cyber
insurance.
d) Participants will answer diligently to enrich the generation of knowledge
through their industry experience.
18
e) Participants work in the South African industry for both the public and
private sectors.
19
CHAPTER 2.
2.1 Introduction
The previous chapter (Chapter 1) provided a high-level purpose, context, and
significance of the study by identifying a problem and objectives to the study
about the adoption of cyber insurance in the South African industry. Chapter 2
reviews the literature that underpins the study in terms of linkage between
cybersecurity and emerging digital technologies. This chapter provides a brief
background and explores the causes of cybersecurity incidents that have a
significant impact on businesses. The exploration of the TechnologyOrganisation-Environment (TOE) theoretical framework forms the basis upon
which this study is based to elucidate emerging factors leading to the first
proposition.
Furthermore, the introduction of the concept of cyber risk management with a
particular focus on the South African and developing world context is unpacked
in detail. The study then makes a second proposition that attempts to bring to
light the potential benefits of a proactive cyber-risk management approach.
Finally, the study delves into the cyber insurance market, various types of cyber
insurance covers, the drivers and challenges that have an impact on the adoption
of cyber insurance. The third proposition emerges and explores the impact of the
operating environment on cyber insurance adoption in South Africa.
2.2 Background
Globally, cybersecurity is inevitably receiving the attention as it is considered a
different method of warfare (de Bruijn & Janssen, 2017) which necessitates the
organisation to search for sustainable countermeasures (Goode, 2018; Von
Solms & Van Niekerk, 2013) and any business operation can be impacted
negatively (Costa et al., 2019). According to Vicevich (2018, p. 9), cybersecurity
is national security and comprises different aspects that are complex, ranging
from legal and legislative issues, global threat actors, and different types of cyber 
20
threats. Threat actors include but not limited to script kiddies, competitors, nationstates, terrorists, employees, customers criminals or malicious hackers (Aloul, AlAli, Al-Dalky, Al-Mardini, & El-Hajj, 2012).
The objective of cybersecurity is to ensure confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of systems, data and assets (R. von Solms & van Niekerk, 2013). The
view is similar to the ISO 27000 standard. International Organisation for
Standardisation is the world-renowned entity that publishes and develops
standards and best practice frameworks - International Organization for
, 2019). The ISO 27000 series contains guidelines and controls
for organisations to manage their cybersecurity risk programmes (Herr, 2019).
According to Von Solms & van Niekerk (2013), cybersecurity is premised on
protecting assets from a range of threats posed by vulnerabilities as illustrated in
Figure 1 below.
Figure 1: Cybersecurity Adapted from (R. von Solms & van Niekerk, 2013)
Figure 1 above indicate that there are various threats due to vulnerabilities of
systems, data, and technology that are likely to affect organisational assets,
human and their interest negatively if they are not managed properly. As such,
threats can emanate both from internal and external because of vulnerabilities
inherently on technology, software, and hardware. Such vulnerabilities may
negatively affect organisational assets thus must be secured.
Cyberspace has the potential to provide human-kind with benefits that
meaningfully improve the quality of life but has various unknown risks that if they
are not addressed could result in security incidents (Tabansky, 2017). A security
incident is defined as a set of security events linked with a multitude of potentially
concerted network activities that merit special consideration by the network
administrator (Ab Rahman & Choo, 2015).
Threats
Internal and external
 Assets
Information and data
 Vulnerabilities
Technology, software and
hardware
21
2.3 The Technology Organisation Environment Framework
The Technology-Organisation-Environment (TOE) framework describes the
process by which a firm adopts and implements innovations in the technological,
organizational, and environmental contexts (Tornatzky et al., 1990). According
to Bandyopadhyay (2012a), the Technology Organization Environment (TOE)
framework of (Tornatzky et al., 1990) is appropriate for an adequate model of
adoption of cyber insurance. Figure 2 below illustrates an adapted TOE
framework that underpins this study. a model for
adoption and utilization of cyber insurance must fundamentally include the factors
that affect the perceived valuation of cyber insurance as an instrument to manage
cyber risk in the organization (Bandyopadhyay, 2012a, p. 3).
Figure 2: TOE Framework Adapted from (Bandyopadhyay, 2012a)
Technology
Awareness
Effectiveness
Environment
Government
regulations
Nature of industry
Organisation
Cybersecurity risk
management
Management support
22
As depicted in figure 2 above, the study will be underpinned by technological,
organisational and environmental factors to ascertain the inclination of South
African firms to make decisions on cyber insurance adoption as a means to
transfer cyber risk to a third party insurer. Cyber insurance adoption in
conjunction with the existing cybersecurity controls delivers maximum value for
the organisation (Woods & Simpson, 2017).
In the technology context, the study will ascertain whether the company has
cybersecurity technologies deployed, how effective it is and how dependent is the
organisation on the technology to mitigate against cyber threats. The organisation
context explores the risk appetite to determine the extent to which the
organisation approaches risk management from an integrated point of view. The
study determines the extent of the availability of financial resources to support
cybersecurity initiatives to manage cyber risk. Finally, the environmental context
considers the extent to which regulatory needs, nature of business and
communities of interests play a role in the cyber insurance decision-making.
2.4 Linking cybersecurity to digital technology
The growing reliance on digital technologies, while creating significant
opportunities for innovation, convenience, and efficiency, comes with digital
security and privacy protection risks (OECD, 2018). There is consistency with
Toregas & Zahn (2014) view that the losses incurred from cyber-attacks are
growing as new technologies spread and reliance on technology increases. The
spread of new technologies such as Cloud computing, mobile devices, and social
media increases vulnerability to cyber-attacks (Toregas & Zahn, 2014).
Cybersecurity risks are likely to significantly increase business processes
become automated, IT assets becoming acquired and businesses placing
reliance on IT to achieve their strategic objectives (Bandyopadhyay, 2012b). As
such, the focus of organisations lies in using those technologies to enhance the
efficiency of their business, not security. The introduction of digital technologies
such as Cloud computing, the Internet of Things (IoT), BlockChain, Big Data, and
other emerging technologies has extended the cybersecurity landscape due to
23
unknown vulnerabilities that attackers could exploit (Sommerrock et al., 2018).
Cloud computing is services that facilitate the access by consumers to virtual
resources that are scalable and dynamic through the Internet from data centres
located across the world anytime with any device (Bahrami & Singhal, 2015).
There are three types of Clouds i.e. Public, Private and Hybrid which are
delivered through the following service models i.e. Software as a Service (SaaS),
Platform as a Service (PaaS), and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) (Ratten,
2016).
Cybersecurity is a dynamic field that is ever-changing however companies have
not caught up with the rate at which new digital technologies are developing and
as such cyber-attacks are increasing with vigour and sophistication (Huang et al.,
2018). Network security continues to be a challenge for managers and executives
due to manifestations of malware that compromise unprotected assets and thus
results in security incidents (Yang & Lui, 2014.; Zou et al., 2016). Aloul (2012, p.
2) state that there are seven causes of increased security incidents world-over,
namely:
a) increase in electronic data,
b) increase in mobile devices,
c) increase of organised cybercrime groups,
d) increase of intelligent external and internal IT security threats,
e) the difficulty of tracing the attackers,
f) limited cybercrime laws, and
g) limited IT security knowledge among internet users
2.4.1 Increase in electronic data
According to a study conducted by IDC (2018), the Global Datasphere will grow
to 175 Zettabytes by 2025, wherein 49 per cent of data will be stored in public
cloud environments. The Global Datasphere quantifies and analyses the amount
of data created, captured, and replicated in any given year across the world.
Additionally, it looks at how much of that data is stored across various storage
components (HDD, flash, optical, tape, and memory).
24
Figure 3 below illustrates the upward trend that suggests that the world will
experience exponential growth in terms of the size of the global Datasphere.
Figure 3: Anticipated Projection of global Datasphere Source: (IDC, 2018)
Figure 3 above suggests that as the data grows exponentially, cybersecurity
controls must follow a similar path to secure organisational assets. The IDC
(2018) report suggests that the increase in data transactions requires
organisations to continuously learn and make improvements based on the data.
The factors behind data increase include autonomous cars, humanoid robots,
intelligent personal assistants and smart home devices that are shifting how we
work, live and play (IDC, 2018). This signals that data will continue to increase
and will require modern and effective security mechanisms to secure data stored
in cloud storage or internal servers at rest as well as in motion.
2.4.2 Increase in mobile devices
According to Lee, Cheng & Cheng (2007), the increase in mobile devices has
resulted in the creation of economic value. It is estimated that mobile commerce
accounts for US6.9 trillion eany account (Lee et al., 2007). This increase is attractive for hackers to target
mobile devices for malicious intents (Sujithra et al., 2015).
Figure 4 below illustrates the global Internet Protocol (IP) traffic, wired and
wireless. The wireless traffic includes both Wi-fi and mobile traffic highlighting
exponential growth on both.
25
Figure 4: Global IP traffic, wired and wireless Source: CISCO Visual Networking
Index (2018)
Figure 4 above illustrate the Global IP traffic from the study conducted by CISCO,
a global network firm. By 2020 it is predicted that wired networks will constitute
29 per cent of IP traffic, and Wi-Fi, as well as mobile networks, will account for 71
per cent of IP traffic , 2018). This view correlates
with the increase in mobile devices and as such, mobile devices are likely to
become targets for cybersecurity attacks (Pescatore, 2017).
The increase in broadband penetration in South Africa promises to stimulate
economic activity and at the same time could expose the citizens to cyber-attacks
(Mooketsi, 2015). as a
launching pad for cyber-attacks to the rest of the world (Jardine, 2015). As
technology keeps advancing, so are cyber threats that could impact South African
organisations negatively resulting in financial losses and damage to reputation
(Van Niekerk, 2017).
Figure 5 below illustrates the number of Internet users for selected countries. The
countries listed in figure 5 below relate to the developing world, particularly the
developing nations. Africa is an attractive destination for cyber-attacks as more
and more users have access to the internet (Kshetri, 2019). Globler & Dlamini
(2012, p. 1) state that factors making Africa vulnerable include increasing
bandwidth, increasing use of wireless technologies and infrastructure, high levels
of computer illiteracy, ineffective or insufficient legislation to deal with cyberattacks and threats, as well as increasing Internet penetration rates.
26
Figure 5: Internet users in selected countries in Africa Source: Statista (2019)
According to March 2019 data from Statista (2019), South Africa is ranked
number four in terms of the number of Internet users with 31.19 million. Nigeria
has 111.63 million, followed by Egypt at 49.23 million and Kenya with 43.33.
Majority of the Internet traffic was generated with mobile phones. This can be
attributed to the fact that mobile connections are much cheaper compared to the
infrastructure associated with traditional PC such as fixed-line internet
connection.
The increase in broadban
Internet infrastructure vulnerable (Manda & Backhouse, 2017). Thus, a
coordinated effort from all stakeholders such as national government, business,
academia, etc. to develop and implement a robust cybersecurity policy framework
is necessary.
2.4.3 Increase in organised cybercrime groups
According to Raghavan & Parthiban (2014, p. 2) cybercrime is a growing threat
in the virtual world as the use of the internet and other digital technologies growth 
27
thereby heightening the risk of attack by cybercriminals across the globe.
Cybercrime, in the most trivial form, is a crime that occurs in a computer and a
network (Sharma et al., 2016, p. 1). Cybercrime involves using computers and
the Internet by individuals to commit crimes (Hassan et al., 2012, p. 1).
Cybercrime activities involve the use of communication devices such as
computers, telephones, cellular and other technological devices for illicit ends
such as theft, fraud, violating property rights, electronic vandalism and
unauthorised access to computer systems and networks (Kshetri, 2015a).
According to Hassan et al. (2012, p. 1) cyber terrorism, identity theft, and spam
are identified as types of cybercrimes.
Cybercrime driven by the amplification and opportunities
provided by Internet penetration mostly in developing economies (Broadhurst et
al., 2014). Broadhurst et al. (2014) state that such an increase, as well as
advancement in digital technologies, can attract a range of various criminal actors
as hacking tools has become accessible to the general public (Kumari &
Mohapatra, 2016). Cybercriminals are much more organised these days as they
share knowledge and resources such as stolen confidential data, extracts of code
or hacking tools in exchange for financial gain or other virtual goods (Lavorgna &
Sergi, 2016). Due to the lucrative nature of cybercrime, some hackers use
communities such as online platforms to organize into groups and launch
sophisticated, financially-motivated cyber-attacks (Benjamin & Hsinchun Chen,
2012, p. 1).
According to Aloul (2012), most governments in the world are introducing laws to
combat computer crime, also known as e-crime or cybercrime. The impact of
cybercrime is a concern in the modern business environment for most executives.
In 2009, the global cybercrime topped $1 trillion (Anderson et al., 2013). That
figure has significantly increased over the years to a couple of trillions. It was
predicted that the cost of cybercrime is likely to rise from $3 trillion in 2015 to $6
trillion in 2021 with one-third of companies being affected by cybercrime (32%)
(Huang et al., 2018). Von Solms & van Niekerk (2013) conclude that the victims
of cybercrime are not just companies whose intellectual property is compromised 
28
but extend to broad stakeholders within the value system such as customers,
partners, and service providers.
2.4.4 Increase of intelligent external and internal IT security threats
Chou (2013, p. 5) states that security threats can occur from both outsides of and
within organizations. According to the 2019 SolarWinds cybersecurity survey
conducted on 200 US federal government, IT decision-makers and influencers,
56% of security threats emanated from careless/untrained insiders (SolarWinds
Federal Cybersecurity Survey Report, 2019). Figure 6 below illustrates the
sources of security threats emanating from the SolarWinds report.
Figure 6: Federal cybersecurity survey report. Source: SolarWinds (2019)
About 43% cited lack of employee training/awareness, 41% indicated the
increase in the number of devices with access to data and 40% volume of network
activity were noted most often as reasons for difficulties with careless or malicious
insider threats. The report puts forward that 35% of respondents indicated a lack
of IT/security staff to be a challenge that requires urgent attention. About 31% of
respondents highlighted the increase in the use of cloud apps and 24% cited 
29
infrastructure as one of the top reasons for malicious threats that are large
because of contractors having access to systems.
Cloud computing provides necessary flexibility and efficiencies from storage,
processing and cost perspectives, however, sensitive data residing on clouds
may be exposed to cyber theft if not adequately secured (Chou, 2013). IDC
(2018) report highlight the threats such as the Distributed Denial-of-Service
(DDoS), ransomware, botnet, spam, spoofing, phishing, Advanced Persistent
Threats (APTs), viruses, worms, hacktivism, spyware, malware and statesponsored cyber warfare to be increasing cyber risk for users and companies.
According to the 2019 Verizon Data Breach Investigations Report (DBIR),
conducted on close to 42000 security incidents and over 2000 data breaches
provided by over 70 data sources, both public and private entities, across 86
countries worldwide (DBIR, 2019). About 69% perpetrated by outsiders with 39%
of breaches are due to organised crime groups and 23% to nation-states or stateaffiliated actors. About 52% of breaches featured hacking, 33% included social
attacks and 28% malware attacks. About 43% of breaches involved small
business victims, 16% public entities, 15% healthcare, and 10% financial
industry. The financial gain represented the biggest driver of data breaches with
71%, followed by 25% breaches motivated by espionage.
2.4.5 The difficulty of tracing the attackers
The escalating rate of cyber incidents and the associated cyber risks impact
negatively on the company brand, reputation, and financial stability of the
organisation (ISACA, 2016). In spite of the advancement in cybersecurity
protective technology, organisations are unable to keep up with the rate of
emerging cyber risks (Yang & Lui, 2014). The prevalence of cyberattack tools
makes it easier for an attacker to launch an attack with a limited chance of being
caught (Sawyer & Hancock, 2018). Cyber-attack can be remotely conducted and
automated to multiple victims due to sophisticated attacks thus tracing the true
source can be time resource-intensive in terms of time and effort (Kumar &
Carley, 2016). This is heightened by the use of Darknet by attackers to hide to
their true source (Choi et al., 2013) and the weakness of cyber defence by most 
30
organisations (Goel & Mehtre, 2015). Darknet typically comprises of a network of
computers with the anonymised identity of individuals and devices that spans
multiple geographies (Arizona State University et al., 2019).
Cybercrime exploits cross-national differences in the capacity to prevent, detect,
investigate, and prosecute such crime, and is fast becoming a growing global
concern (United Nations, 2004; Broadhurst et al., 2014, p. 3). In order to track
and trace the source of the attack, a different approach is required and includes
cooperation and partnership amongst nation-states (Bossong & Wagner, 2018).
Intervention could include coordinated breach reporting, effective prosecution,
and long jail terms. An Internet-based collaborative environment to protect critical
infrastructure such as financial institutions, telco providers, etc. from coordinated
cyber-attacks for organisations operating in geographically dispersed locations is
another alternative (Hung, 2016).
The cyberspace anonymity poses a challenge and makes geography inapt as
cybercrime does not occur within the territory of a single country thus an attack
could be launched anywhere and the victims could be in any other part of the
world (Brenner, 2006; Nawang, 2017). This view is consistent with Lipson (2002,
p. 18) who posit that s poses a
grave threat to the global information society, the progress of an informationbased international economy, and the advancement of global collaboration and
cooperation in all areas of human endeavour. Due to the , it
is time-consuming to build anomaly detection models to detect unknown attacks
due to low detection accuracy (Choi et al., 2013).
2.4.6 Limited cybercrime laws
According to Arfi & Agarwal (2013, p. 1), cybercrime is a kind of crime that
happens in "cyberspace", between computers and the Internet. Most people have
little or no knowledge of cybercrime due to lack of awareness as well as sufficient
regulatory framework (E Kritzinger & Solms, 2013) and its potential severe impact
on society at large (Arfi & Agarwal, 2013) which includes the direct cost of
victimisation, emotional harm, and associated costs (Hutchings, 2014).
Cybercrime actors are not easily identifiable due to false identities they use online
31
(Goldman & McCoy, 2016). There is no link between the real person and the
perpetrator, as a result, poses a challenge to identify, arrest, and prosecute cyber
criminals that are mostly outside of the law enforcement jurisdiction (Bayoumy,
2018).
According to Armstrong & Forde (2003, p. 1) money laundering, drug dealing,
terrorism, hacking, fraud, child pornography and the distribution of objectionable
material are crimes that are perpetrated using the Internet. This view is
supported by Arfi & Agarwal (2013, pp. 1 2) who state cybercrimes are
committed through the use of computer and Internet remotely and include child
pornography, cyber laundering, cyberstalking, cyber terrorism, cyber theft, and
spam. These crimes can be categorised into two parts i.e. local cybercrime and
transnational cybercrime (Dupont, 2018). Local cybercrime physically occurs in
the same sovereign territory and transnational cybercrime occurs in different
territories for both the perpetrator and the victim.
South Africa has enacted statutes such the Electronic Communications and
Transactions Act (ECT), Minimum Information Security Standard, the Regulation
of Interception of Communications and Provision of Communication-related
information Act, Protection of Personal Information Act, Cybercrimes and
Cybersecurity Bill, etc. to regulate and counter effect of the cyberattacks
(ww.justice.gov.za, 2019). South Africa has the responsibility to promote
cybersecurity awareness as the State can be held liable for cybercrimes
emanating inside the country (Grobler et al., 2012). This is due to the international
treaties that the country has signed which oblige the country to fulfil its
commitments hence the national cybersecurity policy framework.
2.4.7 Limited IT security knowledge among internet users
Lack of cybersecurity awareness is a concern for organisations in all sectors as
security is multi-faceted and requires diverse expertise to effectively manage the
risk (Hanus & Wu, 2016). This is probably the biggest challenge faced by
organisations. As such, a security policy can only be effective if an organisation
engages its staff on security awareness that is understandable and employees
accept necessary precautions. According to Shaw, Chen, Harris, & Huang
32
(2009), security awareness is about users understanding and appreciating the
importance of cybersecurity as well as their individual and collective
responsibilities in line with approved policies to protect company assets (Collins,
2017). Increasing concerns include but not limited to sharing of corporate
computing resources with non-employees, using corporate computing resources
for non-work related tasks, downloading and installing unsupported and pirated
software, opening unsolicited email and attachments.
Inadequate understanding of security can expose the organisation to security
threats and vulnerabilities that can lead to security incidents (Muller, 2015). In
order to protect organisational assets and profits, organisations must intensify
efforts for improved information security by instituting cybersecurity awareness
programs to ensure that employees are informed of cybersecurity risks (Gcaza &
Solms, 2017). This could be an effective mechanism to lessen the rising threat of
cybersecurity breaches and attacks on company infrastructure. In order to ensure
holistic awareness and understanding of security threats facing information
assets of the organisation is achieved, security awareness must be extended to
individuals tasked with managing information security (Tianfield, 2016). Susanto
& Almunawar (2012, p. 4) state that security awareness means stakeholders
comprehend that there is the potential to deliberately or accidentally steal,
damage, or misuse the data that is stored in a company's computer system.
Thus, protecting the
any possible security breach is significant for the continuing sustainability of the
organisation.
Education and training must inform employees
as well as initiate activities to protect against policy violations and must become
a formal daily task of employees in an organisation (Crumpler & Lewis, 2019).
This must be done in a coordinated and on-going fashion in order to inculcate the
right culture within an organisation (Sutherland, 2017). As drivers of change
management and culture, top management play a significant role in ensuring
organisational security level through planning and reasonable resource allocation
(Larson, 2015). 
33
2.4.8 Proposition 1
The awareness of effective cybersecurity technology controls complement cyber
insurance to reduce the impact of cyber-attacks in the South African industry.
2.5 Cyber risk management
Gordon, Loeb, & Sohail (2003, p. 1) state that the use of the Internet has
significantly increased the vulnerability of organisations to information theft,
vandalism, and denial-of-service attacks, thereby bringing information security
issues to the forefront of the agenda for corporate executives. This suggests that
cyber risk is quite high on the agenda for executives as risk management is
interlinked with the long-term sustainability of the company. Bouveret (2018, p.
12) defines risk as a combination of consequences and likelihood where the
likelihood is a function of threat levels and the ease of exploitation of existing
vulnerabilities :
Risk = f (Threat, Vulnerability, Consequences)
According to Gordon et al. (2003, p. 3) the process of assessing
risk, taking steps to reduce risk to an acceptable level, and maintaining that level
of risk operational risks to information and
technology assets that have consequences affecting the confidentiality,
availability, or integrity of information or information systems (Eling & Wirfs,
2015). Therefore, cyber risk is a major concern among public and private
corporations due to its systemic nature and must be managed as such (Bouveret,
2018).
According to Toregas & Zahn (2014), cybersecurity is a business problem and
requires that senior IT executives translate the risks of cyber-attacks into
numbers that contribute to providing objective information as opposed to common
fear, uncertainty and doubt security personnel employs. Bohme &
Schwartz (2010) state that cyber risk must be managed through the usual
approach to business risks i.e. eliminate, mitigate, absorb and transfer. 
34
Business risk landscape has increased significantly with the use of the Internet
as more and more services are accessible online.
As depicted in Figure 7 below, the cyber-risk management framework requires a
risk assessment to take place to determine the high-value vulnerabilities that
should receive security resources.
To optimally assess the risk and determine cost-benefit for security investment
Gordon, Loeb & Sohail (2003) suggest that a value-vulnerability grid should be
used. Figure 7 below illustrates a value-vulnerability grid.
Vulnerability
Value
High Medium Low
High 1 2 3
Medium 4 5 6
Low 7 8 9
Figure 7: Value-vulnerability grid Source: Adapted from (Gordon et al., 2003)
In order to effectively leverage scarce information security resources,
information falling into boxes 1, 2, 4 and 5 should generally receive the largest
share of the information security budget (Gordon et al., 2003, p. 4). The priority
boxes mentioned above indicate medium and high ratings for both the value and
vulnerability hence focused security investments.
Kopp et al. (2017, p.2) posit that firms must actively manage cyber risk and invest
in cybersecurity, and to some extent transfer and pool their risks through cyber
liability insurance policies. As such, Toregas & Zahn (2014, p.5) proposes a
return on security investment (ROSI) to measure which takes into account that
security is not usually an investment that provides profit but loss prevention
Gordon et al. (2003) argue that the higher levels of security protection will require
lower levels of cyber-risk insurance (and vice versa). Hence cyber insurance, the
transfer of financial risk associated with network and computer incidents to a third
party (Bohme & Schwartz, 2010; Franke, 2017). Figure 8 below illustrates the
cyber insurance decision plan:
35
Figure 8: Cyber insurance decision plan Source: Adapted from (Gordon et al.,
2003)
According to Gordon et al. (2003), a logical cyber insurance decision plan needs
implementation and managerial support. The associated steps include
conducting an information security risk audit, assessing current coverage,
examining available policies, and selecting a policy.
2.5.1 Cyber insurance as a mechanism to manage cyber risk
Cyber insurance risk policies provide cover for losses that occur as a result of
information security beaches (Gordon et al., 2003). Cyber risk possesses unique
qualities, including interdependent security and correlated failure. (Vicevich,
2018). Losses due to cyber risk are frequently small and independent but they
(Bouveret, 2018). A cyber-attack can result in data loss, reputation loss, and
hinder a business from performing its operational activities thus impact the
financial performance of the organisation (Joshi, Joshi, & Mittal,2019). Therefore,
hacking plays a significant role in cyberattacks on organisations.
While security protection measures may limit cyber-attacks, an alternative way to
manage risk is to transfer the risk to the cyber insurance service provider in the
exchange of paying a premium (Yang & Lui, 2014). Therefore, cyber insurance
can be an effective instrument to transfer cyber risk and complement the benefits
from technological controls that safeguard the information and network assets in
organisations (Bandyopadhyay, 2012b, p. 1).
Cyber insurance can improve cybersecurity through the adoption of best
practices that could be required as a caveat prior to insurance coverage (Kesan
et al., 2005; Kesan & Hayes, 2017). It assists in ensuring that companies
appreciate decent security controls and the cost of lack of good security thereby
Conduct an
Information
Security Risk
Audit
Assess
Current
Insurance
Coverage
Examine and
Evaluate
Available
Policies
Select a
Policy
36
resulting in larger investment and enhancements in cybersecurity. To achieve the
above-stated objective, cyber insurance can add value in pre and post-breach
perspectives.
a. Pre-breach
It is suggested that policies must offer premium reductions or discounts for taking
actions that reduce the probability of a loss as a result of the cyber risk (Gordon
et al., 2003). Cyber insurance can be used as an incentive to improve information
security posture within an organisation (Khalili et al., 2018). This will serve as an
incentive for organisations to take coverage for cyber risks. Various models are
suggested, such as partnerships between Original Equipment Manufacturer
(OEM) and insurance companies to provide benefit to client organisations
(Sommerrock et al., 2018).
Insurers can work with companies to design bespoke cyber insurance products
thereby increasing awareness, improving the information security posture,
recommend best practices
to reduce the effect and fix the breach. This proactive approach will result in a
reduced security incident when it occurs.
b. Post-breach
A growing trend of the partnership between cyber insurance and third-party
service providers (such as OEM, specialists and security experts) is taking shape
in the industry to collaborate for loss prevention and post-breach services
(Camillo, 2017). According to Herr (2019, p. 1), AIG partners with cybersecurity
service providers such as CrowdStrike and Darktrace to make risk assessments
of their clients (Business Wire Staff 2017).
In figure 9 below (Bandyopadhyay et al., 2009, p. 3) provides a high-level in the
cyber insurance claims process. Post-breach, insurers offer a number of services
to insureds (customers), such as crisis management, IT forensic, security advice
and legal consultation.
37
Figure 9: Proposed cyber insurance claims process Source: (Bandyopadhyay et
al., 2009)
Figure 9 above illustrate an eight-step process to be followed when processing a
cyber insurance claim (Bandyopadhyay et al., 2009). According to Sommerrock
et al. (2018), insurance policies provide services that evaluate the impact,
investigate the attack, and incident response and recovery plans, provide
forensics, public relations and communications support, notify customers, and
identify appropriate mitigating actions to strengthen resilience in the future
(Woods & Simpson, 2017).
First, when the cyber incident occurs, the CIO is notified of the by the CISO.
Thereafter the matters are disclosed to legal to obtain an opinion and public
relation to managing communication to external stakeholders. The events are
then
loss to the finance unit. Woods & Simpson (2017) adds that insurer partner with
cybersecurity experts to limit the impact after the cyber-attack and strive to
institute the cause and extent of the loss prior to underwriting the policyholder.
The claim is filed to an insurer who then appoints an IT assessor/adjuster who
then adjusts/audits the claim and notifies the CIO, CISO and the corporate risk
management unit. As part of cyber insurance contracts, coverage for losses from
other information and network assets could be included as well as the cost of 
38
victim notification, liability compensation and cyber extortion (Bandyopadhyay,
2012b). The assessor notifies the insurer who then decides on whether to
pay/close the claim.
2.5.2 Cyber risk in South Africa
According to statistics from the South African Banking Risk Information Centre
(SABRIC), in 2017 there were 13,438 incidents across banking apps, online
banking, and mobile banking which cost the industry more than R 250 000 000 in
gross losses . Incidents from January to
August 2018, demonstrate a 64% increase in gross loss. However, when
comparing January to August 2017 to the same period in 2018, mobile banking
incidents showed an increase of more than 100%, with gross losses of R23 593
631, while online banking incidents showed an increase of 44% with gross losses
of R89 368 722.
For the same period, banking app incidents increased by 20%, with gross losses
of R70 156 364. SIM swops saw 4040 incidents from January to August 2017,
and 8254 incidents from January to August 2018, an increase of 104%. Modus
operandi includes social engineering, phishing, vishing or the installation of
criminal to steal sufficient personal information to access their online banking
profile. According to SABRIC, there is an upward trend in the following frauds:
a) Phishing, Vishing & SMishing
b) SIM Swops
c) Change of Bank Details Scam
d) Email Hacking
According to the IBM (2017) cost of data breach study conducted to 419
companies
$128 million for FY2017 which is higher than the four year average of $115
million. The study predicted that organisations in South Africa, India and Brazil
are most likely to experience a material data breach involving 10,000 or more
records over the next 24 months with South Africa having the highest probability 
39
of experiencing a data breach. As such companies such as Liberty, ViewFines,
City of Johannesburg, etc. have experienced a data breach in the aforementioned
period (Moyo, 2018). According to the report from (Fin24.com, 2018), there were
five data breaches affecting South Africans i.e.
a) Liberty email hack
b) ViewFines licence details
c) Facebook scandal
d) SA
e) Ster2.5.3 Proposition 2
An organisational approach to cybersecurity determines cyber-risk management
support.
2.6 Cyber insurance market
the transfer of financial risk associated with
network and computer incidents to a third party
exchange for a premium (Toregas & Zahn, 2014, p.6). Toregas & Zahn (2014)
posit that the market for cyber insurance policies is at its infancy and expected to
grow in the future. According to (Bandyopadhyay, 2012b, p. 1), cyber insurance
refers to the specific insurance contracts that provide coverage against loss from
theft of data and IS assets.
To complement security protective technology, the residual risk that remains is
transferable to a cyber insurance provider. As such, the cyber insurance market
will mature as more corporates begin to see the value it adds to the business.
Hurtaud, Flamand, Hounka (2015) state that there has been a steady increase in
the size of the cyber insurance market as the U.S. constitutes about 90% of global
cyber insurance market with early adopters being financial services companies,
retailers and healthcare organisations with large amounts of personally
identifiable information (PII). 
40
In comparison to the EU, the growth is due to the mandatory data breach
notification laws in the US. Hurtaud et al. (2015) point out that with the adoption
of the GDPR, the EU is likely to catch up with US counterparts as there are
requirements to speedily notify authorities when breaches to personal data occur.
The cyber insurance market is projected to be a multi-billion dollar industry which
is accelerated by the growing cyber-attacks on companies (Herr, 2019). This view
is affirmed by further observations that suggest that the market is likely to reach
$20 billion or more by 2025 (Camillo, 2017) and over 70 cyber insurance carriers
around the world (Khalili et al., 2018). Cyber insurance enables companies to
manage cyber risks by transferring part of their risks to insurers in exchange for
paying a premium (Kesan et al., 2004; Kesan & Hayes, 2017).
Bohme & Kataria (2006) agrees with the above prediction and augments that
the leading
providers of cyber-insurance in the market. Additionally, other prominent market
-Comprehensive,
(Gordon et al., 2003).
Camillo (2017) contends that the cyber insurance market today has matured
substantially and has become specialised and innovative in terms of product and
service offerings. This includes products that cater to small- to medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs), the mid-market sector as well as very large multinational
corporations. The insurance industry recognizes cybersecurity as an issue at the
national and international levels (Vicevich, 2018). As such, companies of all sizes
are beginning to appreciate the benefits of cyber insurance as a risk transfer
mechanism.
The literature review notes that not all views are uniform and optimistic,
particularly earlier studies have divergent views compared to recent studies.
Points of divergence on the growth and size of the cyber insurance market are
prevalent. For instance, Toregas & Zahn (2014) state that the growth of the cyber
insurance market has somewhat been tentative and slow in developed
economies such as the US. Gordon et al. (2003) supplement that cyber-risk 
41
insurance is a new product with underwriters being hesitant to offer large policies
(relative to traditional insurance).
However, Lloyds offers limits for its e-Comprehensive policy of $50,000,000 and
gives custom quotes up to $200,000,000. This observation is consistent with
Bandyopadhyay et al. (2009) who posit that cyber insurance products remain
underutilized after more than a decade later of commercialisation. This suggests
that the forecasting of the evolution of the cyber insurance market needs
adjustment.
Since cyber insurance product and service offerings are fairly new in the industry,
particularly in the context of South Africa, availability of data on cyber risk and
therefore cyber insurance is scarce (Bouveret, 2018). This could be attributed to
the fact that institutions that have been compromised do not disclose incidences
(Symantec, 2016; Eling & Schnell, 2016). This view is echoed by Bouveret (2018)
who states that data on cyber incidents is scarce and therefore limited
quantitative analyses of cyber risk.
Lack of common standards to record them is cited as the primary factor, and firms
have no incentives to report them (Bouveret, 2018). In the South African context,
legislation such as the Protection of Personal Information (POPI) could change
that narrative, as firms will be required to report each incident to the regulator
(POPIA, 2013). Therefore, residual cybersecurity risks are mitigated using cyber
insurance (Bandyopadhyay & Mookerjee, 2017).
Based on the views expressed above, for and against the cyber insurance market
size and its potential growth, in South Africa the industry is likely to grow due to
the introduction of legislation such as POPI, growing data breaches and cyberattacks as highlighted above. Indeed, the cyber insurance market is still in its
early stages. However, as Eling & Schnell (2016, p.9) point out that as market
development continues, the risk pools will become larger and more data will be
available. Accordingly, future prospects look set to increase upward as the
industry matures (Woods & Simpson, 2017).
42
2.6.1 Types of cyber insurance liability covers
According to (Hurtaud, Flamand, & Hounka, 2015, p. 3), cyber insurance can
coverage in three broad areas:
a) Liability for a data breach or loss
b) Remediation costs (e.g. for investigating the breach, notifying
affected parties, etc.)
c) Regulatory fines/penalties and settlement costs
Camillo (2017) augments that prominent in most cyber insurance policy covers
include cyber exposures, which are
(Toregas & Zahn, 2014). Bouveret (2018) states that cyber risk can impact first
(the target) and third parties (a counterpart to the target).
According to Gordon et al. (2003, p. 4), the first-party risk takes place when the
insured is faced with the possibility of a loss of profits as a result of the theft of
trade secrets, destruction of the property (including hardware, software, and
data), and extortion from hackers. Whereas the third party is due to direct or
indirect damage to organisations infrastructure, reputation or revenue because of
an attack on systems and data. Table 1 below provides a comparison of different
cyber insurance providers, product offering as well as types of policy coverage.
Table 1: Comparison of cyber insurance policies (Marotta, Martinelli,
Yautsiukhin, & Nanni, 2015)
43
As can been seen in table 1 above, not all insurance carriers cover the same
exposures. Largely, there is a trade-off in terms of the covered risk. Such
exposures include loss or damage to digital assets, data recovery, business
interruption, notification costs, liability in respect of data breaches, multimedia
liability, employee dishonesty, cyber extortion and regulatory defence costs
(Camillo, 2017, p. 4). Figure 10 below illustrates the most covered losses due to
cyber-attacks.
Figure 10: Most covered losses Source: (Romanosky et al., 2019)
As shown in figure 10 above, the top five most covered losses are the cost of
claims expenses, penalties; public relations services; notification to affected
individuals; service to affected individuals and business income loss (Romanosky
et al., 2019). With the exception of business income loss, the top four covered
losses relate to external stakeholders.
According to Romanosky et al. (2019) cost of claims, expenses related to
penalties, defence and settlement costs whereas public relations services include
advertising or special promotions as well as media briefing. It is unsustainable to
cover all possible risks; figure 11 below illustrates the cyber insurance exclusions.
44
Figure 11: Policy exclusions Source: (Romanosky et al., 2019)
According to Romanosky et al. (2019, p. 15), most exclusions relate to criminal,
fraudulent, or dishonest acts, errors or omissions, intentional violation of a law,
any ongoing criminal investigation or proceedings, and payment of fines,
penalties, or fees. Additionally, some policies provide further exclusions for
infringement of patents, disclosures of trade secrets or confidential information,
or violations of securities laws.
The cyber insurance market faces various challenges, with the setting of
premiums being one of the biggest issues (Toregas & Zahn, 2014). This view is
exacerbated by the belief, as Toregas & Zahn (2014) point out, that risks
associated with cyber-attacks are not quantifiable and thus, not insurable.
Vicevich (2018) concludes that the insurance industry is unable to pool risk.
Figure 12 below illustrates the cyber insurance premiums.
45
Figure 12: Cyber insurance premium Source: (Herr, 2019)
As shown in figure 12 above, there has been an exponential growth in the cyber
insurance premium. Between 2012 and 2014 there was an exponential growth of
300% wherein the total premiums from coverage jumped from US$835 million to
US$2 billion in 2014 and an estimated US$4 billion in 2017 (Knockless 2015;
Herr, 2019). It is suggested that exponential growth was due to demand from
small and medium companies. Over 90% of insurers noted growth in demand
between 2012 and 2014, mainly from the retail sector (Advisen Ltd. 2014, pp. 4
5; (Herr, 2019, p. 9).
2.6.2 Drivers of cyber insurance
A growing appreciation of cyber vulnerabilities did not immediately translate into
demand for insurance (Camillo, 2017). Despite the awareness of the cyber risks
and risk damage they can cause to the organisation, investment in security, as
well as availability of cyber insurance, is still scarce thus the rampant cyberattacks (Yang & Lui, 2014). Cyber insurance is the outsourcing of low frequency,
high impact risk (Mukhopadhyay et al., 2013). An opportunity exists for
institutions, insurers, legislators, and regulators to create an environment
conducive for information sharing for reporting. Firms that are prone to cyberattacks are more likely to take the cyber insurance (Gordon et al., 2003).
46
Organisations can adopt cyber insurance as a management tool for reducing the
risk of financial losses associated with Internet-related breaches.
Cyber insurance plays an important role in improving the cybersecurity control
environment and it mutually beneficial for both the insurers and insureds (Woods
& Simpson, 2017). Policy-makers and well as insurance providers have a role to
play in the sustainability of the cyber insurance industry. Woods & Simpson
(2017, p. 3) posit that a fragmented policy landscape could provide an additional
barrier to the growth of the market. Therefore, public-private partnership is
essential to ensure that there is a consideration of the interests of all stakeholders
in development cybersecurity insurance market and policy measures. Cyber
insurance investment translates to improved security due to the adoption of more
secure practices within an organisation thereby reducing cyber risks (Kesan &
Hayes, 2017).
Organisations are beginning to appreciate the value that the cyber insurance
provides i.e. financial cover in the event losses occur due to a security incident
(Joshi, Joshi, & Mittal, 2019). This assists an organisation to safeguard against
the threat posed by the malicious actors. Joshi et al. (2019) do, however, point
out that in order for the cyber insurance to increase adoption by companies,
disagreements on coverages and exclusions rules needs to be addressed
between insurance providers and insured customer. It can be deduced that
interpretation of policy provisions by insured companies and gaps due to lack of
cybersecurity by insurance service providers create challenges during a claim.
To address this deficit, Joshi et al. (2019), proposes an automated approach that
utilises machine learning and artificial intelligence to determine current security
controls thereby arriving at an informed policy coverage. This will ensure that all
stakeholders have the same understanding of what the cyber insurance policy
cover entails. According to Hurtaud, Flamand, Hounka (2015, p. 3) cyber
insurance adoption among organisations remains at a low level in spite of the
increase in cyber incidents. In the US, it is estimated that 65% of publicly-traded
companies do not have cyber insurance (Hurtaud et al., 2015). This is an
incongruity as 63% of decision-makers indicate that cyber risk is one of their
biggest challenges. According to Hurtaud et al. (2015), it is due to the lack of 
47
cyber insurance awareness, underwriting complexity, and the challenge of
aligning insurance with risk exposure.
2.6.3 Challenges of cyber insurance
Cyber insurance serves as an additional layer to cyber resilience however the
lack of cogent and systemic approach to risk management could pose a
challenge for an organisation if left unattended (Huang et al., 2018). Various
scholars have identified different challenges that the cyber insurance market
faces. Bandyopadhyay et al. (2009) cite the following three challenges as the
most common reason for the cyber insurance market slow growth:
a) Insufficient attack-loss data
b) Lack of product-market experience
c) Accounting difficulties
Furthermore, a 2018 study conducted by the MIT Sloan School of Management
and the Boston Consulting Group to 45 interviews with underwriters, brokers,
reinsurers, and customers in the U.S., Europe, and Asia added the following
challenges facing the cyber insurance market (Sommerrock et al., 2018).
a) The unique nature of cyber risk.
b) The difficulty in measuring and understanding accumulation risk.
c) The limited availability and sharing of cyber incidents and claims data.
d) The impact of regulation.
e) The effect of new technologies on cybersecurity.
The underdevelopment for the cyber insurance market is due to
lack of experience with cyber risk and scarce actuarial data impeding economical
pricing (Wirfs, 2016). The lack of standardisation reflects the fact that cyber
insurance is a relatively new cover, its evolution out of existing products (e.g. tech
E&O and property insurance) and the competitive nature of the business
(Camillo, 2017). Data on cyber risk are scarce since companies are either
unaware of a cyber-attack (Toregas & Zahn, 2014) or the victims are reluctant to 
48
report such events. Eling & Schnell (2016) argue that most empirical papers on
cyber risk rely on data breach information (not loss information).
Yang & Lui (2014, p. 2) highlight two main challenges associated with cyber
insurance i.e. adverse selection and moral hazard. The challenge with adverse
selection arises when the insurance provider is unable to distinguish between
high and low-risk hosts. Woods & Simpson (2017) adds that adverse selection
occurs where a firm may apply for cyber insurance in the knowledge that they are
relatively more exposed to cyber risk. Figure 13 below illustrates the different
types of protections that the company should explore.
Figure 13: Cyber protection Adapted from (Kesan et al., 2005)
As shown in figure 13, the combination of self-protection and insurance raises the
problem of moral hazard, in which nodes covered by insurance may take fewer
secure measures, or even falsify their loss (Yang & Lui, 2014). Moral hazard
happens when the insurance provider cannot observe the protection level of
nodes (Yang & Lui, 2014) and can be addressed by the ongoing relationship
between the insurer and the policyholder (Woods & Simpson, 2017). Table 2
below summarises cyber insurance challenges based on three categories:
Self-insurance Self-protection
Cyber insurance
Substitutes
High demand for
one affects the
other
Complements
If premium tied to self-protection
level. Cyber insurance increases
self-protection i.e. no moral
hazard
Substitutes
Availability of one would
discourage the other. Selfinsurance likely to create a
moral hazard
49
Table 2: Cyber insurance challenges Source: Toregas & Zahn (2014)
Category Challenge
Legal framework uncertainty about liability
 spotty coverage and insurance
loopholes
 ODFNRIVWDQGDUGVRUEDG
standards
Conceptual issues quantification of risks and costs
 cyber risk not seen as a
business problem or
underestimated
 Correlated, interrelated and
global risks
 lack of re-insurance
Setting premiums lack of actuarial data
 uncertainty about normative
standards
 premiums too high
These factors have led to conservatism by providers that err on the safe side by
overpricing their products (Bandyopadhyay et al., 2009). If that trend grows, the
cyber insurance market may be unsustainable (Vicevich, 2018).
2.6.4 Proposition 3
Compliance with regulations enables organisations to adopt cyber insurance in
the South African industry to reduce the risk of financial losses associated with
cyber breaches.
2.7 Conclusion of the Literature Review
In this chapter, a review of the literature on cyber insurance was conducted.
Background of cybersecurity was provided to highlight the impact on
organisations. A TOE framework
50
the research objectives (Tornatzky et al., 1990). A link between cybersecurity and
digital technology was unpacked to illustrate the risks to organisations that come
with emerging technologies.
The effects of cyber risks were explored and cyber insurance was proposed to
complement existing controls to minimize financial loss. A brief exploration of
cyber risks in the context of South Africa was presented and various incidents
highlighted. The global size of the market was presented and types of liability
covers were discussed. Various cybersecurity threats that influence factors cyber
insurance were discussed as well as benefits to organisations.
Cyber insurance is without challenges, as such, drivers of adoption were
highlighted. This study is based on the adapted (Tornatzky et al., 1990)
theoretical framework called Technology-Organisation-Environment (TOE)
framework. The theoretical perspectives are used to identify factors influencing
cyber insurance adoption in the public and private sectors in South Africa. Three
propositions that will be tested and validated through a qualitative approach are
listed below:
2.7.1 Proposition 1
The awareness of effective cybersecurity technology controls complement cyber
insurance to reduce the impact of cyber-attacks in the South African industry.
2.7.2 Proposition 2
An organisational approach to cybersecurity determines cyber risk management
support.
2.7.3 Proposition 3
Compliance with regulations enables organisations to adopt cyber insurance in
the South African industry to reduce the risk of financial losses associated with
cyber breaches.
51
CHAPTER 3.
3.1 Introduction
The literature review, Chapter 2, enabled the study to gain deeper insights into
cybersecurity, cyber risk management, and cyber insurance theories. This
chapter presents the research approach and the high-level design of this study.
The data were collected using structured interviews based on the questions in
Appendix A. The research questions were designed based on the constructs of
the TOE framework and aligned with three propositions. This was done in an
attempt to gain in-depth industry perception on the adoption of cyber insurance
in the public and private sectors in South Africa. Thematic content analysis was
employed to analyse data.
The study will ensure the highest regard to ethical considerations to ensure the
transferability and credibility of the research methodology employed. Therefore,
the purpose of this study is to present an understanding of the constructs in
charge of proving or disproving the propositions based on the real-world
perception of the factors influencing the adoption of cyber insurance in public and
private sectors in South Africa.
3.2 Research approach
This study employed a qualitative research approach to explore and understand
the meaning participants assign to the concept of cyber insurance in South Africa
(Creswell & Creswell, 2017). The rationale is due to the to
socio-economic factors influencing the adoption of cyber insurance in the public
and private sectors in South Africa. The research approach used to collect data
was predominantly qualitative for the nominated demographic who are assumed
to have an understanding of the study based on their work experience in the
space. The study employs an inductive approach as it provides methodical
flexibility through observing emerging patterns and themes from the interview
questions (Liu, 2016). 
52
3.3 Research design
The research design is grounded on the propositions that were framed using the
TOE framework as an overall guide and feedback from open-ended semistructured interview questions conducted to 10 participants that were deemed to
possess the necessary skills, experience, and understanding of cyber insurance
(Creswell & Creswell, 2017). The research study design comprises of research
objectives, which lead to the three propositions using the interview questions
which is most suitable for a qualitative study to make an inquiry on the cyber
insurance concept (Flick, 2014).
Underpinned by the TOE framework to identify factors influencing the adoption of
cyber insurance in the public and private sectors in South Africa, the premise on
semi-structured interviews to elucidate socio-economic on the three propositions
made (Creswell & Creswell, 2017). In line with the research objectives and to
develop theory from the ground, the study uses the inductive approach with an
intention to pursue South African industry insights (Thomas, 2003). Figure 14
below illustrates the high-level research design supported by the three
propositions derived from the TOE framework.
Figure 14: Summary of research design
As shown in figure 14 above, the research study has adapted the TOE framework
(Bandyopadhyay, 2012b) which translates to three propositions centred on the
technology, organisation, and environment. The study is conducted by
investigationg individuals that are positioned at strategic, tactical and operational
Technology
Environment
Organisation
Proposition 1
Proposition 2
Proposition 3
Structured
interviews
Thematic analysis
Data collection TOE Framework Propositions Data analysis
53
levels in organisations. These levels are operationalised through organisational
cross cutting constructs such as technology, processes and sytems to drive
organisational objectives.Structured interview questions are designed using the
elements of the TOE framework and thematic analysis will be used to inductively
analyse the findings from the semi-structured interview questions (Creswell &
Creswell, 2017). Data analysis is based on the thematic content analysis to
extract essences and essentials of participant meanings (Miles et al., 2014).
3.4 Data collection methods
The data collection method employs semi-structured interviews as the method
best suited for the description of the factors influencing the adoption of cyber
insurance in the public and private sectors in South Africa. There are 10 face-toface semi-structured interview questions that are used to probe 10 participants to
gain deeper insight into cyber insurance adoption in the South African industry
(Creswell & Creswell, 2017).
The emphasis was to ask probing questions to gain deeper insight into the cyber
insurance adoption in the South African industry using the TOE framework on IT
professionals (Harrell & Bradley, 2009). The participants are purposefully
selected as they have the necessary understating of the research problem and
questions due to their experience in IT (Creswell & Creswell, 2017). Collected
data were used to triangulate in order to nullify or affirm the research
theoretical perception (Langa, 2016).
3.5 Population and sample
3.5.1 Population
The population consists of all IT professionals in the public and private sectors
(including cyber insurance providers) in the South African industry operating at
strategic, tactical and operational organisation levels to enable triangulation
(Creswell & Creswell, 2017). The rationalisation was to probe the level of 
54
understanding, knowledge, and experience in various levels of cyber insurance
concept thus answering semi-structured interview questions (Taherdoost, 2016).
3.5.2 Sample and sampling method
Qualitatively, 10 participants were interviewed comprising Chief Information
Officer (CIO), Chief Information Security Officers, Executive Manager, Heads of
Department, Information Security Manager, IT Audit Manager, Cyber Risk, and
Risk Consulting, as well as Principal Specialist responsible for cybersecurity,
cyber risk and cyber insurance from selected organisations. The selected sample
was justified based on the primary aim to understand the factors influencing cyber
insurance adoption in South Africa industry. The study focused on companies
operating in the South African public and private sector albeit some organisations
have global operations thus assigning an international perspective to enhance
diverse viewpoints.
The study employed purposive random sampling through the use of the LinkedIn
professional network that is small in the South African cyber insurance industry
adoption context and will be covered in-depth (Miles et al., 2014). Table 3 below
highlights the profile of interview respondents.
Table 3: Profile of respondents
Description of respondent type Number to be
sampled
Divisional Head: ICT Governance & Compliance 1
Chief Information Security Officer 2
Manager: Information Security 1
IT Audit Manager 1
Executive Manager: Enterprise Architecture, IT
Governance, risk and compliance
1
Head of IT 1
Principal Specialist 1
Client Manager: Cyber Risk and Risk Consulting 1
55
Chief Information Officer 1
TOTAL number of respondents 10
The sample size of 10 participates was reasoned satisfactory as the information
required for the research study was responded with sufficient assertion thus
reaching the saturation point. Saturation occurs where no new discernments from
the added analysis are found (Bowen, 2008) or all angles of the study have been
sufficiently covered (Fusch & Ness, 2015). In terms of this specific study, the
saturation point was grasped at the eighth interview with the remaining two
interviews conducted to confirm the saturation point had been reached.
3.6 The research instrument
The research instrument was based on the qualitative method using the semistructured interviews that were linked to the three propositions stemming from the
TOE theoretical framework (Talmy, 2010). Ten semi-structured interview
questions based on TOE framework constructs are designed in English for ease
of understanding by participants and interpretation. Qualitative research interview
an interview, whose purpose is to gather descriptions of the lifeworld of the interviewee with respect to interpretation of the meaning of the
described phenomena (Opdenakker, 2006, p. 1).
Appendix A illustrates the semi-structured interview questions. The advantage of
semi-structured interview questions is that it is conducted through face-to-face as
well as using the telephone. Face-to-face and telephone semi-structured
interviews have the advantage of being scheduled at the appropriate place and
time as well as spontaneous response with frequent follow-up questions to probe
further (Opdenakker, 2006). Out of 10 interviews, nine were conducted face-toface as participants are located in Gauteng Province and only one was conducted
using telephone due to time and availability constraints albeit being located in
Gauteng Province. The disadvantages of telephone interviews are that the
participant is not visible and there is a possibility of communication interruption.
To alleviate the loss of communication, all interviews were recorded using a
recording device with the permission of participants and transcribed using Otter.ai 
56
web application. Appendix B provides the participant information sheet and
consent form.
3.7 Procedure for data collection
The procedure of research encompasses open-ended semi-structured interview
questions; a collection of data occurred at preferred location,
creating data analysis inductively from basic codes to general themes, and
arriving at interpretations of the meaning of the data thus enabling report writing
(Creswell & Creswell, 2017).
The technique used to collect data on the purposive sample was semi-structured
face-to-face and to some extent, telephonic interviews wherein participants were
given an opportunity to express their experiences, understanding, and views on
the cyber insurance phenomenon (Hox & Boeije, 2005). Prior to the
commencement of the interview process, the interviewer explained the purpose
of the interview and requested the interviewees to familiarise themselves with the
Participant Information Sheet to complete and sign the consent form (Appendix
B). Ten semi-structured interview questions were designed and developed based
on the TOE framework (Appendix A). Participants were identified using the
LinkedIn professional network to ensure experience, understanding, and views
on the cyber insurance phenomenon. Contact of participants occurred through
email to arrange for an interview session that occurred between 28 October 2019
to 18 November 2019. Out of ten interviews, nine were face-to-face and only one
was telephonic due to time constraints on the part of the participant.
Whilst notes were taken, all interviews were recorded using a recording device
with permission from the interviewee. The interview started with the researcher
providing an introduction to the research study and proceeded with open-ended
questions that were semi-structured to allow the participant to provide prompt
feedback. Where necessary, follow up questions were asked to probe for further
insight thus enriching the data collection technique. Towards the end of the
interview, all interviewees were thanked for their time and insightful contribution
to the research study. The recorded data was then uploaded on the Otter.ai web 
57
application to transcribe recordings. The output of the transcript was compared
to recordings as well as the notes taken to ensure accuracy and completeness
that became useful for data analysis and interpretation.
3.8 Data analysis and interpretation
The qualitative method chosen follows a systemic approach wherein purposeful
sampling of 10 participants led to the collection of data using open-ended semistructured interview questions that were analysed using thematic analysis
followed by interpretation of findings (Creswell & Creswell, 2017). Recording of
10 interviews was uploaded on Otter.ai web application to facilitate transcriptions.
Microsoft Excel was used to extract and present raw data to enable coding.
Coding in qualitative analysis enables breaking down data to develop expansive
categories and themes to reach saturation as well as conducting triangulation
thus eliminating research bias (Yeh & Inman, 2007). Saturation occurs where no
new discernments from the added analysis are found (Bowen, 2008) or all angles
of the study have been sufficiently covered (Fusch & Ness, 2015). In terms of this
specific study, the saturation point was reached at the eighth interview with the
remaining two interviews conducted to confirm the saturation point had been
reached.
Triangulation supports a finding to demonstrate multiple independent sources
that are in agreement or do not contradict so that they can complement each
(Miles et al., 2014). Triangulating multiple instances on various sources from
disparate industries in terms of strategic, tactical and operational viewpoints to
collaborate to enhance the trustworthiness of findings (Miles et al., 2014). This
examination and re-examination of various sources at dissimilar points in time
validated the transparent interpretive and constructive processes of the
researcher (Yeh & Inman, 2007). Whilst thematic was a predominant method of
analysis, quantitising strategy was employed to transform qualitatively collected
data to numbers (Langa, 2016) thereby obtaining deeper meaning from
participants experiences (Creswell & Creswell, 2017). Data interpreted through
finding deeper meaning, ideas emerging and insights from the study were
58
subsequently displayed or presented on the report using texts, quotations, tables,
and figures (Yeh & Inman, 2007). The weighing of
researcher interpretations took place thus creating equilibrium ensuring
interpretation of deeper meaning from experiences (Miles et al., 2014).
3.9 Limitations of the study
The research study was limited to the sample of 10 participants that do not
represent the entire South African industry. As such, the views and opinions are
limited in scope. Qualitative studies are deemed to be subjective in nature
(Creswell & Creswell, 2017) therefore the views, experiences, and meanings are
contextual to the 10 participants (Miles et al., 2014) and analysis of data took
longer to complete as it was conducted manually using Microsoft Excel. Some of
the participants were quite senior in their respective careers so scheduling time
in their diary became a challenge, which was overcome by scheduling according
to their availability.
3.10 Transferability and dependability
3.10.1 Transferability
The study employed purposive sampling through the use of the LinkedIn
professional network that is small in the South African cyber insurance industry
adoption context which was covered in-depth (Miles et al., 2014). The sample
comprised 10 participants who purposefully have sufficient understanding and
experience of the South African industry in terms of cyber insurance phenomenon
(Hox & Boeije, 2005). The findings are contextual which can thus be transferred
or applied to another situation or population (Noble & Smith, 2015).
3.10.2 Dependability
The study ensures dependability through unique feedback based on the
personal/human experiences of participants (Noble & Smith, 2015). The findings
are unique for each identified source so that variation in participant experience is 
59
considered (Kuper et al., 2008). As such, each participant's feedback is
considered important to the research study findings as it adds an element of
uniqueness and provides varying insights in a clear and transparent manner
(Noble & Smith, 2015). The use of codes, categories, and themes as well as
triangulating multiple sources to enable effective data to display assisted in
meeting dependability criteria (Yeh & Inman, 2007).
3.10.3 Credibility
The purpose of the study was described to all participants to ensure consistency
and truth value (Connelly, 2016). The research study employed the TOE
framework (Bandyopadhyay, 2012b) to ensure that interview questions were
relevant to the cyber insurance phenomenon to obtain findings (Creswell &
Creswell, 2017). The study employed saturation and triangulation to ensure
credibility wherein researcher bias was eliminated (Yeh & Inman, 2007).
This ensured that collected data reached the point of redundant or saturation at
the eighth interview resulting in no new knowledge added to the study (Yeh &
Inman, 2007). Triangulation was utilised to eliminate researcher subjectivity and
support the attainment of multidimensionality to the data set (Yeh & Inman, 2007).
The study sought to uniquely present findings in the most accurate manner by
describing or interpretation participant experience with the cyber insurance
phenomenon (Kuper et al., 2008).
3.10.4 Confirmability
To ensure confirmability and therefore enhancing findings, the research study
sought to pay attention to participants by probing more clarity seeking questions
in a given context to unearth hiding participant experiences of cyber insurance
phenomenon (Noble & Smith, 2015). As such, this was attained through the
combination of transferability and credibility as well as employing reflexive
strategy as the researcher is a cybersecurity professional (Kuper et al., 2008).
60
3.11 Demographic profile of the respondent
The study intended to identify and interview 10 participants and as such all
respondents cooperated with the and presented on
Microsoft Excel Spreadsheet. The respondents are categorised on the role, the
number of professional years of experience, industry, and description as well as
the perceived level to meet research objectives (Patil et al., 2005). Table 4 below
presents the demographic profile of 10 respondents:
Table 4: Demographic profile of respondents
Table 4 above illustrates the professional profiles of 10 participants. In line with
the ethical prescripts, the demographic profile of respondents was carefully
(Randall &
Participant number Role
Number of
professional years
of experience
Industry Description Perceived level
1
Divisional Head:
ICT Governance
& Compliance
14 Public
Municipality
Local government
municipality Strategic
2
Chief
Information
Security Officer
(CISO A)
14 Private
Beverage
Multinational beverage
corporation with operations
in SA
Strategic
3
Manager:
Information
Security
12 Private
Telecommunication
One of the big four
telecommunication
corporate in SA
Tactical
4 IT Audit Manager 10
Public
Government A government regulator Tactical
5
Executive
Manager:
Enterprise
Architecture, IT
Governance, risk
and compliance
24 Public
Logistics
A State Owned Entity in the
logistics sector Strategic
6
Chief
Information
Security Officer
(CISO B)
12 Private
ICT
A managed ICT service
provider to local and
offshore customers
Strategic
7 Head of IT 10
Public
Financial Services
A state owned entity in the
financial services sector Tactical
8 Principal
Specialist 14 Private
Manufacturing
Multinational steel
manufacturing corporation
with SA operations
Tactical
9
Client Manager:
Cyber Risk and
Risk Consulting
7 Private
Financial Services
A Lead Risk Advisor and
Cyber Insurance Broker
globally with SA operations
Tactical
10
Chief
Information
Officer
23
Public
Financial Services
A state owned entity in the
financial services sector Strategic
Average
Experience 14
Professional Profile
61
Koppenhaver, 2004). Information that was collected about respondents pertains
to the role/function as well as the number of professional years of experience to
ensure consistency with the chosen purposive sampling strategy (Miles et al.,
2014). The average number of professional years of experience is 14 which
illustrates the depth of understanding of the cyber insurance concept. Two
participants that had a similar job title of Chief Information Security Officer (CISO)
namely CISO A and CISO B from the Beverages and ICT sectors respectively of
the South African industry. The industry is categorised as public and private with
five per sector with industry description. Respondents are also categorised as
strategic, tactical and operational levels wherein five respondents were perceived
to strategic and the remaining five being tactical based on their role. None of the
respondents was perceived to be operational which was the limitation of the study
to provide varying perspectives.
3.12 Ethical considerations
Prior to data collection and ethics clearance was issued by the authorising
committee to eliminate harm to respondents (Roberts, 2015). During the data
collection process, consent was obtained from respondents taking into account
the needs of the research project and balancing them with respondents right to
privacy (Houghton et al., 2010). As such respondents identities were anonymised
to maintain confidentiality thereby protecting respondents from any potential
prejudice (Markham, 2012).
Respondents recording and transcriptions were kept secure in a passwordprotected computer to ensure the confidentiality and integrity of data collected
through the interview process (Parry & Mauthner, 2004). Data analysis and
interpretation were subjected to scrutiny to minimise researcher bias thereby
ensuring the trustworthiness of data collected (Dowling, 2005). Due care was
exercised to ensure the research project adheres to ethical conduct (Langa,
2016) as such enhancing research credibility.
62
CHAPTER 4.
4.1 Introduction
Chapter 3, the Research Methodology, provided a systemic approach and design
of the qualitative research to obtain insights from the purposefully selected
sample using open-ended semi-structured interview questions to collect data
(Hox & Boeije, 2005). As shown in Table 4 above, the sample comprised five
respondents from the public sector and another five from the private sector of the
South African industry. The average years of experience are 14 years thus
providing a sufficient combination of knowledge, skills, and understanding of the
cyber insurance concept. Private sector organisations in Beverages, ICT,
Manufacturing, and Financial services industries have global operations. Based
on the sample, two Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) professionals from
the Beverages and ICT sectors, namely, CISO A and CISO B respectively for
ease of identification. Out of ten participants, nine interviews were through faceto-face and one through telephone due to the non-availability of the respondent.
Recordings of all interviews took place using the recording device and recordings
were uploaded onto Otter.ai web application to transcribe. Microsoft Excel was
utilised to code and classify data into categories leading to emerging themes
(Creswell & Creswell, 2017).
Chapter 4, Findings and Discussion, seeks to present and discuss the findings
obtained through 10 interview questions to provide deeper meaning and
interpretation of perspectives obtained from 10 participants (Creswell & Creswell,
2017). To ensure credibility and transferability of findings to another context,
triangulation and saturation concepts are employed thus enriching the meaning
of participants experiences (Yeh & Inman, 2007). The categories of saturation
include the demand-side, which represents nine organisations that may adopt
cyber insurance and one supply-side organisation that is a cyber insurance
service provider. The study employed inductive thematic analysis of findings as
the most suitable approach to meet research objectives (Langa, 2016) thus
classifying respondents as strategic, tactical and operational management levels
based on their perceived role, understanding and experience (White, 2009).
63
Operations pertain to respondents who provide input to management through
administrative tasks, tactical pertains to interpreting and organising tasks for
decision making and strategic level is about aggregating and analysis for
informed decision making (White, 2009).
Furthermore, analysis and interpretation of findings seek to confirm or deny
propositions emanating from the literature review (Ryan, 2006). Alignment of
research objectives, research propositions, research interview questions and
emerging research themes from findings took place to ensure transparency and
consistency. Table 5 below illustrates the alignment to ensure consistency
throughout the research process.
Table 5: Consistency matrix
Research
objectives
Propositions Interview
questions
Emerging
themes
Technology about
the awareness
and effectiveness
of cybersecurity
technologies.
The awareness of
effective
cybersecurity
technology
controls
complement
cyber insurance
to reduce the
impact of cyberattacks in the
South African
industry.
1. How long have
you been a
professional, your
job title and
description?
2. What is your
perception of
cybersecurity?
3. Describe the
importance of
cyber insurance.
4. What is your
general
perception of
cybersecurity
Effective
cybersecurity
awareness 
64
and/or cyber
insurance?
5. Describe how
your organisation
ensures
awareness of
cybersecurity
technology.

Organisation
about cyber risk
management and
management
support.
An organisational
approach to
cybersecurity
determines cyber
risk management
support.
6. Describe how
your organisation
approaches
cybersecurity.
7. To what extent
does your
organisation
manage cyber
risk?
8. Describe
management
support to cyber
risk management
for your
organisation.
An organisational
approach to
managing cyber
risk
Environment
about
government
regulations and
Compliance with
regulations
enables
organisations to
9. Describe the
extent to which
your organisation
must comply with
Cyber insurance
adoption in South
Africa industry.
65
the nature of the
industry.
adopt cyber
insurance in the
South African
industry to reduce
the risk of
financial losses
associated with
cyber breaches.
government
regulations?
10. Describe the
nature of your
industry and how
it approaches the
cyber insurance.
Table 5 above illustrates the alignment of research objectives, propositions
emanating from the literature review, interview questions and the emerging
themes from collected data through semi-structured interviews. The objective of
this study is to investigate factors influencing cyber insurance adoption in the
South African industry from the perspective of technology, organisation, and
environment. The TOE framework enabled the formulation of three propositions
based on the literature review that culminated in the design of ten interview
questions (Bandyopadhyay, 2012b). The outcome of the data collected from the
purposive sample inductively led to three emerging themes (Miles et al., 2014).
4.2 Discussion pertaining to Proposition 1
Proposition 1 from the literature review proposed that the awareness of effective
cybersecurity technology controls complement the adoption of cyber insurance
to reduce the impact of cyber-attacks in the South Africa industry. The design of
five questions provided answers to the proposition that ultimately led to the theme
below which is linked to the research objective on technology about awareness
and effectiveness.
4.2.1 Effective cybersecurity awareness
Cybersecurity awareness has a direct link to the perception of cybersecurity
technology within an organisation. During the interview process, participants had 
66
to select options designed through literature to gauge their general perception of
cybersecurity. Table 6 below illustrates the perceptions of cybersecurity as
obtained from the purposefully selected sample of 10 professionals in the South
African industry.
Table 6: Cybersecurity perception
Cyber Security Perception
Cyber Security Responses Ratio
Secure electronic data
activity on servers,
workstations and mobile
devices
6 60%
Facilitates implementation of
cybercrime laws 3 30%
Detects, prevents and
corrects external and
internal threats to mitigate
cyber risks
10 100%
Improves end-user
knowledge about secure
practices
6 60%
Enhances the privacy and
protection of personal
information
7 70%
Table 6 above illustrates the
cybersecurity perceptions. Quantitising strategy was employed to transform
qualitatively collected data to numbers (Langa, 2016) thereby obtaining deeper
meaning from participants experiences (Creswell & Creswell, 2017). Overall, the
responses seemed positive with few respondents noting negative sentiments.
Notably, all respondents seemed to agree that cybersecurity detects, prevents
and corrects external and internal threats to mitigate cyber risks (Carlton & Levy,
2017; Stallings et al., 2012). IT Audit Manager stated Cybersecurity is important
for the business to operate securely suggesting organisations must pay attention
to cybersecurity for long-term sustainability.
70% of respondents consider cybersecurity as a mechanism that enhances the
privacy and protection of personal information. The Manager: Information
information and is protected at all time i.e. privacy highlighting the need for 
67
organisations to protect customers information. It is the
responsibility to
processed and stored on information systems (Isaak & Hanna, 2018; Mubarak
Alharbi et al., 2013).
60% of respondents considered cybersecurity to secure electronic data activity
on servers, workstations, and mobile devices. The Principal Specialist added,
Cybersecurity is about securing infrastructure to prevent hackers from accessing
systems or applications
multinational manufacturing organisation to secure physical operations from
disruptions (Mo et al., 2011). On a separate event, 60% of respondents
suggested that cybersecurity improves end-user knowledge about secure
practices The biggest weakest link in cybersecurity is people
thus, putting into effect the need for organisations to educate end-users. There is
a close link between effective cybersecurity practices and the level of end-user
understanding of cybersecurity thus making end-users key stakeholders in
protecting organisational assets (Bakhshi, 2017; Stanton et al., 2005).
Finally, only 30% of respondents consider cybersecurity to facilitate the
implementation of cybercrime laws. CISO B seemed to disagree whether you
ce the
laws, therefore, it is an indirect relationship
facilitate cybersecurity implementation (Choucri et al., 2014) and not the other
way around.
Overwhelmingly, out of ten respondents nine (90%) demonstrated positive
sentiment towards the importance of awareness of cybersecurity technology and
the benefits to their respective organisations. Only one (10%) respondent
appeared to have a negative view about the state of awareness at their
organisation. Lack of security awareness is a concern for organisations in all
sectors as security is multi-faceted and requires diverse expertise to effectively
manage the risk (Ben-Asher & Gonzalez, 2015). As such, the Divisional Head:
ICT Governance & Compliance stated In this organisation, cybersecurity is not
taken seriously due to the cost of maintaining the proper cybersecurity
programme, cost of implementation and lack of understanding the value of data,
68
suggesting that the metropolitan municipality cybersecurity maturity is low. The
Client Manager: that budget
and management buy-in can be an issue in some organisations thus requiring
an effective strategic approach to obtain management buy-in is necessary. Whilst
most companies do invest in cybersecurity, CISO B indicates that cybersecurity
investment needs to be taken a lot seriously by companies . As such,
cybersecurity is perceived as the barrier to business activities (Li et al., 2019).
Further, the Divisional Head: ICT Governance & Compliance insists, The
organisation does not review policies, no awareness, no understanding of the
disclaimer for responsibilities. Security is perceived as a tedious act that is not
b descriptions . CISO B agrees with the negative sentiment
by asserting that several organisations see security as a nuisance; they do not
see it as delivering in their value chain . Organisations should conduct costbenefit or rate of return analysis to enable improved investments thus avoiding
over or under investments to cybersecurity (Chronopoulos et al., 2017; Rowe &
Gallaher, 2006).
On a positive note, CISO A perceives cybersecurity
and more organisations are beginning to appreciate the impact of secure practice
to protect their revenue. It is a reality every organisation must ensure it fully
understands its implications . The Executive Manager: Enterprise Architecture,
IT Governance, Risk and Compliance cyber touches many realms in
daily operation, with the increase in digitalisation, organisations are likely to be
exposed to cyber vulnerabilities. It is important to take care of cybersecurity as
lack thereof has significant implications for the organisation . Cybersecurity can
affect reputation, revenue generation and profits resulting in increased costs that
affect innovative ideas to keep customers loyal (Shackelford et al., 2015). This
suggests that cybersecurity must be addressed at the strategic level in order to
ensure the attainment of business objectives. The CIO supports the view that
is a necessity for organisations to continue to operate
sustainably, therefore, cybersecurity is survival and it makes good sense to
protect assets as cyber incidents can close down the company if left unattended .
69
Traditional way of conducting training and awareness such
as email communication cannot be measured . In support of this assertion, the
Principal Specialist adds, traditional methods are no longer giving desired results
that the company needs. Furthermore, email communication alone is not effective
and not measurable. Online assessments are becoming a norm wherein the level
of employee awareness can be measured . The Client Manager: Cyber Risk and
Risk Consulting support this view by stating that there has to be education
preferably E-learning to people dealing with infrastructure . Since according to
Cybersecurity is about securing infrastructure to prevent hackers
from accessing systems or applications. Gaming can be an effective tool to drive
and measure the level of understanding of cybersecurity awareness among
employees (Hendrix et al., 2016). The IT Audit Manager adds, face to face
awareness training to employees where employees can ask questions is one of
the effective methods to drive good behaviour amongst employees . The
Principal Specialist posits, Effective cybersecurity awareness campaigns involve
interacting directly with end-users . Alternative delivery methods include
dissemination of content through various channels as well as face to face
presentations to drive effective awareness programmes (Abawajy, 2014).
To solidify the importance of cybersecurity awareness at the tactical level, the
Information Security Manager from the telecommunications organisation that has
continental and global operations argues, Cybersecurity is important in ensuring
the protection of organisational assets which can be attained by implementing
and having a cybersecurity awareness programme . At the strategic level,
Executive Manager: Enterprise Architecture, IT Governance, Risk, and
Compliance from a publicly owned logistics entity supports the view and augment
it is critical to have cybersecurity to secure organisational assets as
information at all time . Furthermore, at the tactical level, the IT Audit Manager
from the national regulator insists, Cybersecurity is important due to frequent
processing of information by organisations delivering a service to customers thus
important for a business to operate securely . Securing organisational assets
requires a combination of cybersecurity technology as well as resources such as
human and financial to attain business-wide strategic goals (Posey et al., 2015).
70
It is a necessity for organisations to continue to operate
sustainably, therefore, cybersecurity is survival and it makes good sense to
protect assets as Cyber incidents can close down the company .
At the tactical level, there is resonance in terms of the responsibility to distribute
communication content and make employees aware of cybersecurity within the
organisation. Both the IT Audit Manager and the Principal Specialist suggests
that a representative within IT must ensure effective cybersecurity awareness
takes place frequently. Hence, the Head of IT from a publicly owned entity states,
The organisation conducts quarterly awareness programme to educate endusers to drive behaviour . Strategically, the CIO points Organisation has an
awareness programme that is running every year. It is compulsory that the
organisation embarks on to increase the level of awareness . For awareness to
be effective, the CIO suggests, EXCO team must be the advocate of this
initiative. There must be an element of fun people as employees win prices. The
program runs continuously and the message must continuously change to ensure
effectiveness. The organisation does themes around phishing, ransomware,
secure practices, etc.
Effective cybersecurity is not without challenges within an organisation. The
Executive Manager: Enterprise Architecture, IT Governance, Risk and
Compliance points out challen many users are not
cybersecurity savvy i.e. user receiving a phishing email and clicking on the link
and get compromised owever, the CIO insists, phishing attacks are
proactively identified in his organisation highlighting approaches to counter
phishing attacks by organisations. There is a general resonance at the strategic
level about the need to educate users as the CIO state employees need to be
aware of cyber risks as the weakness is the people . Head of IT agrees, An
organisation can protect the data from external threats however individuals within
an organisation can compromise the organisation . Client Manager adds, It is
crucial to educate the end-user as they are easy targets . As such, the human
element is the weakest link and requires undivided attention in terms of training
and education to ensure that the cybersecurity program delivers the desired
results (Pfleeger et al., 2014).
71
It appears that the strategic viewpoint varies from the tactical viewpoint. In
isolation, CISO B from the ICT industry suggests, Cybersecurity is moving from
technical focus areas to be strategic where companies are adopting cyber
strategies as it is a business risk. Board seeing cybersecurity as strategic is long
overdue thus illustrating support at the right level of decision-making. CISO B
posits At the principle level, it is important to run the security awareness
programme for users to understand what is al
security technology must be clear to end-users . In support of CISO B's assertion
of cybersecurity being strategic imperative, the Client Manager: Cyber Risk and
Risk Consulting agree with the narrative to compare and contrast it with the
Cybersecurity is a key strategic
risk in the developed territories as well as in countries where technology is
advance suggesting that South African organisations can learn lessons from
their counterparts in other territories.
Emphasis must be to outline strategic priorities and directions, organisations
must establish clear plans guided by vision and mission as well setting realistic
strategic objectives that can be achieved over a period of time (Borum et al.,
2015). South Africa is ranked as having the
most people affected by cyber-crime in the world. It means that many people
within the country do not understand the implications of the lack of understanding
of cybersecurity .
Review of literature confirms that South Africa is ranked third world-over as a
country where most people are experiencing cybercrime (Gcaza & Solms, 2017).
Therefore, the Client Manager concludes that to ensure effective cybersecurity
awareness, Educate the Executive Committee (EXCO), Management
Committee (MANCO) as well as people on the ground for the content to have a
significant impact . In agreement with the Client Manager, CISO A emphasised,
the need to educate executive to gain necessary buy-in . To get executive
management buy-in, simple and clear articulation of cybersecurity value add to
business operations is a requirement suggesting to avoid technical jargon (B. von
Solms & von Solms, 2018).
72
In conclusion, holistically, the responses seemed positive with few respondents
noting negative sentiments in terms of the importance of effective cybersecurity
awareness. Overwhelmingly, out of ten respondents nine (90%) demonstrated
positive sentiment towards the importance of awareness of cybersecurity
technology and the benefits to their respective organisations. Only one (10%)
respondent appeared to have a negative view about the state of awareness at
their organisation.
It appeared there is a need for organisations to make end-users aware of
cybersecurity to effectively mitigate the risks. To ensure effective cybersecurity
awareness, the suggestion of various mechanisms took place. Mechanisms
included gaming to keep employees engaged, online training such as E-learning
and surveys that are measurable, as well as face-to-face presentations. Thus,
the relationship between effective cybersecurity practices and the level of enduser understanding of cybersecurity is crucial in protecting organisational assets.
It seems organisations in all sectors consider lack of security awareness as a
concern. Perception of the human element as the weakest link requires attention
in terms of training and education to ensure that the cybersecurity program
delivers the desired results. As such, end-users are an important shield in
ensuring effective identification and prevention of cyber risks. Acknowledging
various organisational levels, effective cybersecurity awareness requires a
strategic approach to obtain management buy-in.
Lack of management buy-in resulted in the perception of cybersecurity as a
barrier to business activities. As such, cybersecurity interventions must occur at
the strategic level in order to drive change and ensure the attainment of business
objectives. In order to obtain management buy-in and the board, simple and clear
articulation of cybersecurity value add to business operations is a requirement
suggesting to avoid technical jargon. This will ensure that cybersecurity initiatives
get necessary buy-in in terms of human and financial support. Based on the
evidence above, the study confirms the proposition, therefore, the awareness of
effective cybersecurity technology controls complement cyber insurance to
reduce the impact of cyber-attacks in the South Africa industry.
73
4.3 Discussion pertaining to Proposition 2
Proposition 2 pertains to the approach organisations take towards cybersecurity
thus determining support to cyber risk management in the South Africa industry.
This was achieved by designing three interview questions that culminated in the
emerging theme to provide the answer to proposition 2. The below section will
discuss in detail how the organisational approach to cybersecurity determines
management buy-in to manage cyber risk. To support different types of
cybersecurity approaches within an organisation, exploring the linkage between
management buy-in and cyber insurance perception took place.
4.3.1 An organisational approach to managing cyber risk
The exploration of the organisational approach to cybersecurity determines the
extent of management buy-in to make resources available to manage cyber risk
in the South Africa industry. The approach the organisation takes towards
managing cybersecurity risk has a direct link to cyber insurance perception as
such the outcome of interview questions seeks to explore the relationship. Table
7 below illustrates the perceptions of cyber insurance from the sample of 10
professionals from varying industries in South Africa.
Table 7: Cyber insurance perception
Cyber Insurance Perception
Cyber Insurance Responses Ratio
cybersecurity measures 8 80%
Improves the cybersecurity
control environment 6 60%
Transfers risk of financial
loss/liability associated with
cyber-attacks
10 100%
Challenge with the setting of
premiums and policy coverage 4 40%
Lack of explainable
understanding of cyber
insurance
0 0%
74
Table 7 above highlight the to cyber insurance
perceptions. Similar to Table 6 above, the transformation of raw data to words
necessitated quantitisation (Langa, 2016) to reinforce a deeper understanding of
(Creswell & Creswell, 2017). Overwhelmingly, all
respondents perceived cyber insurance as a mechanism that enables
organisations to transfer the risk of financial loss/liability with cyber-attacks. As
the Client Manager: Cyber Risk cyber insurance
pays for liability that emanates from the cyber incident wherein the cyber
insurance pays to fix the incident as well as lawsuits so that the company
resumes operations as soon as possible view supported by the Principal
covers for loss of productivity in the event of
cyber-attack . Further, the Head of IT extends, Cyber insurance enables the
organisation to cover financial losses and maintain access to data in the event
the organisation is hacked or attacked . However, CISO A contends that having
cyber insurance does not necessarily improve security controls however
it covers financial losses . Manager: Information Security
caution, There has to be some kind of synergy between cyber insurance and
control measures implemented by the organisation . The benefits of cyber
insurance include the shield that could potentially result in financial losses for
organisations emanating from a cyber breach (Camillo, 2017; Franke, 2017)
Considered important, 80% of respondents perceive cyber insurance to
complement . Divisional Head: IT
Governance and Compliance highlight the importance of cyber insurance by
stating, It improves the cybersecurity control environment and transfers the risk
of financial loss/liability associated with cyber-attack to the third party. CISO B
Cyber insurance only transfers the financial risk but not
responsibility . This view is compatible with the IT Audit Manager who states
cyber insurance complements the existing controls and does not improve
controls therefore organisations can use cyber insurance for compensation in the
event of cyber-attack. yber insurance complements an organisation's
cybersecurity controls in case liability for data breach or loss, remediation costs
such as legal and public relations as well as regulatory fines/penalties and
settlement costs takes place (Hurtaud et al., 2015).
75
The other 60% consider cyber insurance to improve the cyber-security control
environment. The Principal Specialist suggests Cyber insurance cover ensures
that the business gets to operate in the shortest period after the breach thereby
revenue preservation . Client Manager: Cyber Risk and Risk Consulting contend,
Whilst managing risk does not translate to revenue generation, it ensures that
controls are placed to enable the organisation to operate risk-free.
insurance plays a significant role in enhancing cybersecurity controls within an
organisation (Woods & Simpson, 2017).
Like any initiative, cyber insurance has inherent challenges, as such, 40% of
respondents indicated that there is a challenge with the setting of premiums and
policy coverage. The Client Manager: Cyber Risk and Risk Consulting posit from
a cyber insurance Underwriters are starting to
exclude cyber incidents to their covers as it is challenging for actuarial
professionals to determine the risk premium unpack risk
The lack of historical
information to enable efficient cyber insurance product pricing (Tøndel et al.,
2015) thus coverage tend to be expensive with numerous policy exclusions
(Peters et al., 2018).
Interestingly, none of the respondents indicated a lack of explainable
understanding of cyber insurance, which suggests that the sample has
knowledge, experience, and understanding of the cyber insurance phenomenon.
With the sophistication of cybercrime, companies are forced to
have cyber insurance. It is about when they will the hackers get to your network.
You will never be 100% insured . Therefore, cyber insurance addresses the
residual after the implementation of cybersecurity control measures (S. Shetty et
al., 2018).
Next, based on the responses from participants in terms of organisational
cybersecurity approach, responses implied two approaches i.e. top-down and
bottom-up wherein management support could be proactive or reactive. Table 8
below illustrates the link between cybersecurity approach and management
support that determines the extent to which cyber risk is managed within an
organisation. 
76
Table 8: Cybersecurity approach and management support
Cyber Security
Approach
Management
Support Responses Ratio
Top-down Proactive 6 60%
Top-down Reactive 3 30%
Bottom-up Reactive 1 10%
Total 10 100%
Table 8 illustrates the relationship between cybersecurity approach in terms of
top-down vs bottom and management support concerning proactive and reactive.
In the context of this study, top-down relates decision-making, goals, objectives,
and actions that are driven from top management to manage cyber risks (Linkov
et al., 2014). Whereas bottom-up is about conducting risk assessments to
influence top management of the organisation to make risk-informed decisions
(Linkov et al., 2014).
In this study, 60% of respondents appeared to lean towards a top-down approach
with proactive management support. The Manager: Information Security state
the objective of cybersecurity is to mitigate the risk that the organisation faces
on a daily basis therefore the organisation takes cyber risk management serious
to protect assets There is management support wherein the
Information Security Risk Committee is established to proactively deal with
technology issues indicates that the organisation is proactive in decisionmaking in terms of cyber risk tolerance.
appetite statement, the IT Audit Manager emphasises the risk register is the
driving force to determine cyber risk tolerance levels. The organisation must,
therefore, ensure that attainable goals are set with adequate capability to counter
the effects of cyber risks thus enhanced business outcomes (Cherdantseva et
al., 2016; Johnson, 2015).
In line with top-down proactive management support, the Executive Manager:
Enterprise Architecture, IT Governance, Risk, and Compliance state, A function
that deals with cybersecurity exists with a structure that comprises of experts on
cybersecurity. the separate establishment of an
information security function as necessary to ensure accountability . Highlighting
the importance of best practice frameworks the Head of IT indicates that 
77
is approached at the high level i.e. policies, standards that
support security ISO 27001/2, frameworks to obtain guidance by implementing
an end-to-end cybersecurity programme to minimise cybersecurity breach and
continuously improve on measures . To emphasise the point, the Executive
Manager Cyber risk is supported across the entire organisation and all
the way to the board . CISO B advises, The board must own the risk and not
transfer it to insurance
take proactive decisions in the interest of the organisation. The Principal
Specialist adds, The Audit Committee has an item where cyber risks are
discussed because of the importance. he board is paying
attention to cyber risk thus takes place at the highest level of the company.
Organisations that have established board committees are less likely to breached
as cyber risks are proactively mitigated through early detection and response thus
adding value to business operations (Higgs et al., 2016). Whilst the management
responsibility to provide oversight thus long-term sustainability of an organisation
(Rothrock et al., 2018). The Client Manager advises, It is important for the
CIO/CISO to communicate clearly in terms of the human and financial resources
needed, timeframe and benefits to the organisation
cybersecurity and associated risk get attention at the board and C-suite level.
comes with educating the C-suite
and impact assessments are necessary to guide CEOs. They must be
empowered to make decisions that are in the best interest of the organisation .
A risk register
exists to track the implementation of risks with automatic escalations if certain
risks are not being adequately managed . This proactive approach seems to be
supported by the Head of IT who highlights Due to recent attacks on South
African companies, implementation of security measures have received top
management attention and financial resources are allocated
commensurate with the risk of the organisation faces. Whilst the organisation
approaches cybersecurity from a top-down perspective, the Principal Specialist
has a different view that suggests The management support is there although a 
78
lot is still required in terms of financial and human resources that are needed
suggesting that resources are required to mitigate the cyber risks. The Client
Manager: Cyber Risk and Risk Consulting appreciate organisational constraints
by acknowledging budget spend can be an issue to some organisations however
it is crucial to priorities activities on the roadmap.
Since cybersecurity is high on the board agenda list, sufficient resources must be
provided to adequately manage cyber risks (Johnson, 2015). The Principal
Specialist also acknowledges the effect of cyber-attacks in South Africa and
due to the recent media coverage on the effect of cybersecurity incidents,
cybersecurity is getting more attention . Cybersecurity
takes precedence for example it receives attention from the Managing D
office. Suggesting that management of cybersecurity risks receives attention
from the highest level of the organisation to ensure that all staff is on board and
therefore understand their role in cyber defence (Islam & Stafford, 2017).
Next, 30% of respondents indicated their organisations approach cybersecurity
in the top-down however reactive fashion. The Divisional Head: ICT Governance
and Compliance indicated that at the metropolitan mun Influential
stakeholders such as Enterprise Risk and Internal Audit are utilised as they carry
weight the type of approach the organisation takes towards
managing cybersecurity. From a managed ICT service point of view, CISO B
states organisations are advised to adopt and implement best practice
frameworks such as ISO27000 standards as a guide to Information Security
Management system .
perception is reactive. For instance, the Divisional Head: ICT Governance and
Cybersecurity is perceived as burdensome
the lack of management support for cybersecurity initiatives in this organisation.
This view correlates with the negative sentiment that cybersecurity perception as
the barrier to business activities at the metropolitan municipality. The reactive
approach towards cyber risk symbolises that in several organisations
cybersecurity is seen as a disruption to business operations (Lewis, 2014). CISO
B believes that the approach to cybersecurity depends on the type of leadership 
79
It is very much dependent on who the
leader and to what extent they have the understanding and appreciation of the
impact of cybersecurity i.e. if the CEO is aware of cybersecurity, then
cybersecurity initiatives get supported
The Client Manager: Cyber Risk and Risk Consulting observe from a customer
usually falls into the CIO or CISO purview
management support the Client Manager fully
aware of cyber risks thereby cascading the message from EXCO, MANCO and
down to the people on the ground
appreciate cybersecurity; they see it as a tick box exercise as opposed to
strategic value add. With effective management support, cybersecurity can
defend the organisation's income stream, customer satisfaction, and loyalty
Representing the remaining 10% of respondents wherein organisations indicated
bottom-up approach that is reactive, CISO A from a multinational Beverage
The organisation uses project-based approach from the
operational and tactical point of view illustrating the limited extent of existence
of management support in this organisation. In this approach, the
prioritise cybersecurity initiatives based on set metrics and report on benefits
realised on investments (Moore et al., 2015). As opposed to an operational
project-based view, the IT Audit Manager posits organisation approaches
cybersecurity from strategic planning then cascaded down the value chain by
implementing controls in a project-based approach which suggests that the
organisation's top-down approach is proactive.
Cybersecurity has earned its place in the boardrooms of most organisations and
executives consider it as a strategic risk that could negatively impact company
earnings if left unattended (Newmeyer, 2015). The Client Manager: Cyber Risk
and Risk Consulting are of the view that cybersecurity must link to organisational
strategy, corporate governance and enterprise risk management to be fully
effective in an organisation. The CIO states Cybersecurity strategy is embedded
in the organisational strategy as a strategic imperative highlighting sufficient
attention from top management.
80
Support is there due to fear
of not knowing what cyber risk is about and limited funding to carry out initiatives
which suggest minimal management support In opposition, the IT Audit
Manager advises that whilst there is management support at his organisation, it
is insufficient as there is no dedicated resource responsible for cybersecurity on
a daily basis. CISO A is of the view that the structure contributes to how cyber
risk is managed as such cyber risk is seen as slowing down business and
therefore the organisation is reactive towards cyber risk management (Lewis,
2014). CISO B supports this view by stating, Organisations are mostly reactive
With the increase of cyber-attacks, there should be more efforts to protect
information and business systems (Brangetto & Aubyn, 2015).
South Africa is very
ignorant around cyber risk understanding whereas in developed territories
understand of cyber risk has matured implying they are cyber risk resilient to
protect revenues (Elmarie Kritzinger & Von Solms, 2012). Further, from the
service provider point of view, the Client Manager postulate South African
companies tend to be reactive towards risk assessments companies
should be proactive to ensure sound cybersecurity posture to manage cyber risk
at the right level of decision making within an organisation (Higgs et al., 2016).
The organisation keeps abreast of what is happening in the
market and industry in terms of cyber risks thus staying ahead of the curve.
In conclusion, overwhelmingly, all respondents considered cyber insurance as a
mechanism that enables organisations to transfer the risk of financial loss/liability
associated with cyber-attacks. It appears that respondents perceive the benefits
of cyber insurance to safeguard against financial losses for organisations
emanating from cyber breaches as well as complementing the
cybersecurity measures. Cyber insurance shields against data breach or loss,
remediation costs such as legal and public relations as well as regulatory
fines/penalties and settlement costs takes place. It appears that lack of historical
information in the context of South Africa results in a challenge to price risk
premium.
81
Seemingly, the link between cybersecurity approach and management support
determines the extent to which cyber risk management occurs within an
organisation. The cybersecurity approach can be either top-down or bottom
wherein top-down pertains to decision-making or bottom-up pertains to risk
assessments. In this study, 60% of respondents appeared to lean towards a topdown approach with proactive management support.
Organisations that have top-down cybersecurity approach and proactive
management support have institutionalised risk register driven by organisational
risk appetite and risk committee to provide accountability and oversight,
communication of cyber risks as well as organisational structures. Organisations
that are top-down and proactive seem to have boards that have cyber risk as a
top agenda item thereby enhanced revenue streams, customer loyalty, and brand
reputation. It appears such boards provide sufficient human and financial
resources to manage cyber risks from the highest level of the organisation to
ensure that all staff is aware. Therefore, the staff understands their role in cyber
defence. Perception of organisations that have established board committees is
less likely to be attacked as cyber risks are proactively mitigated through timely
discovery and reaction thus long sustainability.
Further, 30% of respondents indicated their organisations approach
cybersecurity in the top-down however reactive fashion. There appears to be
minimal management support where the o .
There seems to be a correlation between the lack of management support for
cybersecurity initiatives and cybersecurity perception as the barrier to business
activities. It seems reactive approach links with lack of awareness towards cyber
risk which symbolises cybersecurity is seen as a burden.
Further, reactive management support is linked with the extent to which executive
management understands cyber risk. Suggesting that cybersecurity awareness
must be intensified at top management and the message cascaded to staff on
the ground to defend income streams, customer loyalty, and brand reputation.
The remaining 10% of respondents represent organisations that indicated a
bottom-up approach and reactive management support. These organisations 
82
seem to not drive cyber risk management from a strategic level instead they react
to events as they happen. Seemingly, this was prevalent to organisations that do
not have structures to monitor and mitigate cyber risks on a frequent basis. As
such, this option could result in a negative impact on company earnings. In line
with the analysis, the study confirms the proposition, therefore, the organisational
approach to cybersecurity determines cyber-risk management support.
4.4 Discussion pertaining to Proposition 3
In this section, the relationship between the need for organisations to comply with
various government legislations and the cyber insurance adoption takes place.
Further, the manner in which an organisation perceives cyber insurance
determines organisational appetite for adoption. The research study explored the
perceptions per sector to determine the drivers for cyber insurance adoption in
South Africa industry.
4.4.1 Cyber insurance adoption in South Africa industry
The findings of cyber insurance in the South African industry reveals interesting
outcomes. During the interview process, participants were asked to indicate
whether they have adopted cyber insurance in their respective industries. Table
9 below illustrates the status of cyber adoption from the purposefully selected
sample of 10 professionals in the South African industry.
Table 9: Cyber insurance adoption
Cyber Insurance Adoption
Status Response Ratio
Adopted 5 50%
Not
Adopted 5 50%
Total 10 100%
As shown in Table 9, out of 10 respondents, 50% indicated that they have
adopted cyber insurance in their organisation meanwhile the other 50% indicated
that cyber insurance adoption has not occurred in their organisations. Table 10 
83
below illustrates the comparison of cyber insurance adoption by sector and
industry.
Table 10: Cyber insurance in the public and private sectors
Adoption by
Sector
Adoption by
Industry
Not Adopted by
Sector
Not Adopted
Industry
Public
Metropolitan
Municipality Public Regulator
Public
Financial
Services Public Logistics
Private
Financial
Services Public
Financial
Services
Private Telecom Private Beverages
Private ICT Private Manufacturing
This represents 40% public whereas 60% constitute private sector organisations
that have adopted cyber insurance. Two Respondents namely Divisional Head:
ICT Governance & Risk and CIO from Metropolitan Municipality and Financial
Services industries, respectively, represented public sector organisations that
indicated cyber insurance adoption. To understand the rationale, the Divisional
50% of financial loss has been insured through a cyber insurance
service provider based on the risk appetite defined by the enterprise risk
management stingly, the Divisional Head had earlier indicated that the
organisation is proactive in terms of cybersecurity however, it lacks management
support to drive cyber risk management. In
general, few government institutions have adopted cyber insurance. This
municipality could be the first in the public sector.
Further, the CIO noting that it gets the
organisation to operations quicker after cyber-attack has taken place
that the organisation considered potential cybersecurity incident and structured
cyber insurance adoption along those lines. From a cyber insurance provider
point of view, the Client Manager Most South African organisations are
not proactive as they seek cyber insurance cover after an attack has occurred .
Further, the Client Manager From a government point of view,
what will the hacker do when they get access to citizen information? The
collection, storage, and processing of citizens sensitive data that resides on 
84
information systems present an opportunity for attackers to launch cyber-attacks
on public institutions to disrupt the network and gain unauthorised access to data
(Kesan & Hayes, 2017).
Three respondents namely the Client Manager: Cyber Risk and Risk Consulting,
Manager: Information Security as well as CISO B from Financial Services,
Telecom and ICT industries, respectively, represent private sector organisations
that indicated cyber insurance adoption. Client Manager posits cyber insurance
is necessary since most organisations are data driven in terms Artificial
Intelligence, Big Data, Internet of Things, etc.
data as well the link between cyber insurance and emerging digital technologies
(Huang et al., 2018). Unpacking the driver for cyber insurance adoption in the
Business
must operate all the time suggesting cybersecurity controls complement cyber
insurance to manage cyber risk.
Warning potential buyers, CISO B highlights buyers and cyber insurance provider
Buyers must be a lot more informed, implement cyber
essentials before signing a cyber insurance policy claim
can occur if there is sufficient proof that there were no effective controls.
cyber insurance service providers must explain in simple
terms the provisions of policy cover to engage
cybersecurity specialists to fully understand what is being bought and value it has
on business.
However, in the context of South Africa, there seems to be a slow uptake of cyber
insurance adoption. The Client Manage South African corporates do
not understand the risk and what cover they need thus an opportunity for
insurance companies to educate potential clients on their product offering. The
level of cyber insurance adoption needs to mature in South Africa to ensure
resilience from cyber incidents that are occurring at an alarming rate (Woods &
Simpson, 2017).
Overwhelmingly on both public and private sectors of the South African industry,
government legislations seem to influence cyber insurance adoption. Divisional 
85
The metropolitan municipality is highly regulated and must
comply with various legislations such as POPI, RICA, MFMA, etc
Relevant legislation include but not limited to
POPI, RICA, GDPR, etc. highlighting the organisation readiness to ensuring
processes are compliant to protect customer data. CISO B explains that as a
managed service company operating in South Africa, regulations such as
GDPR, POPI, etc. are relevant; however, the organisation also operates in global
markets where GDPR is relevant such EU. Similarly, with Client Manager "The
organisation is Multinational Corporation based in Chicago, London and
Johannesburg. In SA, legislation is the driver for cyber insurance adoption thus
the organisation adheres to King 4, POPI, etc. In other territories that the
organisation operates in, as a Lead Risk Advisor and Lead Insurance Broker
globally it must comply with relevant laws and regulations . Companies operating
in South Africa have a duty to protect customer data in line with the provisions of
the POPI act (Swartz & Da Veiga, 2016).
In terms of the five organisations that indicated to have not adopted cyber
insurance, three (60%) represent the public sector and the remaining two (40%)
represent the private sector. Respondents include the IT Audit Manager,
Executive Manager: Enterprise Architecture, IT Governance, Risk, and
Compliance as well as Head of IT who represents the regulator, state-owned
logistics and publicly owned financial services industries, respectively, from the
public sector.
Noting the importance of cyber insurance, the IT Audit Manager states Cyber
insurance has not been adopted yet which the organisation must look into. With
increasing cyber-attacks, cyber insurance can provide a financial shield.
Suggesting the lack of accountability or ownership of cyber risks in terms of
government regulations in this organisation. The Executive Manager
That it is impossible to mitigate all possible cyber risks.
Signifying that risks that are prevalent in cyber space warrants cyber insurance
thus it is unlikely that all cyber risks can be mitigated .
Cyber insurance reduces the effects of cyber-attacks on
organisations thereby business s the criticality of cyber 
86
Cyber insurance has not been adopted, however, the organisation
has adopted other insurance covers such as logistics, goods, machinery, and
locomotives in line with core operational functions of the organisation.
of IT indicates The organisation complies with all government rules and
regulations in South Africa. cyber insurance has not been adopted
internal best practices such as COBIT 5 as well as
legislation such as POPI are adopted by the organisation.
The organisation complies with rail
safety regulations which are The Executive Manager
POPI may not be a factor for this organisation. POPI is more on staff
medical records ensuring fit to drive a train. Companies operating in South Africa
trol
and ensure compliance with the POPI act (Scharnick et al., 2016).
The remaining two respondents namely CISO A and Principal Specialist
represent the Beverages and Manufacturing industries, respectively, from the
South African private sector. CISO A concedes that cyber insurance is quite new
in the South African Few organisations have adopted the cyber
insurance . CISO A states currently organisations are not investing in the
acquisition of cyber insurance however there is likely to be an increase in cyber
insurance as cyber-attacks on organisations gets advanced and legislations such
as POPI get introduced. Principal Specialist concurs with CISO A by stating
Cyber insurance is new territory, actuarial scientists are finding it difficult to set
up the premiums thus not easy to quantify the premium. Cyber insurance is still
new in the industry, even insurance companies are able not to price premium
correctly, to determine what is covered and not covered. There seems to be
uniformity on the lack of knowledge around cyber insurance, suggesting that
cyber insurance provider must educate potential buyers on product offerings and
various options. There is still a shortage of cyber security skills
in SA however no effort from organisations to improve the skillset. This could be
the motivation for cyber insurance adoption. CISO B whose organisation has
adopted cyber insurance insists, Controls must be in place whether cyber 
87
insurance is there or not. Over and above cyber insurance adoption,
organisations must emphasise on the effectiveness of cybersecurity controls.
Whilst cyber insurance adoption has not materialised, CISO A notes cyber
insurance importance by stating, Cyber insurance assists businesses against
cyber-attacks by insuring against loss, reputation as well as profit thereby
protecting the organisation against losses. Head of IT agrees that cyber
insurance assists in protecting the reputation of the organisation. In terms of
multinational corporations. As such, Principal Specialist contends there is a
lot of regulation to comply. Locally, it is POPI, Cybercrime Bill, ECT Act, etc.
Globally it incl This suggests that the
organisation operates in a highly regulated environment. Therefore, the
however cyber insurance has
not been adopted . CISO A elaborates that the organisation complies with various
regulations.
Since the organisation is global, compliance with POPI, GDPR and
other applicable laws comes from multiple regions . However, in the South
African subsidiary, there are no dedicated resources responsible for legal and
regulatory compliance . There is no appetite for cyber
insurance adoption in this organisation. The organisational processes are not
mature. Advising that if there was a cyber-attack there could be a financial loss.
Therefore, more education is required to understand what value cyber insurance
can add to the organisations as it appears the organisations have invested in
technology and not in cyber insurance.
In conclusion, out of 10 respondents, 50% indicated that they have adopted cyber
insurance in their organisation meanwhile the other 50% indicated that cyber
insurance adoption has not occurred in their organisations. Organisations who
have adopted cyber insurance represents 40% public and 60% private.
Organisations that have adopted cyber insurance perceive it as important as it
gets the organisation quicker to operations after a breach. 
88
However, in the context of South Africa, there seems to be a slow uptake of cyber
insurance adoption. Thus, an opportunity for insurance companies to educate
potential clients on their product offering. Overwhelmingly on both public and
private sectors of the South African industry, government legislations seem to
influence cyber insurance adoption. The majority of respondents indicated that
applicable South African laws included but not limited to POPI, RICA, MFMA,
KING 4, Cybercrime Bill and ECT, etc. thus becoming the driver for cyber
insurance adoption. Multinational organisations cited GDPR (UK) and Sarbanes
Oxley (US) as applicable in other territories where they operate.
In terms of the five organisations that indicated to have not adopted cyber
insurance, three (60%) represent the public sector and the remaining two (40%)
represent the private sector. Interestingly, organisations that have not adopted
cyber insurance all acknowledge the importance of cyber insurance suggesting
that risks that are prevalent in cyberspace warrants cyber insurance.
Most respondents seem to suggest that cyber insurance is quite new in the South
African industry arguing that pricing for risk premium as the main challenge as
well as not understanding what is covered. Proposing the need to engage and
collaborate with cybersecurity specialists to fully understand what cyber
insurance covers and the value it has on business. There seems to be uniformity
on the lack of knowledge around cyber insurance, suggesting that cyber
insurance provider must educate potential buyers on product offerings and
various options. There appears to be an increased likelihood of financial losses
for organisations that have not adopted cyber insurance. As such, more
education is required to understand what value cyber insurance can add to the
organisations as it appears the organisations have invested in technology and
not in cyber insurance. Therefore, compliance with regulations enables
organisations to adopt cyber insurance in the South Africa industry to reduce the
risk of financial losses associated with cyber breaches.
89
4.5 Conclusion
Chapter 4, Findings and Discussion provided insightful analysis and
interpretation of findings from the sample of 10 respondents. Alignment of
objectives, propositions, interview research questions culminated to the
emergence of the following three themes:
a) Effective cybersecurity awareness
b) An organisational approach to managing cyber risk
c) Cyber insurance adoption in South Africa industry
The research found that to have effective cybersecurity awareness, boards and
executive management must drive change as a strategic imperative, support the
initiatives through human and financial resources as well as cascade
communication to staff on the ground. Indeed, the awareness of effective
cybersecurity technology controls complement cyber insurance to reduce the
impact of cyber-attacks in the South Africa industry.
The study found a link between cybersecurity approach and management
support that determines the extent to which cyber risk management occurs within
an organisation. Organisations that have top-down cybersecurity approach and
proactive management support have institutionalised risk register driven by
organisational risk appetite and risk committee to provide accountability and
oversight, communication of cyber risks as well as organisational structures.
perception is reactive. There seems to be a correlation between the lack of
management support for cybersecurity initiatives and cybersecurity perception as
the barrier to business activities. It seems reactive approach links with lack of
awareness towards cyber risk which symbolises cybersecurity is seen as a
burden. Therefore, organisational approach to cybersecurity determines cyberrisk management support.
The study found a 50/50 split between organisations who have adopted cyber
insurance and those who have not adopted cyber insurance. The majority of
organisations who have adopted cyber insurance represents public sector (60%) 
90
and the remaining 40% represents the public sector. The biggest driver of
adoption of cyber insurance for both public and private sector organisation is
government legislation which includes but not limited to POPI, RICA, MFMA,
KING 4, Cybercrime Bill and ECT.
here seems to be uniformity on the lack of knowledge around cyber insurance,
advising that cyber insurance provider must educate potential buyers on product
offerings and various options. There appears to be an increased likelihood of
financial losses for organisations that have not adopted cyber insurance. As such,
more education is required to understand what value cyber insurance can add to
the organisations as it appears the organisations have invested in technology and
not in cyber insurance.
In conclusion, a combination of effective cybersecurity awareness, organisational
approach to managing cyber risk and compliance with government legislations
are factors influencing cyber insurance adoption in the South African industry to
reduce the risk of financial losses associated with cyber breaches.
91
CHAPTER 5.
5.1 Introduction
The purpose of this study was to investigate the factors influencing cyber
insurance adoption in South Africa industry. Cyberspace inherently has cyber
risks that result in cyber-breaches in the event cybersecurity measures are
inadequate. Even with the most sophisticated cybersecurity defence arsenal,
cyber-breaches can still occur. Thus, cyber insurance manages residual risk after
the implementation of cybersecurity controls. Cyber insurance can provide a
financial shield to ensure business resume operations post cyber breach in the
South Africa industry.
The research objective was to investigate factors influencing cyber insurance
adoption in the South Africa industry from the perspective of technology,
organisation, and environment (TOE). To discover factors influencing cyber
insurance adoption, the study employed the TOE framework as the basis for
exploration leading to an intensive literature review. The review of the literature
resulted in the formulation of three propositions in line with TOE. The literature
revealed the importance of effective cybersecurity, the relationship between the
organisational approach to cybersecurity and management support. Further, a
review of literature established that organisations adopt cyber insurance to
transfer the risk of financial liability to the third party thereby improved compliance
with government regulations.
The study employed a qualitative research method using semi-structured
interviews as an instrument to collect data in order to address the research
problem. The coding and categorisation of data enabled the analysis of the
emerging themes. The study employed saturation, triangulation, and quantitising
leading to the systemic interpretation and presentation of data. Data presentation
employed a combination of words and tables to support the three propositions.
The chapter then concluded with findings confirming propositions using the
utmost ethical standards thus ensuring credibility and transferability of the study.
The remainder of this chapter integrates findings from the previous chapter with 
92
research objectives. Finally, the presentation of recommendations and
suggestions for further research occurs.
5.2 Conclusions regarding research objective 1
Factoring cybersecurity awareness as part of the day-to-day work yields desired
outcomes for the organisation. To ensure effective cybersecurity awareness,
organisations must be proactive and awareness should not be a once-off event.
Organisations must create awareness to educate end-users about the risks
associated with unsecured practices. Organisations must keep on educating
employees and ensuring that employees are kept engaged through exciting
content that they are able to relate as cyber threats are becoming more
sophisticated. Examples include ensuring that staff is well trained up on the clean
desk policy, understanding why the awareness is necessary and inform
employees about the various social engineering threats they should lookout.
Employees must be cautious when opening suspicious emails/links.
It is critical to have cybersecurity to secure organisational assets. Organisations
must be aware of the risks on all the layers of cyberspace thus important to run
the security awareness programme on a continuous basis. It is crucial for users
to understand what is allowed or not and that cybersecurity risks are clear to endusers. An online security programme should have a technical element to help
improve the security posture of an organisation. To ensure effectiveness,
cybersecurity must begin at the board and top management levels to drive
change. This plays a big role in driving awareness and getting buy-in, which in
turn informs the amount of airtime that cybersecurity gets in the organisation.
Therefore, organisations in South Africa seem to have low maturity when it comes
to effective cybersecurity awareness
5.3 Conclusions regarding research objective 2
With the increase of cyber-attacks, there should be more efforts to protect
information assets by organisations in South Africa. Cyber insurance is quite new
and few organisations have entered the cyber insurance space thus it is not 
93
mature yet. Having cyber insurance does not necessarily improve security
controls however it covers financial losses. Cyber insurance only transfers the
financial risk but not responsibility. Behavioural risk management is required as
opposed to the current blanket approach to cyber risk management.
Organisations must ensure there is sufficient budgeting, allocate resources such
as people and operate effectively to manage the ever-increasing cyber risks.
Implement various solutions in terms of defence in depth and monitoring for cyber
resilience.
Defined cybersecurity strategy forms the basis for cybersecurity risk mitigation
strategies to ensure the successful operationalisation of the cybersecurity
strategy. Effective controls ensure that stakeholders have visibility of security
posture. Organisations must understand the risk and align with best practice
frameworks that are recognised worldwide. Seemingly, organisations that
approach cybersecurity in a proactive manner and have management buy-in tend
to have to sound cybersecurity posture, thus mitigating cyber risks. Cyber risk
management receives sufficient support to ensure successful mitigation, both in
terms of budget allocation and sponsorship in organisations that are proactive
and have management support.
Boards and top management must be empowered to make decisions that are in
the best interest of the organisation. Therefore, it is important for the CIOs/CISOs
to communicate clearly in terms of the resources (human and financial) needed,
timeframe and benefits to the organisation. Organisations must use risk registers
to identify cybersecurity risks, come up with mitigating strategies and implement
countermeasures. Boards must establish a risk committee to oversees and
monitor the process of identifying, assessing and responding to cybersecurity
risks
5.4 Conclusions regarding research objective 3
Organisations in the private sector viewed cyber insurance adoption as one of
the strategies to comply with laws in a competitive way. Meanwhile, organisations
in the public sector seemed to adopt cyber insurance out of fear of the unknown 
94
in terms of legislation. Cyber insurance can help organisations to meet the
requirements of the POPIA and other data protection requirements.
In the context of the South African industry, emerging legislations such as POPI
and to some extent for organisations that have global operations seem to propel
executive buy-in. This is an angle in which cybersecurity buy-in to the executives
as a business imperative and not a nice to have. Cyber insurance adoption should
only occur after cybersecurity controls are in place not when there are gaps. It
must not be a tick box exercise. Cyber insurance providers must partner with
cybersecurity specialists to arrive at better premiums. Organisations should have
controls at a reasonable level, thereafter consideration of cyber insurance policy
needs to fit for purpose. There must be ongoing/continuous improvement in cyber
risk management. Most attacks are happening due to weak controls on web
applications. As such, basics from design, implementation, monitoring must be in
place.
Buyers must be a lot more informed, implement cyber essentials before signing
a cyber policy. It is important to engage cybersecurity specialists to fully
understand what is being bought and the value it has on business. Buyers must
be mindful of the terms and conditions i.e. if there are no controls, frameworks
implemented, monitored and continuous improvement, those basics must be in
place. Controls must be in place whether cyber insurance is there or not as a
repudiation of a claim can occur if it can be proven that there were no effective
controls. The board must own the risk and not transfer it to an insurance provider.
Cyber insurance providers must collaborate with cyber specialists to arrive at a
better premium.
On a cost versus benefits scale, the price and cost of buying cybersecurity
insurance will not be viable and will certainly not make business sense if it will
exceed the potential sanctions (penalties and fines) for non-compliance. This is
the principle in which many executives view cybersecurity insurance. It can,
therefore, be deduced that cyber insurance is currently a grudge purchase and in
this study, half of the organisations indicated to have not adopted it.
95
5.5 Recommendations
The adoption of cyber insurance in certain instances raises questions about what
law an organisation can ignore due to the transfer of cyber risk to the cyber
insurance provider. Cyber insurance must be recognised from a strategic point of
view, as such, it is recommended that cybersecurity as function resides with CISO
and not CIO as When it comes to
cybersecurity, the South African industry should approach it differently. Individual
companies are approaching cybersecurity in a siloed manner.
Digital technologies such as Artificial Intelligence, Internet of Things; Big Data,
Cloud Computing, and other emerging technologies. are the future. Thus,
requires effective cybersecurity to protect the organisational assets. With the
exception of high-status enterprises such as the City of Johannesburg, Banks,
Liberty, etc. that have recently been attacked by cybercriminals, most entities in
South Africa keep such information to themselves. South African companies must
disclose cyber attacks as well as associated losses as the study found that most
events relate to US and EU countries which were the limitation of this study.
It is recommended that organisations consider the combination of effective
cybersecurity awareness, organisational approach to managing cyber risk and
compliance with government legislations as factors influencing cyber insurance
adoption in the South African industry to reduce the risk of financial losses
associated with cyber breaches.
5.6 Suggestions for further research
The study was limited to the sample of only 10 professionals purposefully
selected to represent public and private sector sentiments on the cyber insurance
phenomenon. For future research, the expansion of the study is necessary to
include more respondents thus enriching the development of knowledge in the
context of South Africa. This will ensure that collected data contains diverse
viewpoints in the South African context. 
96
The cyber insurance is relatively new in South Africa; therefore, future studies
need to focus on both the demand side as well as the supply side. This will result
in the development of knowledge relevant to the South African industry as the
review of literature consisted mostly of cases outside of South Africa.
Future research needs to be conducted on quantification of cyber-attacks to
determine cyber insurance pricing models thus contributing to knowledge
development in this discipline in South Africa and other developing economies.
Further, the examination of the relationship between the organisational approach
to cyber risk and management support as a determinant for cyber insurance
adoption in South Africa needs further scrutiny.
97
09_Gordon2003FrameworkUsingCyberInsurance.pdf. (2003). Retrieved 7
August 2019, from
http://ns2.dpix.pestiest.hu/~mfelegyhazi/courses/EconSec/readings/09_
Gordon2003FrameworkUsingCyberInsurance.pdf
Ab Rahman, N. H., & Choo, K.-K. R. (2015). A survey of information security
incident handling in the cloud. Computers & Security, 49, 45 69.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2014.11.006
Abawajy, J. (2014). User preference of cyber security awareness delivery
methods. Behaviour & Information Technology, 33(3), 237 248.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2012.708787
Addington, D., & Manrod, M. (2019). Cyber security threats and solutions for the
private sector. Understanding New Security Threats.
Africa number of internet users by country 2019. (n.d.). Statista. Retrieved 5
August 2019, from https://www.statista.com/statistics/505883/number-ofinternet-users-in-african-countries/
Aloul, F. A. (2012). The Need for Effective Information Security Awareness.
Journal of Advances in Information Technology, 3(3).
https://doi.org/10.4304/jait.3.3.176-183
Aloul, F., Al-Ali, A. R., Al-Dalky, R., Al-Mardini, M., & El-Hajj, W. (2012). Smart
Grid Security: Threats, Vulnerabilities and Solutions. International Journal 
98
of Smart Grid and Clean Energy, 1 6. https://doi.org/10.12720/sgce.1.1.1-
6
Anderson, R., Barton, C., Böhme, R., Clayton, R., van Eeten, M. J. G., Levi, M.,
Moore, T., & Savage, S. (2013). Measuring the Cost of Cybercrime. In R.
Böhme (Ed.), The Economics of Information Security and Privacy (pp.
265 300). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
39498-0_12
Arfi, N., & Agarwal, D. S. (2013). Knowledge of Cybercrime among Elderly. 4(7),
7.
Arizona State University, Benjamin, V., Valacich, J. S., University of Arizona,
Chen, H., & University of Arizona. (2019). DICE-E: A Framework for
Conducting Darknet Identification, Collection, Evaluation with Ethics. MIS
Quarterly, 43(1), 1 22. https://doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/2019/13808
Armstrong, H. L., & Forde, P. J. (2003). Internet anonymity practices in computer
crime. Information Management & Computer Security.
https://doi.org/10.1108/09685220310500117
Bahrami, M., & Singhal, M. (2015). The role of cloud computing architecture in
big data. In Information granularity, big data, and computational
intelligence (pp. 275 295). Springer.
Bakhshi, T. (2017). Social engineering: Revisiting end-user awareness and
susceptibility to classic attack vectors. 1 6.
99
Bandyopadhyay, T. (2012a). ORGANIZATIONAL ADOPTION OF CYBER
INSURANCE INSTRUMENTS IN IT SECURITY RISK MANAGEMENT A
MODELING APPROACH. 7.
Bandyopadhyay, T. (2012b). Organizational Adoption of Cyber Insurance
Instruments in IT Security Risk Management A Modeling Approach.
Bandyopadhyay, T., & Mookerjee, V. (2017). A model to analyze the challenge
of using cyber insurance. Information Systems Frontiers, 1 25.
Bandyopadhyay, T., Mookerjee, V. S., & Rao, R. C. (2009). Why IT managers
cyber-insurance products. Communications of the ACM,
52(11), 68. https://doi.org/10.1145/1592761.1592780
Bayoumy, Y. (2018). Cybercrime Economy-A Netnographic Study on the Dark
Net Ecosystem for Ransomware.
Ben-Asher, N., & Gonzalez, C. (2015). Effects of cyber security knowledge on
attack detection. Computers in Human Behavior, 48, 51 61.
Benjamin, V., & Hsinchun Chen. (2012). Securing cyberspace: Identifying key
actors in hacker communities. 2012 IEEE International Conference on
Intelligence and Security Informatics, 24 29.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISI.2012.6283296
Biener, C., Eling, M., & Wirfs, J. H. (2015). Insurability of Cyber Risk: An Empirical
Analysis[dagger]. Geneva Papers on Risk & Insurance; London, 40(1),
131 158. http://0-dx.doi.org.innopac.wits.ac.za/10.1057/gpp.2014.19
100
Böhme, R., & Kataria, G. (2006). Models and Measures for Correlation in CyberInsurance. WEIS.
Bohme, R., & Schwartz, G. (2010). Modeling Cyber-Insurance: Towards A
Unifying Framework. 36.
Borum, R., Felker, J., Kern, S., Dennesen, K., & Feyes, T. (2015). Strategic cyber
intelligence. Information & Computer Security, 23(3), 317 332.
https://doi.org/10.1108/ICS-09-2014-0064
Bossong, R., & Wagner, B. (2018). A Typology of Cybersecurity and Public
Private Partnerships in the Context of the European Union. In Security
Privatization (pp. 219 247). Springer.
Bouveret, A. (2018). Cyber Risk for the Financial Sector: A Framework for
Quantitative Assessment. SSRN Electronic Journal.
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3203026
Bowen, G. A. (2008). Naturalistic inquiry and the saturation concept: A research
note. Qualitative Research, 8(1), 137 152.
Brangetto, P., & Aubyn, M. (2015). Economic aspects of national cyber security
strategies. Brangetto P., Aubyn MK-S. Economic Aspects of National
Cyber Security Strategies: Project Report. Annex, 1(9 16), 86.
Brenner, S. W. (2006). Cybercrime jurisdiction. Crime, Law and Social Change,
46(4), 189 206. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10611-007-9063-7
Broadhurst, R., Grabosky, P., Alazab, M., Bouhours, B., & Chon, S. (2014). An
Analysis of the Nature of Groups Engaged in Cyber Crime (SSRN 
101
Scholarly Paper ID 2461983). Social Science Research Network.
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2461983
Camillo, M. (2017). Cyber risk and the changing role of insurance. Journal of
Cyber Policy, 2(1), 53 63.
Carlton, M., & Levy, Y. (2017). Cybersecurity skills: Foundational theory and the
cornerstone of advanced persistent threats (APTs) mitigation. Online
Journal of Applied Knowledge Management, 5(2), 16 28.
Cherdantseva, Y., Burnap, P., Blyth, A., Eden, P., Jones, K., Soulsby, H., &
Stoddart, K. (2016). A review of cyber security risk assessment methods
for SCADA systems. Computers & Security, 56, 1 27.
Choi, S., Song, J., Kim, S., & Kim, S. (2013). A model of analyzing cyber threats
trend and tracing potential attackers based on darknet traffic: A model of
analyzing cyber threats trend and tracing potential attackers. Security and
Communication Networks, n/a-n/a. https://doi.org/10.1002/sec.796
Chou, T.-S. (2013). Security threats on cloud computing vulnerabilities.
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology, 5(3),
79.
Choucri, N., Madnick, S., & Ferwerda, J. (2014). Institutions for cyber security:
International responses and global imperatives. Information Technology
for Development, 20(2), 96 121.
Chronopoulos, M., Panaousis, E., & Grossklags, J. (2017). An options approach
to cybersecurity investment. IEEE Access, 6, 12175 12186.
102
Cisco Visual Networking Index: Forecast and Trends, 2017 2022 White Paper.
(2018). Cisco. Retrieved 29 July 2019, from
https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/serviceprovider/visual-networking-index-vni/white-paper-c11-741490.html
Collins, R. M. L. (2017). Proactive Cybersecurity Through Active Cyber Defense.
Connelly, L. M. (2016). Trustworthiness in qualitative research. Medsurg Nursing,
25(6), 435 437.
Cybersecurity Landscape America the Virtual: Security, Privacy, and
Interoperability in an Interconnected World: Foreword. American
University Law Review, 5, 1113 1130.
https://heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hein.journals/aulr62&i=1162
Costa, P., Montenegro, R., Pereira, T., & Pinto, P. (2019). The Security
Challenges Emerging from the Technological Developments. Mobile
Networks and Applications, 24(6), 2032 2037.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11036-018-01208-0
Creswell, J. W., & Creswell, J. D. (2017). Research design: Qualitative,
quantitative, and mixed methods approaches. Sage publications.
Crumpler, W., & Lewis, J. A. (2019). The cybersecurity workforce gap. Center for
Strategic and International Studies, Washington, DC.[Online]. Available:
Https://Www. Csis. Org/Analysis/Cybersecurityworkforce-Gap.
103
Daud, M., Rasiah, R., George, M., Asirvatham, D., & Thangiah, G. (2018).
Bridging the gap between organisational practices and cyber security
compliance: Can cooperation promote compliance in organisations?
International Journal of Business and Society, 19(1), 161 180.
de Bruijn, H., & Janssen, M. (2017). Building cybersecurity awareness: The need
for evidence-based framing strategies. Government Information Quarterly,
34(1), 1 7.
Digital Banking Crime Statistics. (2019). Retrieved 7 August 2019, from
https://www.sabric.co.za/media-and-news/press-releases/digital-bankingcrime-statistics/
Dowling, R. (2005). Power, subjectivity and ethics in qualitative research. In
Qualitative research methods in human geography (pp. 19 29). Oxford
University Press.
Dupont, B. (2018). Mapping the International Governance of Cybercrime.
Governing Cyber Security in Canada, Australia and the United States, 38,
23.
Eling, M., & Schnell, W. (2016). What do we know about cyber risk and cyber risk
insurance? The Journal of Risk Finance; London, 17(5), 474 491.
http://0.search.proquest.com/docview/1847390592/abstract/D84AFF71C
59B4F4EPQ/1
Eling, M., & Wirfs, J. H. (2015). Modelling and Management of Cyber Risk. 24.
104
Five massive data breaches affecting South Africans. (2018). Fin24.
https://www.fin24.com/Companies/ICT/five-massive-data-breachesaffecting-south-africans-20180619-2
Flick, U. (2014). An introduction to qualitative research. Sage.
Franke, U. (2017). The cyber insurance market in Sweden. Computers &
Security, 68, 130 144.
Fusch, P. I., & Ness, L. R. (2015). Are we there yet? Data saturation in qualitative
research. The Qualitative Report, 20(9), 1408.
Gcaza, N., & Solms, R. von. (2017). A Strategy for a Cybersecurity Culture: A
South African Perspective. The Electronic Journal of Information Systems
in Developing Countries, 80(1), 1 17. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1681-
4835.2017.tb00590.x
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) Final text neatly arranged. (2019).
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). Retrieved 3 August 2019,
from https://gdpr-info.eu/
Goel, J. N., & Mehtre, B. (2015). Vulnerability assessment & penetration testing
as a cyber defence technology. Procedia Computer Science, 57, 710 715.
Goldman, Z. K., & McCoy, D. (2016). Deterring financially motivated cybercrime.
Journal of National Security Law and Policy.
Goode, J. (2018).
Cybersecurity Countermeasures Awareness and Skills in Traditional vs.
Socio-Technical Programs.
105
Gordon, L. A., Loeb, M. P., & Sohail, T. (2003). A framework for using insurance
for cyber-risk management. Communications of the ACM, 46(3), 81 85.
https://doi.org/10.1145/636772.636774
Grobler, M., & Dlamini, Z. (2012). Global Cyber Trends a South African Reality.
8.
Grobler, M., van Vuuren, J. J., & Leenen, L. (2012). Implementation of a Cyber
Security Policy in South Africa: Reflection on Progress and the Way
Forward. In M. D. Hercheui, D. Whitehouse, W. McIver, & J.
Phahlamohlaka (Eds.), ICT Critical Infrastructures and Society (Vol. 386,
pp. 215 225). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
642-33332-3_20
desktop security behavior: A protection motivation theory perspective.
Information Systems Management, 33(1), 2 16.
Harrell, M. C., & Bradley, M. A. (2009). Data collection methods. Semi-structured
interviews and focus groups. Rand National Defense Research Inst santa
monica ca.
Hassan, A. B., Lass, F. D., & Makinde, J. (2012). Cybercrime in Nigeria: Causes,
Effects and the Way Out. 2(7), 6.
Hendrix, M., Al-Sherbaz, A., & Bloom, V. (2016). Game Based Cyber Security
Training: Are Serious Games suitable for cyber security training?
International Journal of Serious Games, 3(1).
https://doi.org/10.17083/ijsg.v3i1.107
106
Herr, T. (2019). Cyber insurance and private governance: The enforcement
power of markets. Regulation & Governance.
https://doi.org/10.1111/rego.12266
Higgs, J. L., Pinsker, R. E., Smith, T. J., & Young, G. R. (2016). The Relationship
between Board-Level Technology Committees and Reported Security
Breaches. Journal of Information Systems, 30(3), 79 98.
https://doi.org/10.2308/isys-51402
Houghton, C. E., Casey, D., Shaw, D., & Murphy, K. (2010). Ethical challenges
in qualitative research: Examples from practice. Nurse Researcher, 18(1),
15 25. https://doi.org/10.7748/nr2010.10.18.1.15.c8044
Hox, J. J., & Boeije, H. R. (2005). Data collection, primary versus secondary.
Huang, K., Siegel, M., & Madnick, S. (2018). Systematically Understanding the
Cyber Attack Business: A Survey. ACM Comput. Surv., 51(4), 70:1 70:36.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3199674
Hung, H. (2016). Confronting Cybersecurity Challenges through US-Singapore
Partnership.
Hurtaud, S., Flamand, T., de la Vaissiere, L., & Hounka, A. (2015). Cyber
insurance as one element of the cyber risk management strategy.
Available at: Www2. Deloitte. Com/Lu/En/Pages/Risk/Articles/CyberInsurance-Element-Cyber-Risk-Management-Strategy. Html.
Hurtaud, S., Flamand, T., & Hounka, A. (2015). Cyber Insurance as one element
of the Cyber risk management strategy. 6.
107
Hutchings, A. (2014). Crime from the keyboard: Organised cybercrime, cooffending, initiation and knowledge transmission. Crime, Law and Social
Change, 62(1), 1 20. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10611-014-9520-z
InfoRegSA-POPIA-act2013-004.pdf. (2013). Retrieved 3 August 2019, from
http://www.justice.gov.za/inforeg/docs/InfoRegSA-POPIA-act2013-
004.pdf
Isaak, J., & Hanna, M. J. (2018). User data privacy: Facebook, Cambridge
Analytica, and privacy protection. Computer, 51(8), 56 59.
Islam, M., & Stafford, T. (2017). Information Technology (IT) integration and
cybersecurity/security: The security savviness of board of directors.
ISO - International Organization for Standardization. (2019). ISO. Retrieved 28
July 2019, from
http://www.iso.org/cms/render/live/en/sites/isoorg/home.html
Jardine, E. (2015). Global cyberspace is safer than you think: Real trends in
cybercrime.
Johnson, K. N. (2015). Managing cyber risks. Ga. L. Rev., 50, 547.
Joshi, K., Joshi, K. P., & Mittal, S. (2019). A Semantic Approach for Automating
Knowledge in Policies of Cyber Insurance Services. 8.
Justice/Legislation. (2019). Retrieved 5 August 2019, from
http://www.justice.gov.za/legislation/legislation_main.htm
108
Kesan, J. P., & Hayes, C. M. (2017). Strengthening cybersecurity with
cyberinsurance markets and better risk assessment. Minn. L. Rev., 102,
191.
Kesan, J. P., Majuca, R. P., & Yurcik, W. (2004). The Economic Case for
Cyberinsurance.
Kesan, J. P., Majuca, R. P., & Yurcik, W. (2005). Cyber-insurance As A MarketBased Solution To The Problem Of Cybersecurity. WEIS.
Kesan, J. P., Majuca, R. P., & Yurcik, W. J. (2005). CYBERINSURANCE AS A
MARKET-BASED SOLUTION TO THE PROBLEM OF
CYBERSECURITY A CASE STUDY. 47.
Khalili, M. M., Naghizadeh, P., & Liu, M. (2018). Designing Cyber Insurance
Policies: The Role of Pre-Screening and Security Interdependence. IEEE
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, PP, 1 1.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2018.2812205
King, N. J., & Raja, V. (2012). Protecting the privacy and security of sensitive
customer data in the cloud. Computer Law & Security Review, 28(3), 308
319.
Kopp, E., Kaffenberger, L., & Jenkinson, N. (2017). Cyber risk, market failures,
and financial stability. International Monetary Fund.
Kritzinger, E, & Solms, S. (2013). A Framework for Cyber Security in Africa.
Journal of Information Assurance & Cybersecurity, 1 10.
https://doi.org/10.5171/2012.322399
109
Kritzinger, Elmarie, & Von Solms, S. (2012). A framework for cyber security in
Africa. Journal of Information Assurance & Cybersecurity, 2012, 1.
Kshetri, N. (2015a). Cybercrime and cybersecurity issues in the BRICS
economies. Journal of Global Information Technology Management,
18(4), 245 249.
sector and public-private partnership. IEEE Security & Privacy, 13(3), 16
23.
Kshetri, N. (2019). Cybercrime and Cybersecurity in Africa.
Kumar, S., & Carley, K. M. (2016). Understanding DDoS cyber-attacks using
social media analytics. 231 236.
Kumari, N., & Mohapatra, A. (2016). An insight into digital forensics branches and
tools. 243 250.
Kuper, A., Lingard, L., & Levinson, W. (2008). Critically appraising qualitative
research. Bmj, 337, a1035.
Langa, M. (2016). Adapting information technology management for effective
information technology strategy leadership.
Larson, S. (2015). The cyber security fair: An effective method for training users
to improve their cyber security behaviors. Information Security Education
Journal, 2(1), 11 19.
110
Lavorgna, A., & Sergi, A. (2016). Serious, therefore organised? A critique of the
emerging" cyber-organised crime" rhetoric in the United Kingdom.
International Journal of Cyber Criminology, 10(2), 170 187.
Lee, C.-C., Cheng, H. K., & Cheng, H.-H. (2007). An empirical study of mobile
commerce in insurance industry: Task technology fit and individual
differences. Decision Support Systems, 43(1), 95 110.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2005.05.008
Leitner, C., & Stiefmueller, C. M. (2019). Disruptive Technologies and the Public
Sector: The Changing Dynamics of Governance. In A. Baimenov & P.
Liverakos (Eds.), Public Service Excellence in the 21st Century (pp. 237
274). Springer Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-3215-9_8
Lewis, J. A. (2014). National perceptions of cyber threats. Strategic Analysis,
38(4), 566 576.
Li, L., He, W., Xu, L., Ash, I., Anwar, M., & Yuan, X. (2019). Investigating the
behavior. International Journal of Information Management, 45, 13 24.
Linkov, I., Anklam, E., Collier, Z. A., DiMase, D., & Renn, O. (2014). Risk-based
standards: Integrating top down and bottom up approaches.
Environment Systems and Decisions, 34(1), 134 137.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10669-014-9488-3
Lipson, H. (2002). Tracking and Tracing Cyber-Attacks: Technical Challenges
and Global Policy Issues. https://doi.org/10.1184/R1/6585395.v1
111
Liu, L. (2016). Using Generic Inductive Approach in Qualitative Educational
Research: A Case Study Analysis. Journal of Education and Learning,
5(2), 129. https://doi.org/10.5539/jel.v5n2p129
Manda, M. I., & Backhouse, J. (2017). Digital transformation for inclusive growth
in South Africa. Challenges and opportunities in the 4th industrial
revolution. 2nd African Conference on Information Science and
Technology, Cape Town, South Africa.
Markham, A. (2012). Fabrication as Ethical Practice. Information, Communication
& Society, 15(3), 334 353.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2011.641993
Marotta, A., Martinelli, F., Yautsiukhin, A., & Nanni, S. (2015). A Survey on CyberInsurance. 53.
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldaña, J. (2014). Qualitative data analysis: A
methods sourcebook. 3rd. Ed: Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mo, Y., Kim, T. H.-J., Brancik, K., Dickinson, D., Lee, H., Perrig, A., & Sinopoli,
B. (2011). Cyber physical security of a smart grid infrastructure.
Proceedings of the IEEE, 100(1), 195 209.
Mooketsi, T. R. (2015). Factors affecting internet and broadband penetration in
South African ordinary schools.
Moore, T., Dynes, S., & Chang, F. R. (2015). Identifying how firms manage
cybersecurity investment. Available: Southern Methodist University. 
112
Available at: Http://Blog. Smu. Edu/Research/Files/2015/10/SMU-IBM.
Pdf (Accessed 2015-12-14), 32.
Moyo, A. (2018). ts escalate. ITWeb.
https://www.itweb.co.za/content/Pero37ZgOnXMQb6m
Mubarak Alharbi, I., Zyngier, S., & Hodkinson, C. (2013). Privacy by design and
-
commerce. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 26(6), 702
718. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-07-2013-0039
Mukhopadhyay, A., Chatterjee, S., Saha, D., Mahanti, A., & Sadhukhan, S. K.
(2013). Cyber-risk decision models: To insure IT or not? Decision Support
Systems, 56, 11 26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2013.04.004
Muller, L. P. (2015). Cyber Security Capacity Building in Developing Countries.
Opportunities and Challenges. Norwegian Institute of International Affairs.
Nawang, N. I. (2017). Combating anonymous offenders in the cyberspace: An
overview of the legal approach in Malaysia. 13 18.
Newmeyer, K. P. (2015). Elements of national cybersecurity strategy for
developing nations. National Cybersecurity Institute Journal, 1(3), 9 19.
Nikolov, L., & Slavyanov, V. (2018). Network infrastructure for cybersecurity
analysis. International scientific conference.
Noble, H., & Smith, J. (2015). Issues of validity and reliability in qualitative
research. Evidence-Based Nursing, 18(2), 34 35.
113
North, J., & Pascoe, R. (2016). Cyber security and re
governance. Governance Directions, 68(3), 146.
Opdenakker, R. (2006). Advantages and disadvantages of four interview
techniques in qualitative research. 7.
Parry, O., & Mauthner, N. S. (2004). Whose Data are They Anyway?: Practical,
Legal and Ethical Issues in Archiving Qualitative Research Data.
Sociology, 38(1), 139 152. https://doi.org/10.1177/0038038504039366
Patil, S. R., Cates, S., & Morales, R. (2005). Consumer food safety knowledge,
practices, and demographic differences: Findings from a meta-analysis.
Journal of Food Protection, 68(9), 1884 1894.
Pescatore, J. (2017). Cyber Security Trends: Aiming Ahead of the Target to
Increase Security in 2017. SANS Institute InfoSec Reading Room.
Peters, G., Shevchenko, P. V., & Cohen, R. (2018). Understanding cyber-risk and
cyber-insurance. Macquarie University Faculty of Business & Economics
Research Paper.
Pfleeger, S. L., Sasse, M. A., & Furnham, A. (2014). From weakest link to security
hero: Transforming staff security behavior. Journal of Homeland Security
and Emergency Management, 11(4), 489 510.
Posey, C., Roberts, T. L., & Lowry, P. B. (2015). The Impact of Organizational
o Protect Organizational Information
Assets. Journal of Management Information Systems, 32(4), 179 214.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2015.1138374
114
finances. International Journal of Current Research & Academic Review,
2(2), 173 178.
Randall, S., & Koppenhaver, T. (2004). Qualitative data in demography: The
sound of silence and other problems. Demographic Research, 11, 57 94.
https://doi.org/10.4054/DemRes.2004.11.3
Ratten, V. (2016). Continuance use intention of cloud computing: Innovativeness
and creativity perspectives. Journal of Business Research, 69(5), 1737
1740. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2015.10.047
Roberts, L. D. (2015). Ethical issues in conducting qualitative research in online
communities. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 12(3), 314 325.
Rohmeyer, P., & Bayuk, J. L. (2019). What Can We Do? In Financial
Cybersecurity Risk Management (pp. 105 124). Springer.
Romanosky, S., Ablon, L., Kuehn, A., & Jones, T. (2019). Content analysis of
cyber insurance policies: How do carriers price cyber risk? Journal of
Cybersecurity, 5(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/cybsec/tyz002
managing cybersecurity risks. MIT Sloan Management Review, 59(2), 12
15.
Rowe, B. R., & Gallaher, M. P. (2006). Private sector cyber security investment
strategies: An empirical analysis. The fifth workshop on the economics of
information security (WEIS06).
115
Ryan, A. B. (2006). Methodology: Analysing qualitative data and writing up your
findings. Researching and Writing Your Thesis: A Guide for Postgraduate
Students, 92 108.
Sawyer, B. D., & Hancock, P. A. (2018). Hacking the human: The prevalence
paradox in cybersecurity. Human Factors, 60(5), 597 609.
Scharnick, N., Gerber, M., & Futcher, L. (2016). Review of data storage protection
approaches for POPI compliance. 48 55.
Shackelford, S. J., Proia, A. A., Martell, B., & Craig, A. N. (2015). Toward a global
cybersecurity standard of care: Exploring the implications of the 2014 NIST
cybersecurity framework on shaping reasonable national and international
cybersecurity practices. , 50, 305.
Sharma, P., Doshi, D., & Prajapati, M. M. (2016). Cybercrime: Internal security
threat. 2016 International Conference on ICT in Business Industry
Government (ICTBIG), 1 4.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICTBIG.2016.7892727
Shaw, R. S., Chen, C. C., Harris, A. L., & Huang, H.-J. (2009). The impact of
information richness on information security awareness training
effectiveness. Computers & Education, 52(1), 92 100.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2008.06.011
Shetty, N., Schwartz, G., Felegyhazi, M., & Walrand, J. (2010). Competitive
Cyber-Insurance and Internet Security. In T. Moore, D. Pym, & C. Ioannidis
(Eds.), Economics of Information Security and Privacy (pp. 229 247).
Springer US. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-6967-5_12
116
Shetty, S., McShane, M., Zhang, L., Kesan, J. P., Kamhoua, C. A., Kwiat, K., &
Njilla, L. L. (2018). Reducing informational disadvantages to improve cyber
risk management. The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance-Issues and
Practice, 43(2), 224 238.
Silva, J. D. C., Rodrigues, J. J. P. C., Saleem, K., Kozlov, S. A., & Rabêlo, R. A.
L. (2019). M4DN.IoT-A Networks and Devices Management Platform for
Internet of Things. IEEE Access, 7, 53305 53313.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2909436
Skopik, F., Settanni, G., & Fiedler, R. (2016). A problem shared is a problem
halved: A survey on the dimensions of collective cyber defense through
security information sharing. Computers & Security, 60, 154 176.
SolarWinds Federal Cybersecurity Survey Report January 2019. (2019). 30.
Stallings, W., Brown, L., Bauer, M. D., & Bhattacharjee, A. K. (2012). Computer
security: Principles and practice. Pearson Education Upper Saddle River,
NJ, USA.
Stanton, J. M., Stam, K. R., Mastrangelo, P., & Jolton, J. (2005). Analysis of end
user security behaviors. Computers & Security, 24(2), 124 133.
State-of-cybersecurity_res_eng_0316.pdf. (2016). Retrieved 3 August 2019,
from https://www.isaca.org/cyber/Documents/state-ofcybersecurity_res_eng_0316.pdf
117
Sujithra, M., Padmavathi, G., & Narayanan, S. (2015). Mobile device data
security: A cryptographic approach by outsourcing mobile data to cloud.
Procedia Computer Science, 47, 480 485.
Susanto, H., & Almunawar, M. N. (2012). Information Security Awareness Within
Business Environment: An IT Review. 25.
Sutherland, E. (2017). Governance of cybersecurity-The case of South Africa.
African Journal of Information and Communication, 20, 83 112.
Süzen, A. A. (2020). A Risk-Assessment of Cyber Attacks and Defense
Strategies in Industry 4.0 Ecosystem. International Journal of Computer
Network & Information Security, 12(1).
Swartz, P., & Da Veiga, A. (2016). PoPI Act-opt-in and opt-out compliance from
a data value chain perspective: A South African insurance industry
experiment. 9 17.
Tabansky, L. (2011). Basic Concepts in Cyber Warfare. 18.
Tabansky, L. (2017). Cyber Security Challenges: The Israeli Water Sector
Example. In Cyber-Physical Security (pp. 205 219). Springer.
Taherdoost, H. (2016). Sampling methods in research methodology; how to
choose a sampling technique for research. How to Choose a Sampling
Technique for Research (April 10, 2016).
Talmy, S. (2010). Qualitative interviews in applied linguistics: From research
instrument to social practice. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 30,
128 148.
118
Thomas, D. R. (2003). A general inductive approach for qualitative data analysis.
11.
Tianfield, H. (2016). Cyber security situational awareness. 782 787.
Tiirmaa-Klaar, H. (2016). Building national cyber resilience and protecting critical
information infrastructure. Journal of Cyber Policy, 1(1), 94 106.
Tøndel, I. A., Meland, P. H., Omerovic, A., Gjære, E. A., & Solhaug, B. (2015).
Using cyber-insurance as a risk management strategy: Knowledge gaps
and recommendations for further research.
Toregas, C., & Zahn, N. (2014). Insurance for Cyber Attacks: The Issue of Setting
Premiums in Context. 20.
Tornatzky, L. G., Fleischer, M., & Chakrabarti, A. K. (1990). Processes of
technological innovation. Lexington books.
Van Niekerk, B. (2017). An analysis of cyber-incidents in South Africa. African
Journal of Information and Communication, 20, 113 132.
Vicevich, D. L. (2018). The Case for a Federal Cyber Insurance Program
Comment. Nebraska Law Review, 2, [i]-606.
https://heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hein.journals/nebklr97&i=567
von Solms, B., & von Solms, R. (2018). Cybersecurity and information security
what goes where? Information & Computer Security, 26(1), 2 9.
https://doi.org/10.1108/ICS-04-2017-0025
119
Von Solms, R., & Van Niekerk, J. (2013). From information security to cyber
security. Computers & Security, 38, 97 102.
von Solms, R., & van Niekerk, J. (2013). From information security to cyber
security. Computers & Security, 38, 97 102.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2013.04.004
Wang, S. S. (2019). Integrated framework for information security investment and
cyber insurance. Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 57, 101173.
White, G. (2009). Strategic, tactical, & operational management security model.
Journal of Computer Information Systems, 49(3), 71 75.
Wirfs, J. H. (2016). How to Organize Cyber Risk Transfer?
Woods, D., & Simpson, A. (2017). Policy measures and cyber insurance: A
framework. Journal of Cyber Policy, 2(2), 209 226.
https://doi.org/10.1080/23738871.2017.1360927
Yang, Z., & Lui, J. C. S. (2014). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Performance Evaluation.
Yeh, C. J., & Inman, A. G. (2007). Qualitative data analysis and interpretation in
counseling psychology: Strategies for best practices. The Counseling
Psychologist, 35(3), 369 403.
Zou, Y., Zhu, J., Wang, X., & Hanzo, L. (2016). A survey on wireless security:
Technical challenges, recent advances, and future trends. Proceedings of
the IEEE, 104(9), 1727 1765.
120
ZYKLN2E3.pdf. (2017). Retrieved 5 August 2019, from
https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/ZYKLN2E3
121
I) SETTING THE SCENE
1. How long have you been a professional, your job title and description?
Response
2. What is your perception of the general term  th
Response
II) CYBER SECURITY
3. Describe your perception of the link between 4IR and cybersecurity.
Respons
e
4. What is your general perception of cybersecurity and/or cyber insurance?
Secure electronic data activity on servers,
workstations and mobile devices
Facilitates implementation of cybercrime
laws
Detects and prevents organised crime groups Improves knowledge about secure practices
Detects, prevents and corrects external and
internal threats Can be used to improve internal controls
Traces attackers Mitigate against cybe
122
General Comment:
III) TECHNOLOGY
5. Describe how your organisation ensures availability of cybersecurity technology?
123
Response
6. Describe how your organisation approaches the effectiveness of cybersecurity?
Response
124
IV) ORGANISATION
7. Describe how your organisation approach cyber risk management?
Response
8. Describe top management support to ensuring integrated risk management for your organisation?
Response
V) ENVIRONMENT
9. Describe the extent to which your organisation must comply with government regulations such as the
Protection of Personal Information?
125
Response
10. Describe the nature of your industry and how it approaches the adoption of cyber insurance?
Response
Thank you for your participation!
- - - oOo - - -
126
Participant Information Sheet
Dear Sir / Madam,
My name is Nkosinathi Sphiwe Mbatha and I am a Masters student in Digital Business at the
University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg. As part of my studies, I have to undertake a
research project, and I am investigating factors influencing cyber insurance adoption in South
Africa industry. The aim of this research project is to investigate the factors influencing cyber
insurance adoption in South Africa.
As part of this project, I would like to invite you to take part in an interview. This activity will
involve 10 interview questions and will take around 45-60 minutes. With your permission, I
would also like to record the interview using a digital mobile phone. You will not receive any
direct benefits from participating in this research, and there are no disadvantages or penalties for
not participating. You may withdraw at any time or not answer any question if you do not want
to. The interview will be completely confidential and anonymous as I will not be asking for your
name or any identifying information, and the information you give to me will be held securely
and not disclosed to anyone else. I will be using a pseudonym (false name) to represent your
participation in my final research report. If you experience any distress or discomfort at any point
in this process, we will stop the interview or resume another time.
If you have any questions anytime during the research process about this research, feel free to
contact me or my supervisor on the details listed below. This study will be written up as a research
report which will be available online through the university library website. If you wish to receive
a summary of this report, I will be happy to send it to you (optional). If you have any concerns or
complaints regarding the ethical procedures of this study, you are welcome to contact the
University Human Research Ethics Committee (Non-Medical), telephone +27(0) 11 717 1408,
email Shaun.Schoeman@wits.ac.za
Yours sincerely,
Mr Nkosinathi Sphiwe Mbatha
2261524@students.wits.ac.za / 0725105773
Supervisor: Mthandeni Langa, mthandeni@gmail.com, 0829482920
127
Consent Form
Title of project: Factors influencing cyber insurance adoption in South Africa
industry
Name of researcher: Nkosinathi Sphiwe Mbatha
research has been explained to me and I understand what my participation will involve.
Please circle the relevant options below.
I agree that my participation will remain anonymous YES NO
I agree that the researcher may use anonymous quotes
in his / her research report YES NO
I agree that the interview may be audio recorded YES NO
I agree that the information I provide may be used YES NO
anonymously by other researchers following this project



Cyber security Measures in
SMEs: a study of IT
professionals’ organizational
cyber security awareness
Author: Milos Zec
Supervisor: Miranda Kajtazi
Examiner: Christina Mörtberg
Date: 2015-06-08
Course Code: 5IK10E, 30 credits
Subject: Information Systems
Level: Master
Department of Technology

Abstract
With the significant growth and high business dependency on cyber space nowadays,
organizations are exposed to dangers such as attacks coming from Internet than ever
before. The existence of this actual issue alerts organizations to develop and always use
up to date cyber security measures. The current trends indicate that most vulnerable
organizations to cyber-attacks are small and medium enterprises (SMEs). According to
previous studies the primary reason for this occurrence is SMEs’ lack of investment in
cyber security. However, this study considers that there are additional contributors for
SMEs being more often cyber-attacked than large enterprises. In order to understand
these additional contributors a theoretical framework has been developed that considers
cyber security from three aspects: organizational, technological and psychological. The
organizational aspect presupposes that the ones who create cyber security measures are
exposed to unclear and undefined decision processes and rights that lead to system
vulnerabilities. The technological aspect focuses on disclosing IT professionals’ failure in
their organizations to meet foundational technological measures, such as the existence of
Internet firewall, logs of system events, existence of hardware and software inventory list,
data backup, antivirus software and password rules. Lastly, the psychological aspect,
explains how guilt and shame affect counterproductive work behavior and therefore
influence the cyber security decisions made by IT professionals. The collected data
analysis, that is based on interviews with IT professionals across 6 organizations in
Republic of Slovakia, show that cyber-security is yet to be developed among SMEs and it
is an issue that must not be taken lightly. Results show that the IT professionals in these
organizations need to strengthen and develop their security thinking and to bring their
awareness to a higher level, in order to decrease the vulnerability of informational assets
among SMEs. It is believed that a perspective on understanding decision-making
processes upon the cyber security measures by IT professionals in SMEs may bring a
theoretical redirection in the literature, as well as an important feedback to practice.
Keywords: cyber security, SMEs, IT professionals, decision-making, security counter
measure
3
4
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my thesis supervisor Miranda Kajtazi for
her continuous support, patience motivation and knowledge. Her guidance helped me in
all the time of research and writing of this thesis. Besides my thesis supervisor, I would
like to thank my professor Christina Mörtberg for her insightful comments and
encouragement, but also for the hard questions that incented me to widen my research
from various perspectives.
I thank my fellow students for the inspiring meetings that helped us learn through the
interaction. Many interesting ideas came from our stimulating discussions.
I would like to thank my partner for supporting me spiritually throughout writing this
thesis and my life in general.
5
List of abbreviations
CRM – Content Relationship Management System
CS – Cyber Security
CSIRT - Computer Security Incident Response Team
CWA - Complete awareness
CWB – Counterproductive Work Behavior
EU – European Union
fMRI - Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
HUWA - High unawareness
ICT – Information and Communication Technology
IS – Information System
IT – Information Technology
LOE - Lack of empowerment
LOR - Lack of resources
NGL - Negligence
PTC - Partial compliances
PTT - Predominant technological theme
SME – Small and Medium Enterprises
USB - Universal Serial Bus
VOIP – Voice Over Internet Protocol
6
Table of contents
1 Introduction .......................................................................................................10
1.1 Research Problem ....................................................................................... 11
1.2 Overall Research Aim................................................................................. 12
1.2.1 Research Questions................................................................................. 12
1.3 Topic Justification....................................................................................... 13
1.4 Research Contribution ................................................................................ 14
1.5 Scope and Limitations................................................................................. 14
1.6 The Thesis Structure ................................................................................... 15
2 Research Setting – Concepts and Definitions.................................................16
2.1 Small and Medium Enterprises................................................................... 16
2.2 Cyber Security History, Concepts and Definitions..................................... 16
2.3 Cyber Security Standards and Trends......................................................... 18
2.3.1 Cyber Security Standards........................................................................ 18
2.3.2 Cyber Security Trends............................................................................. 19
2.4 Analysis of Previous Cyber Security Research .......................................... 19
3 Theoretical framework .....................................................................................20
3.1 Current theoretical frameworks review ...................................................... 20
3.2 Argumentation for the Choice of Theoretical Framework ......................... 23
3.3 Bringing a New Psychological Perspective ................................................ 25
3.4 Developing the Theoretical Framework ..................................................... 28
3.4.1 Organizational Aspect............................................................................. 28
3.4.1.1 Pre-cyber-attack Organizational Decision Making ............................. 28
3.4.1.2 During-cyber-attack Organizational Decision Making ....................... 29
3.4.1.3 Post-cyber-attack Organizational Decision Making............................ 29
3.4.2 Technological Aspect.............................................................................. 29
3.4.3 Psychological Aspect .............................................................................. 31
4 Research Methodology......................................................................................34
4.1 Interpretive Philosophical Approach and Qualitative Research Method.... 34
4.2 Research Strategy........................................................................................ 34
4.3 Data Collection ........................................................................................... 35
7
4.3.1 Interview participants selection............................................................... 37
4.4 Data Analysis Description .......................................................................... 38
4.5 Research Validity and Reliability ............................................................... 39
4.6 Ethical Considerations................................................................................ 40
4.7 Methodology criticism................................................................................ 41
5 Empirical Findings - Themes Classification ...................................................42
5.1 General interview details and emerged themes description........................ 42
5.2 Complete Awareness Theme (CWA) ......................................................... 43
5.3 High Unawareness Theme (HUWA).......................................................... 44
5.4 Lack of Resources Theme (LOR)............................................................... 45
5.5 Negligence Theme (NGL) .......................................................................... 46
5.6 Lack of Empowerment Theme (LOE)........................................................ 49
5.7 Predominant Technological Aspect Theme (PTT) ..................................... 50
5.8 Partial Compliances Theme (PTC)............................................................. 51
6 Data Analysis and Results ................................................................................54
6.1 The Analysis of the Organizational Aspect ................................................ 54
6.1.1 Pre-cyber-attack Security Measures........................................................ 55
6.1.2 During-cyber-attack Security Measures.................................................. 57
6.1.3 Post-cyber-attack Security Measures...................................................... 58
6.2 The Analysis of the Technological Aspect ................................................. 59
6.3 The Analysis of the Psychological Aspect.................................................. 62
6.3.1 The First Set of Questions – General Level of Guilt/Shame................... 63
6.3.2 The Second Set of Questions – Distinguishing the Guilt and Shame ..... 64
6.3.2.1 During CS Measures Creation............................................................. 64
6.3.2.2 Post CS Measures Creation ................................................................. 65
7 Discussions.........................................................................................................68
7.1 General discussion ...................................................................................... 68
7.2 Implications to research and practice.......................................................... 68
7.3 Strengths and weaknesses of the thesis....................................................... 72
8 Conclusions........................................................................................................74
8.1 Future Research .......................................................................................... 77
8
References.........................................................................................................................80
Appendix 1 - Interview Guide ...........................................................................................90
Appendix 2 – Consent Form..............................................................................................94
Appendix 3 - Empirical findings from the general types of questions…….……...……..96
List of figures
Figure 1: Cyber security aspects in SMEs........................................................................ 27
List of tables
Table 1: Summary of cyber security theoretical frameworks and their aspects............... 22
Table 2: General details of IT professionals and their companies.................................... 42
Table 3: Organizational aspect interviewees' answers with the themes embedded .......... 54
Table 4: Technological aspect interviewees' answers with the themes embedded........... 59
Table 5: Psychological aspect interviewees' answers with the themes embedded ........... 62
9
10
1 Introduction
In today’s business global environment companies struggle to obtain and keep sustainable
competitive advantage on the market that in return requires being object to changes that
need to be performed in business (Fiol, 2001; Kotter, 2012; Reed and DeFillippi, 1990).
In order to achieve this aim most of business organizations find resort in some kind of
information system (IS). However, implementing IS and information technology (IT)
demands analyzing many important organizational aspects and “as applications of
information systems technology become wider and more complex, companies need more
formal planning processes” (McFarlan, McKenney & Pyburn, 1983, p. 156). One of those
important organizational aspects certainly represents the field of cyber security (CS).
According to Dhillon and Backhouse (2000) business organizations are not anymore
valued only by their physical assets but also by networks that are created with other
organizations where CS has been gaining a significant growth of its importance and
existence. Although there are no manuals for planning and implementing CS
organizational measures (Atoum, Otoom, & Amer, 2014), most of business organizations
worldwide are using some kinds of tools or policies to cope with security in the cyber
space in order to prevent external and internal cyber-attacks into their IS. However,
Kindervag et al. (2011) assert that even the enterprises in possession with very mature
and advanced cyber security measures cannot avoid each single attack in their system and
especially if the attackers are supported by financial and time resources. Despite this, it is
very important for all organizations to have developed some cyber security measures for
the purpose of decreasing the possibilities of these kinds of attacks, big or small
enterprises respectively.
The previous trends showed that in the period from 1982 to 2000 there were 38% of
internal security incidents and 31% of external ones but this trend changed from 2000 to
2003 by altering this ratio to 71% of external and 5% of internal incidents (Byres and
Lowe, 2004). The recent studies (Gostev, 2012; Raiu, 2012; Watters et al., 2012) show an
increasing number of cyber-attacks globally by each year and that this number will
continue its growth. Moreover, cyber-criminals are becoming more and more
sophisticated in using new methods and tools for cyber-attacks in economic activity areas
by targeting businesses as the actual attacking methods are becoming less effective
(Gostev, 2012). Despite being aware of the growing trend of cyber-attacks and their
sophistication globally, official statistics are not able to identify the exact volume of
cyber incidents due to organizations’ reluctance to report them (Byres and Lowe, 2004;
Choo, 2011). According to Choo (2011) this reluctance comes from three reasons. Firstly,
organizations’ fear of negative publicity and weakening of competitive advantage,
secondly, disbelief of prosecuting the perpetrators and finally, the lack of belief that the
cyber-attack was not serious enough for being reported. The term “cyber security” started
being mentioned at the beginning of early 1990s (Hansen and Nissenbaum, 2009;
Nissenbaum, 2005) and since then its popularity has been growing in today’s 
11
contemporary business. However, the latest trends emphasize that the majority of cyberattacks victims are SMEs or to be more specific, the group of firms that employ from 11
to 250 employees (Verizon Risk Team, 2012, p. 11).
It is believed that the situation is not different in Republic of Slovakia. Slovakia has
received a significant rise in foreign direct investments (Investment in Slovakia, 2013, pp.
22-23) from big international companies that potentially increases the possibility of
cyber-attacks from outside the country and therefore requires careful consideration for
creation of effective cyber security measures. The volume of SMEs in Slovakia is 99.9%
and the rest are the large enterprises which indicate that economy of this country heavily
depends on SMEs (European Commission, 2014). Such a high presence of SMEs in
Republic of Slovakia calls for attention and requires to be researched in the field of cyber
security measures in SMEs in this country. Additionally, the SMEs are often in supply
chain or some kind of partnerships with the large enterprises which makes them being an
attractive object of cyber-attacks (Verizon, 2012).
However, although a number of developments have been witnessed in the area of cybersecurity, in particular from a practical point of view, organizations develop pre-cautions
(Hu, Hart and Cooke, 2007); governments develop new protection agendas (Choo, 2011);
home users are more aware of cyber-attacks (Kritzinger, E. and von Solms, S. H., 2010);
there are still major holes in cyber security that are SMEs object to experience through
their business performance (Julisch, 2013).
1.1 Research Problem
Although, most of SMEs globally have implemented some type of cyber security
measures, those measures are in many cases minimal (Byres and Lowe, 2004). However,
the minimal cyber security measures are often not sufficient and need to be re-evaluated
and updated over the time (Byres and Lowe, 2004; Kindervag et al., 2011) due to cyber
threats develop and change rapidly (Choo, 2011). In addition there are many SMEs that
persistently invest their resources into cyber security measures, but their ISs are still weak
and harmful to cyber-attacks (Julisch, 2013). The aforementioned argumentation
represents a challenging situation and brings up a question interest about how these
organizations are led by when creating their cyber security measures but their efforts
remain unsuccessful. According to Julisch (2013) the answer lies within three aspects,
namely psychological, technological and organizational. These three aspects contain four
anti-patterns. The first anti pattern is under psychological aspect and is called
“Overreliance on intuition to make security decisions” (Julish, 2013, p. 2206). The main
drawback of this anti-pattern occurs when decision makers make decisions about creating
cyber security measures by over relying on their intuition and experience but not on
existing statistical trends and impacts of cyber-attacks. The technological aspect implies
two anti-patterns. First is called “Leaving cracks in the security foundation” and the 
12
second “Overreliance on knowledge versus intelligence” (Julish, 2013, p. 2206). While
the first suggests that IT professionals frequently neglect security basics while creating
cyber security measures which “becomes the root cause of many cyber incidents”, the
second emphasizes IT professionals’ overreliance on rather static and universal
knowledge of products such as for instance antivirus software and internet firewalls
(Julish, 2013, p. 2206). Finally, the organizational aspect presupposes that the ones who
create cyber security measures are exposed to unclear and undefined decision processes
and rights that lead to system vulnerabilities, which represents the fourth anti-pattern that
is called “Weak security governance” (Julish, 2013, p. 2207).
In summary, SMEs exposure to minimal cyber security measures which are often
insufficient and therefore require re-evaluation, place these organizations into a
challenging situation and create an urge to understand what are SMEs led by when
creating their cyber security measures.
1.2 Overall Research Aim
For the purpose of formulating the research questions in this study, one overall aim was
created. The achievement of this aim helps us later to answer the research questions. The
aim of this study is to provide new insights in regard to organizational, technological and
psychological aspects of cyber-security measures by looking at how they influence CS in
SMEs at an overall organizational level.
In order to address the aim mentioned above comprehensively, the following
characteristics will be tackled to better understand the lack of cyber security level among
SMEs:
 Aim - organizational level: New insights about organizational, technological and
psychological aspects in CS and their influence on CS in SMEs
In order to achieve the aim, this study considers foundational cyber security measures
from technological aspect, adapted measures from organizational aspect as well as a new
psychological aspect that is presented in the text further.
However, the focus of this research is on IT professionals that are in the role of IT staff
with responsibility to create cyber security measures by using their decisions for this
purpose. The phenomenon of IT staff in this context will be researched within SMEs in a
specific country (Republic of Slovakia).
1.2.1 Research Questions
Having considered the previously described research problem and formulated overall aim
abovementioned, two research questions were derived. We believe that answering the
first question is going to bring us closer to the way of SMEs’ dealing with cyber securit
13
measures creation in their challenging situation. Therefore, the first question is as
follows:
What is the awareness level of IT professionals among SMEs for dealing with cyber
security measures creation from technological, organizational and psychological
aspects?
The second research question is intended to help us to grasp what are additional possible
contributors of SMEs being in this challenging situation when it comes to the field of
cyber security. The question is as follows:
What are the reasons that SMEs are more open to cyber-attacks than large enterprises?
1.3 Topic Justification
There are several reasons that motivate this research. First, cyber security adds an extra
dimension in difference to information security due to, beside information it also includes
humans as targets that can participate in cyber-attacks without their awareness. Beside
information and people there is an additional implication of cyber-attacks for the whole
society due to cyber security includes ICT infrastructure and devices that can be accessed
over computer network (Hathaway et al., 2012). From this reason IT staff needs to be
aware of the current cyber technologies (Kumar, Mohan, and Holowczak, 2008) when
taking into account what cyber security measures they will choose and employ for
protecting information systems.
Second, despite ICT development breakthroughs which led to cyber security trends
improve rapidly over the time (Baheti and Gill, 2011), the number of new cyber-attacks is
exceeding business organizations abilities to go along and cope with them readily
(Symantec Team, 2012). Some of the causes of SMEs’ inability to cope with this problem
could be that IT staff “expose their firms to unfamiliar risks of which they are unaware,
refuse to acknowledge, or are often poorly equipped to manage” (Loch, Carr and
Warkentin, 1992, p. 173) and that these organizations are too static and lack of flexibility
in their approach for solving these issues (Julisch, 2013).
Third, the recent trends show that cyber-attacks dominate in occurrence in SMEs than in
large enterprises (Symantec Team, 2014; Verizon Risk Team, 2012) that greatly harms
these organizations financially. According to Ponemon Institute (2011) SMEs suffer
much larger costs per capita than large enterprises i.e. $1,088 versus $284. The
aforementioned arguments show that SMEs, that represent the back bone for most of the
economies worldwide, are endangered and confronted to a significant issue that needs to
be tackled at an academic and practical level.
Finally, there are plenty of newspaper articles writing about SMEs inability of tackling
cyber security measures or about their ignorance in this domain nowadays that are written 
14
and made available very recently (Anderson, 2015; Ashford, 2014; Bradley and Vaizey,
2015; Brooke, 2015; Jee, 2014). This fact indicates that this topic is very popular in the
global contemporary business nowadays with an increasing tendency of worldwide
interest.
The abovementioned arguments represent a rationale for conducting this research and
therefore tackle cyber security features in relation with IT staff and SMEs.
1.4 Research Contribution
There are several contributions of this study. Firstly, it contributes to researchers who are
interested to explore on what basis cyber security measures are created by IT
professionals in SMEs when it comes to organizational, technological and psychological
aspects. Secondly, a potential contribution of this research is to understand if IT staff,
while creating cyber security measures, unconsciously contribute to the rising trend of
cyber–attacks on SMEs as well as beside low financial investments in security in SMEs
(Rodriguez and Martinez, 2013) to reveal additional reasons of SMEs being more
attacked in the cyber space than the large enterprises nowadays. Thirdly, due to direct
foreign investments of international companies in Slovakia is in its raise, IT professionals
of these companies might find this study interesting for exploring how cyber security
measures are created in SMEs in this country. Therefore, this information could be useful
due to big enterprises usually have SMEs in their supply chain or have some other kind of
cooperation. Finally, this study may be of help to SMEs’ IT professionals to obtain an
insight which can be taken into consideration when making decisions about creating
cyber security measures for IS in organization that they work for.
1.5 Scope and Limitations
Due to increasing accessibility of organizations to the Internet and rapid development of
ICT, these organizations are becoming vulnerable to varied cyber threats (Jouini, Rabai,
and Aissa, 2014). Although cyber security represents a global issue, delimitation of this
research will be that it will only examine SMEs on the territory of Slovak Republic, more
specifically its second largest city named Kosice (Eastern Europe). According to Borbás
(2014) Slovakia’s performance within European Union (EU) single market is above EU
average due to its geographical location and openness in economic sense which adds an
extra dimension to understand decision making about cyber security measures in this
country. It also has to be mentioned that this study is time limited due to it is a study and
an integral part of a master program in information systems. Also the number of SMEs
available to participate in this study is limited.
The scope of this study will specifically focus on how organizational, technological and
psychological aspects are brought into consideration when IT staff in SMEs decides
about creation of cyber security measures. Further, this study focuses on understanding
15
why IT professionals in SMEs use their particular cyber security measures for organizing
and protecting ISs from cyber-attacks in their organization. While defining the research
problem it was addressed that Julisch (2013) proposes four cyber security anti-patterns
that are covered by psychological, technological and organizational aspects. However, the
psychological aspect will not be taken from Julisch (2013) but from Cohen et al. (2011)
and Cohen, Panter and Turan (2013) by adapting their theory of counter productive work
behavior (CWB) and guilt and shame proneness. The reason for not taking the
psychological aspect from Julisch (2013) but from Cohen et al. (2011) and Cohen, Panter
and Turan (2013) is supported in the chapter of theoretical framework of this thesis (Ch.
3). Further, two Julisch’s (2013) anti-patterns are adapted for this study that are covered
by two aspects i.e. technological and organizational. The technological aspect is adapted
by being limited only to foundational cyber security measures and Julisch (2013) refers to
it as “Leaving cracks in the security foundation”, while organizational aspect is limited
only to IT staff responsibilities and rights allocation that Julisch (2013, pp. 2206-2207)
refers to it as “Weak security governance”. Additionally, the organizational aspect will
be supplemented by SMEs use of any international, national or EU standards.
It is also important to point out that this study focuses on IT professionals in SMEs who
are responsible for security issues. However, due to the small size of sample
organizations used for this study, some of their IT professionals are responsible for the
whole ICT activities in their company. Despite their overall responsibility of the whole
ICT in their organization, we focused only on their responsibility of cyber security.
Further delimitations of this study are that it does not focus on impact assessment and risk
evaluation of cyber-attacks, cost analysis and investment decisions about CS strategy
implementation. The term “information security” is considered to be an integral part of
cyber security which is explained in details in the next chapter. Finally, this study does
not tend to define and explore the term “cyber-crime” because “crime” is object to
different definitions in different countries’ legislations but it focuses on any kinds of
attacks and dangers that come from the cyber space.
1.6 The Thesis Structure
There are eight chapters in this master dissertation. The second chapter describes the
research motivation of this study being conducted. The third chapter provides the
theoretical framework where the choice of theoretical framework is argued and a new
theoretical framework is proposed. The research methodology is presented in the fourth
chapter where the research strategy is described with the inclusion of the ethical
considerations. The chapter five represents the study of empirical findings and in the
chapter six data analysis and results are provided. Finally, the discussion is given in the
seventh chapter while the chapter eight represents conclusions with the future research
included.
16
2 Research Setting – Concepts and Definitions
In this chapter, a definition and role of SMEs is given, literature review concepts and
definitions are provided as well as standards and trends of cyber security are presented.
Later on, previous cyber security studies are introduced.
2.1 Small and Medium Enterprises
SMEs are the group of enterprises that need to fulfil two requirements. First of these
requirements is the number of employees and second the financial balance. Number of
employees must be less than 250 and the financial annual turnover must not exceed 50
million euro (European Commission, 2003). More specifically, in the group of small
enterprises belong the enterprises that employ less than 50 employees and with a financial
annual turnover less than 10 million euro and in the group of the medium enterprises
belong the enterprises that employ less than 250 employees and their financial annual
turnover does not exceed 50 million euro (European Commission, 2003). According to
Ayyagari, Beck and Demirguc-Kunt (2007) SMEs are a core sector element for fostering
the growth of economy, increasing employment and alleviating poverty. On the global
level, SMEs perform more than 90 percent of the worldwide business economy (Vives,
2006). Therefore the importance of researching SMEs requires a high attention among
researchers due to the fact that this group of enterprises represent a backbone of the
global economy.
2.2 Cyber Security History, Concepts and Definitions
Although the cyber security and its concepts change over the time, it is worth saying that
it was mentioned first time in Computer Science and Telecommunications Board’s report:
“Computers at Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age” (CSTB, 1991) which
defined this term as: ‘‘protection against unwanted disclosure, modification, or
destruction of data in a system and the safeguarding of systems themselves’’ (CSTB,
1991, p. 2). When defining CS, Nissenbaum (2005) refers to three categories. Firstly,
protection from dangerous, antisocial and disruptive communications and organizations
that come from computer networks, secondly, protection for societal infrastructures such
as for example banks, healthcare, communication media and government administration
and lastly, protecting ISs from being partially or completely disabled.
However, the term “cyber security” consists of two words, so the word “cyber” needs to
be first explained. According to Hunton, (2009) the word “cyber” refers to describing
virtual environment which is in a strong association with the Internet. Guariniello and
DeLaurentis (2014) to the word “cyber” add the word “space” so they define cyberspace
as “the interdependent network of information technology infrastructures and includes the
Internet, telecommunications networks, computer systems, and embedded processors and
controllers in critical industries”. From aforementioned arguments we can understand that 
17
the word “cyber” refers to the environment or space that can be “moved through” and
accessed by the Internet. On the other hand word “security” can be generally referred to
protection from something but Ng, Kankanhalli and Xu, (2009) refer to it as protective
technologies. However, for this study the word “security” is referred to as protective
measures.
Therefore, from the previous definitions the conclusion can be drawn that the term “cyber
security” is referred in this study as protective measures created for the space that can be
accessed by the Internet.
When it comes to protective or cyber security measures this study considers how they are
created towards organizational, technological and psychological aspects (Julisch, 2013).
According to Julisch (2013) the organizational aspect represents decisions about security
priorities and roles and in this study it refers to national, international and EU cyber
security standards, written cyber security policy and their usage in practice, information
value prioritization, system access permissions, cyber-attack measures, cyber-attack
analysis and informing stakeholders about cyber-attacks. The technological aspect in this
study implies using cyber technology protection tools such as system logs analysis,
hardware and software inventory list, system backups, antivirus threat analysis, advanced
password rules and internet firewall rules. The psychological aspect considers taking in
relation counter productive work behavior with the level of guilt and shame in IT
professionals as well as distinguishing guilt from shame proneness.
According to Hathaway et al. (2012) cyber-attacks target computer network over the
Internet but it is important to emphasize that the final target beside desktop and laptop
computers can be devices controlling traffic lights, elevators, mobile phones, washing
machines, televisions (for example in smart homes and cities) and any other assets that
can be accessed over computer network. Not a long time ago cyber-attacks could be only
performed by computer geniuses called “hackers” but as the technology has been
improving, there are tools that can even be purchased online for this purpose and an
individual who wants to perform an attack of this kind does not have to have an expert
knowledge to be successful in this aim (Potts, 2012).
According to Von Solms and Van Niekerk (2013) it is important to distinguish the terms
of information security and cyber security because information security is concerned with
information availability, confidentiality and integrity while the term cyber security beside
information, encircles ICT infrastructure and humans as part of the society. 
18
2.3 Cyber Security Standards and Trends
2.3.1 Cyber Security Standards
When it comes to international cyber security standards it would be hard not to mention
International Organization for Standardization (ISO). This organization has published
numerous security standards since 1980s but the most famous publications related to
cyber security are marked as ISO 27001 followed by ISO 27002 and ISO 27005 (Infosec
and ISO, 2013). These three standards belong to the family of information security
management standards and under the general title of Information technology – Security
techniques (ISO/IEC, 2014). ISO 27001 encompasses the requirements for information
security management systems, ISO 27002 relates to code of practice for information
security controls and ISO 27005 emphasizes information security risk management
(Infosec and ISO, 2013). Although, these three ISO standards more refer to the term of
information security, ISO 27032 encompasses cyber security guidance and covers four
domains namely information security, network security, internet security and critical
information infrastructure protection (ISO/IEC, 2012).
European Council adopted a directive to confront cyber-attacks against information
systems as a part of Digital agenda for Europe in 2020 initiative (European Commission,
2014). This directive emphasizes the importance of information systems in European
Union (EU) and points out that cyber-attacks can be critical to both, private and public
sector in EU (European Parliament, 2013). Beside this directive EU also established
European cybercrime platform, work with global stakeholders against computer-based
security attacks and supports EU wide cyber security preparedness exercises (European
Commission, 2013).
According to Rezek et al. (2012, p. 9) there is “no state-sponsored institution in Slovakia
specialized exclusively in the whole spectrum of cyber security issues”. They continue by
explaining that cyber security is dispersed among Slovak National Accreditation Service,
National Security Authority, Ministry of Interior, Ministry of Defense, Ministry of
Finance and Personal Data Protection Office. However, the Ministry of Finance of
Slovak Republic has established so called Computer Security Incident Response Team
that is in charge to protect critical information and communication infrastructure (CSIRT,
2009).
It remains being a question how many SMEs in Slovakia really use these or any other
cyber security standards to protect their ISs but this question we categorized into
organizational aspect of cyber security and asked our IT professionals that we
interviewed.
19
2.3.2 Cyber Security Trends
While reports from 2011 and 2012 showed that SMEs were target to 50% of all cyberattacks, the report from 2013 shows that this number increased to 61% (Symantec Team,
2014, p. 30). One of the reasons that attacks in the cyber space are concentrated on SMEs
in this proportion is that the majority of big organizations have already developed and
implemented advanced cyber security measures for their ISs, which is not the case with
SMEs so attacking them represents a lower risk for cyber attackers to be revealed in their
actions (Verizon Risk Team, 2012, p. 20). According to Verizon Risk Team (2012, p. 17)
there is a possibility of SMEs being more often object to cyber-attacks because they are a
part of supply chain or are business partners of big enterprises so perpetrators find easier
to get to the big organizations through the small ones that are less well protected. This is
why some large organizations approach SMEs and offer them help to deal with security
in the cyber space (Gostev, 2012).
However, as previously mentioned, despite of awareness for increasing trends of cyberattacks on the global level, it is not easy to verify their number through the real statistics
due to firms’ reluctance to report them fearing to compromise themselves either in front
of their clients or disbelieving these attacks are enough serious and dangerous (Byres and
Lowe, 2004; Choo, 2011).
2.4 Analysis of Previous Cyber Security Research
There have been a lot of studies conducted in cyber security field since this term appeared
for the first time. At beginning of the cyber era Loch, Carr and Warkentin (1992)
performed a study where they identified four dimensions of IS cyber-attacks. First
dimension is distinguished by source of attack which can be internal and external. The
second dimension represents sorts of perpetrators which can be human or non-human.
The third dimension is classified by intention of attack that could be either accidental or
intentional and finally the fourth dimension reflects the consequences of attacks such as
information system modification, destruction, disclosure and denial of use. Batsell, Rao
and Shankar (2005) developed a framework for detecting new cyber-attacks for
information systems by creating measures of real-time detection and a recent study shows
that cyber security threats can be categorized according to adversary goals where they can
be classified according to attack techniques and attack goals (Jouini, Rabai, and Aissa,
2014). These cyber-attack categorizations and classifications can help IT professionals to
improve cyber security measures in their organizations. However, this study adapts and
uses Julish’s (2013) proposal of why cyber security often fails in organizations despite
investing enough resources where technological and organizational aspects are taken into
consideration and from Cohen et al. (2011) and Cohen, Panter and Turan (2013) by
adapting their theory of counter productive work behavior and guilt and shame proneness.
20
3 Theoretical framework
This chapter first reviews the current cyber security theoretical frameworks in academic
literature and provides the argumentation for the choice of the theoretical framework for
this thesis. After that, a theoretical framework is going to be developed for this particular
paper and its model will be graphically presented.
3.1 Current theoretical frameworks review
While it is a dilemma to agree what the best decision about security strategy for a
company is, there is a common existing problem in practice that organizations often
underestimate organizational aspect of security strategy and overemphasize the
technological aspect (Kajtazi, 2013). However, as we will see further, some researchers
developed theoretical frameworks about cyber security measures creation where
sometimes even organizational aspect prevails. Therefore it is important to summarize
several important theoretical frameworks proposed previously, which focus on cyber
security and represent their aspects.
One of the pioneering cyber security frameworks was represented by Ban and Heng
(1995) in their article “Computer security issues in small and medium-sized enterprises”.
They proposed how to create security measures in SMEs and defined them like tasks
namely to be: (i) issue a computer security policy statement; (ii) assign responsibilities
and accountabilities for security; (iii) educate all staff on security issues; and (iv)
establish a simple enforcement plan and a follow-up strategy to monitor security
compliance (Ban and Heng, 1995, p. 23). Security policy statement is meant to be
conveyed to all organization’s employees and also represents legal evidence.
Responsibilities and accountabilities assignment implies allocation of corresponding
security positions and roles to employees. Staff education on security issues considers
raising employees’ awareness on security issues in general while the last task focuses on
creation of security enforcement plan that should be aligned to company’s strategy.
Although this particular framework was developed early on when many organizations
have not even considered incorporating security strategies in their business agenda, this
framework shows us that Ban and Heng (1995) put less weight on the technological
aspect and no weight on the psychological aspect as opposed to the organizational aspect.
Dutta and McCrohan (2002) in their article Management’s Role in Information Security
in Cyber Economy provided a theoretical framework that entails three dimensions of a
balanced approach of security for organizations. However, they argue that security is in
the first place a management but not a technological issue. They propose a framework
that consists of three cornerstones. The first cornerstone represents the organizational
aspect that implies business structure and environment, politics and culture, operational
procedures and education, for example on awareness. Secondly, there is a technological
cornerstone that contains internet firewalls, password rules, detection of intrusions and 
21
secure servers. Finally, the third cornerstone is called critical infrastructure and encircles
critical infrastructure protection which is usually under government’s rule which leads us
to conclude that organizations do not have control over this last dimension. The main
components of critical infrastructure are namely critical infrastructure protection,
government industry collaboration and managements’ role in critical infrastructure.
According to Dutta and McCrohan (2002) security must be left to senior management
who must initiate and manage security policies and plans, particularly because if the
security function is left with the IT staff, the technological dimension will be
overemphasized. It stays unclear how the third dimension i.e. the critical infrastructure
protection can be controlled by the senior management as previously mentioned, because
it is under government’s ownership and maintenance. Additionally, we are of opinion that
all the three dimensions need to be in balance and that IT staff also has to be included
when decisions are initiated and implemented.
In a case study presented by Tawileh, Hilton and McIntosh (2007), security management
process creation for SMEs is conducted by soft systems methodology, which contains
four stages. They emphasize the importance of flexibility while defining security goals
where the minimum resource requirements are crucial for the success of their approach.
Specifically, the stages they propose are goals definition, action identification,
implementation and monitoring and review. In the first stage security goals need to be
defined by specifying their aims and objectives. The second stage includes action
determination that needs to be accomplished in order to achieve the aims and objectives
of previous goals defined. In the third stage the determined actions need to be performed
and the last stage should encompass changes in business environment that would then
allow to know how to be respondent to the changes.
Mattern et al. (2014) propose a quite creative or better said proactive way of thinking
when it comes to cyber security measures creation. They support intelligence-driven
cyber security that is based on proactive measures of protection and the theoretical
framework that they propose encircles three intelligence led operations. The first is
proactive security posture that covers defense of network, legal efforts, public relations as
well as other operations of business. The second operation is to understand threats of the
environment, in a timely and accurate fashion and the last measure is to create decisions
that are based on data. Mattern et al. (2014) assert that cyber security measures must be
proactive but not defensive i.e. reactive because once when a perpetrator is already in the
system it may be too late to react and to avoid a potential damage to organization. They
state that in the essence of their framework there is importance to know what is “not
known” and in that way to decrease uncertainty for professionals who make decisions
which can be achieved through using data i.e. intelligence.
In his proposal for holistic approach of cyber security measures creation and while at the
same time explaining why cyber security measures often fail in business organizations, 
22
Julisch (2013) identifies three aspects being crucial to consider when creating cyber
security measures. As mentioned before these are organizational, technological and
psychological aspects. Organizational aspect implies clear distribution of responsibilities
and rights for IT staff. The aspect of technology refers of having created firm and steady
cyber security measures foundation and that when IT professionals create these measures
their knowledge should not rely only on security products databases as it for example is
antivirus software database but also to take advantage of their knowledge acquired from
other sources. Finally, the psychological aspect asserts not to rely on intuition but on
statistical data of cyber-attacks like for example their nature and concentration on certain
subjects.
In order to summarize the abovementioned theoretical frameworks, Table 1 is created.
The table shows containing aspects of theoretical frameworks that were found while
scrutinizing existing cyber security measures creation literature.
Table 1: Summary of cyber security theoretical frameworks and their aspects
 Cyber security aspects
Author Organizational Technological Psychological Critical
infrastructure
Ban and Heng
(1995)
Computer security
policy;
responsibility and
accountability
assignment; all
staff education;
establishment of
enforce plan and
following-up
strategy;
X X X
Dutta and
McCrohan
(2002)
Business structure
and environment;
politics and culture;
operational
procedures and
education;
Internet firewalls;
Password rules;
detection of
intrusion; secure
servers;
X
Critical
infrastructure
protection;
government
industry
collaboration;
managements’ role
in critical
infrastructure
protection;
Tawileh, Hilton
and McIntosh
(2007)
Goals definition;
action
identification;
implementation;
monitoring and
review;
X X X
Mattern et al.
(2014)
Creating decisions
based on data
Proactive security
posture (network
defense, to public
relations, legal
efforts, and other
Understanding
threats of the
environment
X
23
business
operations)
Julisch (2013)
Defining clear
decisions processes
and rights
Security
foundation to be
well established
(existence of
Internet firewall,
logs of system
events, existence
of hardware and
software inventory
list; data backup;
existence of
antivirus software;
existence of
password rules;
Over reliance on
statistical and other
data but not on
intuition when
making decisions
X
As we can see in the Table 1, it shows the summary of theoretical frameworks that are
created in order to help decision making when creating cyber security measures.
Organizational aspect is taken onto consideration in each theoretical framework and
followed by technological aspect in its frequency. The psychological aspect is offered by
Mattern et al. (2014) and Julisch (2013) while the aspect of critical infrastructure is
proposed only by Dutta and McCrohan (2002). However, the aspect of critical
infrastructure is not clear how to use due to organizations do not have control over it.
3.2 Argumentation for the Choice of Theoretical Framework
As we could see Ban and Heng (1995) focus on organizational aspect by proposing
creation of security policy statement, responsibilities and accountabilities allocation as
well as to create enforcement plan. Moreover, by proposing all organization staff
education they also focus on socio-organizational aspect and we could say that the
technological aspect is neglected. This is not the case with Dutta and McCrohan (2002)
who strongly argue that cyber security is primarily organizational i.e. management issue
due to if it is left to IT professionals, they would put more weight on technological
aspect. In addition, beside organizational and technological aspects that they propose,
they also add the third, as they call, cornerstone of critical infrastructure. Although Dutta
and McCrohan (2002) admit that management does not have any control over the critical
infrastructure, they assert that it is management’s responsibility to balance these three
dimensions which brings up quite a paradoxical situation. Similarly to Ban and Heng
(1995) and their organizational approach of cyber security measures creation, Tawileh,
Hilton and McIntosh (2007) also support more organizational than technological or any
other theoretical aspect in this domain. Actually, their framework reminds us on four
management functions i.e. planning, organization, leading and controlling (Robbins,
DeCenzo, and Gao, 2007). They propose goals definition as the first step (planning), then
action identification (organizing), afterwards implementation (leading) and finally 
24
monitoring and review (controlling). As we saw, Mattern et al. (2014) present a
theoretical framework about cyber security measures creation that operates within the
field of intelligence-driven cyber security and we know that decisions based on
intelligence represent predicting future by analysis of data (Turban et al., 2010). Although
the last measure, i.e. creating decisions based on data, is similar to Julisch’s (2013)
psychological aspect, Mattern et al. (2014) do not define their framework strictly but
leave some gaps for readers to understand by guessing. Such an example is where they
present their first operation which is proactive security posture where they number the
defense of network, legal efforts, public relations as well as other operations of business
but do not specify exactly which business operations they are. Finally, Julisch (2013)
covers and explains three aspects that he proposes in his theoretical framework. It is a
very good point to notice that when it comes to technological aspect, certain
organizations invest their resources but some parts of security foundations are neglected
and this directly leads to security issues. Organizational aspect must not be neglected and
clear distribution of responsibilities for IT professionals such as for example, system
permissions must be defined and distributed necessarily. Moreover, in his study, Julisch
(2013) includes the psychological aspect where he argues that cyber security decisions
should not be made intuitively but they should be based on existing data. However,
although Julisch (2013) clearly describes how to measure technological and
organizational aspects in his study, it remains unclear how to measure the psychological
aspect i.e. if IT professionals, while making decisions about cyber security creation are
led by intuition or statistical data or even both, respectively.
The fact that Julisch (2013) does not pay less attention neither to organizational nor
technological or psychological aspect and that he does not overemphasize any of them, is
one of the reasons why this framework is the key for this study, which intends to
highlight the value of all of the three aspects in creating security measures by IT
professionals.
The second reason is, that Julisch (2013), after describing each aspect and identifies
problems and causes of weak cyber security in organizations, also proposes how to
overcome these specific problems which is not the case with the frameworks mentioned
above. Being more specific, at the end of technological and organizational aspects,
Julisch (2013) provides comprehensive tasks that need to be accomplished in order to
close cyber security gaps which he expresses by writing in imperative grammatical mood.
In his study, after presenting the psychological aspect, he does not exactly specify the
tasks that need to be done but explains from a general point of view what to pay attention
about and describes the most frequent cases of cyber security omissions that are also
based on his personal experience.
The third reason for not taking any of frameworks mentioned above is that, as we could
see Ban and Heng (1995) and Tawileh, Hilton and McIntosh (2007) mostly focus on 
25
organizational aspect where Tawileh, Hilton and McIntosh (2007) base their framework
on four management functions. Further, Dutta and McCrohan (2002) advocate the idea
that cyber security is primarily management (organizational) issue and assert the third
aspect to be critical infrastructure over which neither organizations and therefore nor IT
professionals have any influence. Finally, although Mattern et al. (2014) build their
theoretical framework upon foundations of intelligence and well define their
technological aspect, they fail to precisely identify their proposed dimension for
operation of proactive security posture.
Despite the advantages of Julisch’s (2013) organizational and technological aspects, it
must be criticized that he does not clearly describe how to measure the psychological
aspect that is based on intuition. In this study, if we decided to measure the psychological
aspect based on intuition then the whole study would change methodologically because,
the intuition, would require to be observed in a longitudinal study rather than what this
study proposes. By other words, the psychological aspect would need in-depth analyses
and complex methods to derive the desired results. One of these analyses is conducted by
Schneier (2008) where, in order to explore psychology of security, he uses the field of
neuroscience which helps intuition to be understood by exploring parts of the brain such
as neocortex and amygdala that are brought in relation with thinking emotionally and
intellectually. Studies that would also take this kind of psychological factor into
consideration could, for instance, conduct an experiment with functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) that would certainly lead to better understanding of decisions
based on intuition and personal experience (Krawczyk et al., 2013; Sahito and Slany,
2012).
While this study does not propose to make such complex measurements on the
psychological aspect, as a reflection to the arguments developed above, another
perspective of how the psychological aspect could be analyzed in this study is described
below.
3.3 Bringing a New Psychological Perspective
In their attempt to understand what drives counterproductive work behavior (CWB)
among employees in organizations, Cohen, Panter, and Turan, (2013) investigated the
relationships between CWB and guilt and shame proneness. Fox, and Spector (2005) and
Spector, Bauer, and Fox, (2010) define CWB as behavior that is counterproductive to
organizations in a way that harm employees and organizations per se. As Cohen, Panter,
and Turan, (2013) identify, this kind of behavior involves intentionally doing work
incorrectly, stealing employer’s assets from work or writing more working hours than it
was worked or abusing colleagues or intentionally wasting employer’s supplies or
materials. From this we can grasp that CWB is not a single behavior, but it consists of a
set of behaviors. Additionally, in case of IT professionals and their responsibilities about 
26
creating cyber security measures, it would be a huge risk and potential waste of firm’s
resources to have a person in this role that is prone to CWB.
According to Berry, Carpenter and Barratt (2012) CWB can be measured in two ways; by
observation and self-reports. However, self-reports are considered more measurement
trustworthy due to employees have more knowledge about their job responsibilities and
their own behavior but to achieve a full effect participants must be guaranteed complete
anonymity (Cohen, Panter, and Turan, 2013).
According to Cohen et al. (2011) high level of guilt and shame proneness are directly
proportional to each other but indirectly proportional with unethical making of decisions.
They assert that guilt and shame proneness are not emotional state but rather an
emotional trait and prior studies proved that people with higher guilt and shame
proneness less likely engage in the set of behavioral activities that indicate CWB. As
Cohen, Panter, and Turan, (2013, p. 6) put:
“… for guilt-prone individuals public surveillance should not be required to prevent
moral transgressions; instead, their conscience should guide them in their decision
making.” (Cohen, Panter, and Turan, 2013, p. 6).
In their study, Cohen, Panter, and Turan, (2013) found that it would be wise that while
making hiring decisions, employers consider guilt and shame proneness.
They measured guilt and shame proneness by conducting survey where asked their
participants to imagine themselves in different kind of specific situations. Some of the
questions that Cohen, Panter, and Turan, (2013) had in their survey they put as:
“After realizing you have received too much change at a store, you decide to keep it
because the salesclerk doesn't notice. What is the likelihood that you would feel
uncomfortable about keeping the money?” (Cohen, Panter, and Turan, 2013, pp. 9-10).
“At a coworker’s housewarming party, you spill red wine on their new cream-colored
carpet. You cover the stain with a chair so that nobody notices your mess. What is the
likelihood that you would feel that the way you acted was pathetic?” (Cohen, Panter, and
Turan, 2013, p. 10).
“You lie to people but they never find out about it. What is the likelihood that you would
feel terrible about the lies you told?” (Cohen, Panter, and Turan, 2013, p. 10).
Although most of people use “guilt” and “shame” terms interchangeably, these words
differ in their meaning. Cohen et al. (2011) explain this difference by describing two
schools of thought i.e. public-private distinction and the self-behavior distinction. The
public-private distinction implies that transgressions that are committed publically
provoke feeling of shame but the ones that are committed privately (not in public), 
27
provoke feelings of guilt. On the other hand, in the self-behavior distinction school of
thought shame focuses on one’s self where that person creates self-impression such as “I
am a bad person”, while guilt emphasizes one’s behavior by creating a statement such as
“I did a bad thing”. In their study Cohen et al. (2011, p. 51) found that “guilt proneness is
more adaptive than shame proneness in terms of psychological functioning”. This can be
explained by realizing that persons with high level of guilt proneness after making a
mistake or failure are aware of that and they are motivated to make correction and to
apologize while people with high level of shame proneness tend to run away and avoid
coping with consequences (Tangney and Dearing, 2002). Despite these differences, as
mentioned above, people with higher level of guilt and shame proneness are less likely to
interfere in counter productive work behavior.
Having in consideration that the psychological aspect can be studied from a perspective
other than the intuition as originally proposed in Julisch (2013), taking a guilt and shame
proneness perspective would allow us to develop a new understanding on why and how
IT professionals take particular decisions when choosing security measures. The latter
also informs us about how IT professionals would react after they have taken decisions to
incorporate security measures in their organization, which they find that it may have not
been the best solution. Thus, based on these arguments it is considered that guilt and
shame proneness can be used as a part of theoretical framework to understand the
psychological aspect of cyber security. More specifically, as we can understand, guilt and
shame proneness represents an emotional trait that can affect IT professionals’ during or
post decisions making after they for example realize that a wrong decision had been made
while deciding about their cyber security measures.
Having in consideration abovementioned, Figure 1 is created in order to depict the model
that represents the interplay of three cyber security aspects that is proposed to be brought
into this field.
Figure 1: Cyber security aspects in SMEs
28
3.4 Developing the Theoretical Framework
Here we develop a theoretical framework based on two theoretical perspectives. One by
Julisch (2013) by adapting his organizational and technological aspects and the other by
Cohen et al. (2011) and Cohen, Panter and Turan (2013) by adapting their guilt and
shame proneness i.e. psychological aspect. This blended theoretical framework is meant
to help us to understand IT professionals’ decission making on cyber security measures in
their organizations.
3.4.1 Organizational Aspect
When making decisions about cyber security measures in organizations it is not sufficient
to be limited only to technological but it is also important to develop and include
organizational domain (Julisch 2013; Kajtazi 2013). It needs to be emphasized that weak
governance creates gaps that leave organizations harmful to cyber-attacks (Julisch 2013).
According to Weill and Ross (2005, p. 64) IT governance specifies “the decision rights
and accountability framework to encourage desirable behavior in using IT”. However,
Julisch (2013) asserts that huge numbers of organizations do not clearly define
responsibilities, rights and roles in a case of a cyber-attack occurrence in their IS.
In order to adapt and present Julisch’s (2013) organizational aspect in a comprehensive
manner we decided to divide organizational cyber security decision creation into three
phases. The first phase represents pre-cyber-attack organizational decision making, the
second during-cyber-attack organizational decision making and the third post-cyberattack organizational decision making.
3.4.1.1 Pre-cyber-attack Organizational Decision Making
Under pre-cyber-attack organizational decision making we consider all the measures that
are or could be created in order to prevent cyber-attacks. Here at the first place we would
like to see if any of national, EU or international cyber security standards are adopted and
used in particular organization. As mentioned and described before, these standards exist
and could represent a useful security guide for IT professionals even if only partly
adopted.
Although cyber security standards exist, Julisch (2013) claims that there is not a unique
optimal way to deal with organizing cyber security for every organization due to each
organization is object to distinct business strategy, culture and organizational structure. In
order to define these specific organizational needs, cyber security policy can be created.
According to Doherty and Fulford, (2006, p. 2), “information security policy provides a
framework to ensure that systems are developed and operated in a secure manner”.
29
However, despite security policy creation is an essential point in organizational cyber
security, it should be ensured that it is used in the practice (Bulgurcu, Cavusoglu and
Benbasat, 2010).
Governing security priorities is another important factor of organizational aspect of cyber
security due to each asset in an IS has different organizational value and therefore priority
which identification must be evaluated by certain processes (Julisch, 2013). Julisch
(2013) adds that based on IS asset priority there must be set up system access permissions
(for example, e-mail accounts, share drives) and there are usually disagreements about
whose responsibility is to decide about these permissions i.e. company’s management or
IT professionals.
3.4.1.2 During-cyber-attack Organizational Decision Making
The consideration that is taken under this phase is the organizational decision about who
and how to act in the real time of a cyber-attack. In order to specify what needs to be
done in the case of such an attack organizational responsibilities and accountabilities
must be made (Julisch, 2013). Some of examples of these decisions could be the roles and
accountabilities such as whether the server or only Internet connection should be shut
down during the attack and if yes, by who.
3.4.1.3 Post-cyber-attack Organizational Decision Making
The last phase represents the post organizational activities after a cyber-attack has
occurred. Going further with organizational aspect Julisch (2013) addresses what
responsibilities need to be taken after cyber-attack has occurred. Here he emphasizes the
importance of deciding if the attack was an isolated case or it was a large-scale attack that
is directly meant to target the current organization and how the impact of the attack that
happened is assessed in order to obtain this information.
Finally, it is also important that after the attack has passed someone needs to be informed
about it (for example clients, stakeholders, national cyber security body) and there should
be a person who has that role (Julisch, 2013).
These are the three phases that comprise organizational cyber security aspect and
decision making in organizations. Julisch (2013) does not present proposed
organizational aspect in three phases but we did it in order to present this aspect more
comprehensively and more easily to be understood.
3.4.2 Technological Aspect
Empirical evidence shows that most of organizations that were victims of cyber-attacks
were not fully familiar with the basics of cyber security measures and that “it is still
common to find organizations that lack fundamental security controls” (Julisch, 2013, p.
2206). Further, according to Verizon Risk Team annual report (2012) 80% of cyber-
30
attacks were performed successfully only because the foundational security measures
were not met in those organizations.
In his survey about computer crime and security, Richardson (2008) finds that only 50%
of responders track logs in their management system. Lack of monitoring system logs in
organizations represents a huge factor for successful cyber-attacks (Verizon Risk Team,
2012). From aforementioned facts it can be concluded that tracking and monitoring
system logs represents one of technological cyber security foundations for ISs in
organizations. Moreover, Julisch (2013) emphasizes that it is not sufficient only to track
and monitor the system logs but they also need to be analyzed for successful cyberattacks prevention.
Organizations often do not have complete and correct inventory list of their hardware and
software assets that results with not knowing which devices and software are authorized
in their IS (Julisch, 2013). This directly leads to firms’ inability to identify software or
devices that should not be authorized in their cyber space Montesino and Fenz (2011) and
could be perpetrator’s tools for performing a cyber-attack.
Siegel, Sagalow and Serritella (2002, p. 36) provide an extensive guidance for data
backup and archival for ISs where they stress that “backups should be made regularly –
as often as daily depending on the requirements of the business – and should be stored
off-site to prevent loss or damage”. Despite system backup is good old and proven
practice in the “computer world” Julisch (2013) points out that many organizations either
have incomplete backups or they are slow for retrieval.
Vulnerability scanning of ISs is a good practice to mitigate cyber-attacks but it is useless
without ability of results evaluation (Julisch, 2013). Many cyber-attacks on SMEs
represent so called “opportunistic attacks” that is not so difficult to prevent by using
antivirus software (Maisey, 2014). Unlike targeted cyber-attacks, opportunistic cyberattacks require much less sophistication of perpetrators (Kshetri, 2005) due to they are
random and without any specific aim or purpose.
Using passwords is a well-known technique for protection in the cyber space however
there are two factors addressed by Sommestad, Ekstedt and Johnson (2009). These two
factors are “the strength of passwords, and if there is a limitation to the number of
attempts that an attacker can try passwords using standard logon functionality”
(Sommestad, Ekstedt and Johnson, 2009, p. 4). There is a frequent problem in
organizations that represents intrusions thankfully to shared, default or weak passwords
(Julisch, 2013) so specific character password rules as well as changing passwords over
the time is a good practice that adds to cyber security foundation.
Finally, in order to prevent perpetrators’ cyber-attacks organizations must install and
implement internet firewall (Dimopoulos et al., 2004). However, only existence of an 
31
internet firewall does not mean automatically that the system is safe (Lopes and Oliveira,
2014). Company assets in the cyber space must be classified by its priority and
accordingly internet firewall rules applied (Julisch, 2013). Otherwise the existence of the
full cyber security foundation is a mere pretext.
Technological aspect of cyber security is a broad field but as we could see this study
focuses on cyber security foundations such as existence of internet firewall, logs of
system events, existence of hardware and software inventory list, data backup, antivirus
software and password rules. More specifically, the technological aspect of cyber security
foundation is applied in order to understand how IT professionals in SMEs decide to
employ these cyber security measures and why they are included or some of them are not
included for protection of ISs in their organization.
3.4.3 Psychological Aspect
As mentioned before there are two ways of measuring CWB i.e. by self-reports and
observation (Berry, Carpenter and Barratt, 2012), where self-reports are considered to
derive more reliable results due to only an employee knows the best what his/her own
behavior is and what the work responsibilities require at the particular job position
(Cohen, Panter, and Turan, 2013). This is the reason why interviews are chosen in order
to elicit the level of shame and guilt proneness among IT professionals. Additionally, the
condition of self-reports implies a full confidentiality of respondents.
Further, according to abovementioned, it is advisable for employers to take in
consideration the level of guilt and shame proneness due to people with the higher level
of these psychological traits are less likely to interfere with immoral and unethical actions
that in short or long run would inevitably lead to CWB (Cohen, Panter and Turan, 2013).
Therefore, we conclude that in the case of low level of guilt and shame proneness in IT
professionals it could be risky business for organizations as during and post creation of
cyber security measures some security gaps can stay open and not reported to the
management. This is why, in this study we first establish the general level of guilt and
shame proneness of IT staff in SMEs in Slovakia by asking first set of three more general
questions in order to elicit interviewees’ answers. Second, we ask them the second set of
three questions related to specific area of during and post cyber security measures
creation in order to understand whether these persons are more in possession of guilt or
shame proneness.
The first set of questions provides us with a general level of both, guilt and shame
proneness that helps us to understand whether guilt and shame proneness indicate
unethical behavior in regard to their decision-making about their security measures
placed in their organization. The second set of questions helps us to distinguish the guilt
and shame proneness of IT staff which is meant to give us the insight whether IT
professionals are likely to be prone to guilt, which would indicate they are likely to 
32
accept the mistake, apologize and correct it, or they are more prone to shame that
indicates their affinity to “run away” from problem i.e. not to face the consequences and
not to apply necessary corrections. In other words, people with higher value of shame
proneness are more able to hide mistakes.
In overall we believe that the answers on these two sets of questions will provide us with
answer if psychological traits such as guilt and shame proneness add to the fact of why
SMEs are being more cyber-attacked than large enterprises.
The interview questions can be found in the interview guide in the Appendix 1 of this
thesis.
33
34
4 Research Methodology
In this section, interpretive philosophical approach, qualitative research method and
research strategy are introduced. Afterwards, how the data was collected, interview
participants selected and how the data would be analyzed are presented. Lastly, there is a
description of this research validity and reliability, ethical considerations and finally the
research methodology was criticized.
4.1 Interpretive Philosophical Approach and Qualitative Research Method
There is a raising interest among researchers to use interpretive philosophical approach
when it comes to researching information systems (Myers and Avison, 2002). Interpretive
philosophical assumption tempts to provide understanding of human interactions and
experience which represents a social phenomenon where “the researcher seeks to
establish the meaning of a phenomenon from the view of participants” (Creswell, 2009,
p. 22). According to Walsham (2006) interpretive research presents people as social
beings and has subjective point of view that concerns the reality. Therefore this study
follows interpretivism as a philosophical underpinning by tending to understand making
decisions of creating cyber security measures of IT professionals when taking into
consideration technological, organizational and philosophical perspectives.
Considering the purpose of this study, the qualitative research method drives the analysis
and results in this thesis. Myers and Avison (2002) assert that qualitative research method
predominates in social science in order to understand complex cultural and social
phenomena where interviews and observations represent some of the typical types of data
sampling, where the whole research must be taken into consideration such as potential
limitations, targeted objectives as well as available time and resources. According to
Creswell (2009, p. 20), “qualitative research is fundamentally interpretive”. Creswell
(2009) explains that data interpretations are made by the researcher, which includes
description development of a setting or individual where data are analyzed for categories
or themes. According to Lichtman (2013) the purpose of qualitative research is to
understand “the whole” (feelings and ideas) of interviewed participants in natural setting.
Due to aforementioned arguments, this study uses qualitative research method in order to
achieve its overall aim in regard to technological, organizational and philosophical
aspects when IT professionals make decisions about creating cyber security measures in
SMEs in Republic of Slovakia. In addition, this study is therefore driven by the
interpretive paradigm where the social reality is a network of assumptions (Dhillon and
Backhouse, 2001).
4.2 Research Strategy
There are different types of qualitative research strategies that need to be carefully
considered in relation of the nature of the study. According to Creswell (2009) some of 
35
these strategies are grounded theory, phenomenological research, ethnography, action
research and narrative research. However, empirical research is taken into consideration
when the real life phenomena is being investigated for acquiring knowledge of complex
problems that need to be understood (Yin, 2009). The complexity of the problem
introduced in this study comes from the possibility of different cyber security measures
creation in SMEs where IT professionals answer interview questions based on their
experience and knowledge that was gained from their everyday work setting.
This study focuses on six different SMEs and their different contexts where experience
and knowledge of IT participants let us understand why they make certain choices about
the security measures that are in place in their organizations. For a detailed overview of
the data collection method, the section below gives a detailed introduction.
4.3 Data Collection
In this study, interviews are used as a method for data collection. Interviews mostly
represent studies of an interpretive nature by accessing participants’ interpretations in the
research field (Walsham, 2006). In one of his papers, Walsham points out the importance
of time management while conducting interviews (Walsham, 1995). While conducting
interviews for this study we could experience what Walsham meant under the good time
management. Firstly, most of participants, i.e. the IT professionals, were very busy with
their everyday work activities and had a tight schedule so the given interview time had to
be utilized very well. Secondly, at interview initiation, each IT professional was quite
suspicious about this study’s purpose despite when scheduling the interviews it was
explained that their and the company’s names would not be revealed and that the
interview was completely anonymous. These two reasons were warnings to plan the time
of interviews carefully. So once the interview has started there was a time needed to
reassure the interviewee about the purpose and confidentiality (Walsam, 2006). This was
done by explaining the study’s purpose, aims, methodology and ethical considerations
and this took for about five to seven minutes of each interview in order to make
interviewees feel relaxed and obtain their trust.
According to Bernard (1988) semi-structured interviews are best to use when researcher
knows that there will not be another chance to arrange additional time with the
interviewee. As mentioned above, interviewed participants had very tight work schedule
at work and hardly found time for the interviews so each interview was a unique
opportunity of using their time. For semi-structured interviews, interviewer prepares
interview questions in advance which is referred to as “interview guide” (Cohen and
Crabtree, 2006, p. 1). According to Cohen and Crabtree (2006), ahead preparation is one
of the reasons of why semi-structured interviews are favorable to be used by interviewers.
Another benefit that is brought by semi-structured interviews is that they “also allow
informants the freedom to express their views in their own terms” (Cohen and Crabtree, 
36
2006, p. 1). For a detailed overview, the interview guide of this study is enclosed in the
Appendix.
For the purpose of this study, the interviews were conducted in formal mode and were
type recorded. Specifically, when interviews took place, as introduced earlier the
researcher dedicated five to seven minutes to describe and explain the study purpose,
aims, methodology and ethical considerations and then the interviewee was given the
interview guide to read it through. In some cases, IT professionals asked the interviewer
to send them the interview guide in advance in order to read questions ahead, which was
also a practice in this study to accommodate the interviewees’ needs. After the
interviewee read through the interview guide, the type recording started. Type recording
represents very practical way to conduct interviews because it is quite difficult for a
researcher “to focus on conducting an interview and jotting notes” (Cohen and Crabtree,
2006, p. 1).
The interview guide consists from introductory text and four types of questions.
Introductory words addressed the interviewees by thanking for their participation,
explaining the ethical considerations and describing types of the questions used. First sort
of questions are of general type and therefore were not analyzed but only presented in the
chapter of empirical findings (Ch. 5.1). They are meant to elicit some answers such as
general company details (number of employees, business core that the company operates
within and where the company conducts its business), number of responsible people for
cyber security, company’s dependency of cyber space and IT professional opinion of
cyber security importance for the particular firm. The second type of questions represents
organizational aspect which is divided into pre, during and after cyber-attack. The precyber-attack covers the period of decision making while cyber security measures are
created by IT professionals. During-cyber-attack is the moment when the attack is
happening. And finally the post-cyber-attack questions cover the actions of IT
professionals after a cyber-attack happened. The third type of questions contains specific
questions of cyber security from technological aspect. They cover specific questions
about system logs, inventory list of hardware and software, system backups, antivirus
software and firewalls and system protection passwords. The technological questions are
meant to understand if the particular organizations have created foundational level of
cyber security. Lastly the fourth type of questions represents psychological perspective
and is divided into two sets of questions. The first part has intention to measure a general
level of guilt and shame proneness of IT professionals while the second set of questions is
meant to find and distinguish whether it is the guilt or the shame that is more present with
IT professionals.
There were six interviews with six IT professionals from six different SMEs in Republic
of Slovakia. The interviews took from 35 to 50 minutes. The main reason for some
interviews took longer was that some interviewees were not fluent in English because 
37
their mother tongue was Slovak language so they spoke slower. Three interviews took
place at the company’s premises while the other three were taken by using online social
media software such as Skype and Viber. Each interview was initiated in a more formal
manner because it was noticeable that participants were a bit reserved. However, after it
was carefully explained that the interview was completely anonymous and as the
questions started being asked, the interviewees gradually relaxed and opened themselves.
This is also the reason why some of interviews took even fifty minutes.
4.3.1 Interview participants selection
One of the critical parts in data collection that contributes to understand a research
theoretical framework is data selection (Bernard, 2002). Therefore, it was carefully
considered how participants for this study would be selected. The selection of the
interview participants was an extensive process and it was performed by the help of
Internet. While browsing the Internet, the search criteria was to find the list of small and
medium enterprises in Kosice, Slovakia. Once when the SMEs’ list was found, the
companies were randomly chosen and their website would be visited in order to find
more about each organization. According to Creswell (2012, p. 206) the intent of
qualitative research “is not to generalize to a population, but to develop an in-depth
exploration of a central phenomenon”. This is why, although the companies were chosen
from the list randomly, the purpose of the sampling was to find IT professionals who
would participate in this study interviews. Being more specific, when it is referred to
sampling of IT professionals in this study, it is very important to note that the main aim
was to find IT professionals who are responsible for cyber security in SMEs. Therefore,
the target IT professional could be a person who is responsible only for cyber security or
a person who is responsible for the whole ICT in a particular SME including the cyber
security.
Once the companies were selected, they were contacted by e-mail where the researcher
introduced himself and explained the purpose of contacting the company. Some of
companies did not reply, some of them replied with negative answers but some of them
were interested to participate in this study. If a particular company expressed the interest
of being a participant, the researcher would arrange a live meeting with the potential
company’s contact person and the IT professional. At the meeting it would be talked
about the research details and some of the potential participants asked to be given the
interview guide before they would accept to participate in the study.
If the company would accept its participation, the consent form was sent to the firm by email and asked kindly to print it out, sign it and send it back by e-mail. Once when the
consent form was signed by the company and received, the company’s contact person
would be contacted by phone and asked when and what time the interview would be 
38
arranged and if it would took place at the company’s premises or via social media
software.
This was the standard procedure when all of the six interview participants were selected
for this study.
4.4 Data Analysis Description
Although there are sources about qualitative research in abundance, the vast majority of
these texts mostly do not describe in exact details how to perform data analysis or only
contain one meagre chapter about it (Berg, 2004; Creswell, 2007; Shank, 2002).
According to Leech and Onwuegbuzie (2007, p. 563) a lot of leading textbooks about
qualitative research method “also do not provide explicit details as to how to analyze
qualitative data”. However, in their article “An Array of Qualitative Data Analysis Tools:
A Call for Data Analysis Triangulation”, Leech and Onwuegbuzie (2007) describe
qualitative data analysis tools such as keywords in context, taxonomic analysis, classical
content analysis, constant comparison analysis, domain analysis, componential analysis
and word count. Keywords in context data analysis is suitable to use when collected data
seems uninteresting or less rich in information by identifying keywords and then making
list of the words that exist before and after those keywords (Leech and Onwuegbuzie,
2007). Domain analysis is found by Spradley (1979) and he suggested it to be used for
pure ethnographic studies but Leech and Onwuegbuzie (2007) argue that domain analysis
can be also used for understanding relationships between concepts. Taxonomic analysis
represents the second step of domain analysis and it “helps the researcher to understand
how participants are using specific words” (Leech and Onwuegbuzie, 2007, p. 572).
Componential analysis also can be used as the second step of domain analysis but
opposite to taxonomic analysis, it is used to understand how specific words are used and
to understand the relationships among these words (Leech and Onwuegbuzie, 2007;
Spradley, 1979). Classical content analysis is very frequently used for qualitative data
analysis and it is done through looking for “which might be the most important concepts
for the interviewee” (Leech and Onwuegbuzie, 2007, p.569). According to Leech and
Onwuegbuzie (2007) word count is data analysis where person’s perspective can be
understood by counting her words. They further refer to Carley (1993) by concluding that
“underlying assumption with word counts is that more important and significant words
for the person will be used more often” (Leech and Onwuegbuzie, 2007, p. 568).
Lichtman (2013) asserts that qualitative data analysis represents a practical dilemma and
that there is only general information of how to perform it. However, Lichtman (2013)
continues that although qualitative data analysis is a challenge without clear rules, it can
be practiced, as she suggests, by using coding process. Coding process starts by
organizing and categorizing for example, interview text data which is continued by
analyzing and categorization this data into codes (Lichtman, 2013). Coding analysis is 
39
also referred to as “Constant comparison analysis”, it is most widely used in the analysis
of qualitative data and it is created by Glaser and Strauss in 1967 (Leech and
Onwuegbuzie, 2007, p. 565). Leech and Onwuegbuzie (2007, p. 565) describe coding
analysis process as follows:
“… the researcher first reads through the entire set of data (this also could be a subset of
the data). After doing so, the researcher chunks the data into smaller meaningful parts.
Then, the researcher labels each chunk with a descriptive title or a “code.” The
researcher takes pains to compare each new chunk of data with previous codes, so
similar chunks will be labeled with the same code. After all the data have been coded, the
codes are grouped by similarity, and a theme is identified and documented based on each
grouping” (Leech and Onwuegbuzie, 2007, p. 565).
Lichtman (2013) believes that the biggest success of coding analysis comes from
systematic approach where personal discipline and creativity come into the force.
Although in qualitative data analysis it can be searched for similarities, Kaufmann (2011)
sees this process as rather looking for differences. All in all, qualitative data analysis
represents a non-standardized process which is only limited by researcher’s creativity and
technology availability (Lichtman, 2013).
Therefore, coding analysis is chosen to be used for this study. All the interviews were
recorded with participants’ permission and transcribed into written form. For the purpose
of this study these data were read and subcategorized into meaningful parts which is in
this thesis referred to as themes. As Lichtman (2013) suggests, the data analysis began at
the same time when the data collection started. Firstly each subcategory of data was
compared and grouped into similar groups (looking for similarities) and secondly data
differences were categorized. Later on, themes were identified in these groups of
categories and were compared constantly and iteratively. In the part of data analysis
interviewees’ answers were analyzed and thereafter the themes emerged were analyzed
according to the details of cyber security aspects requirements.
The findings that were considered most important were similarities and differences
among the answers and themes emerged and it was spotted that IT professionals from two
companies had quite similar answers while the other four were quite different which is
referred in data analysis part of this study.
4.5 Research Validity and Reliability
There is a great importance for researchers to represent valid and reliable results in their
research. That is also the case in this study when the data were collected from IT
professionals who are responsible for making decisions about creating cyber security
measures in SMEs. The collected data are either recorded or noted on the paper through
the interviews with the participants. If they were recorded, they were transcribed in the 
40
written form. These data are presented truthfully and without any sophistry. Moreover,
during the data analysis, the themes emerged were double checked and compared in a
constant and iterative manner in order to avoid inconsistencies and deviations (Creswell,
2009). Additionally, in order to avoid inconsistencies and deviations, participant were
asked to go through the interview guide once when interview was finished and to add
something if they considered it important or to correct themselves if they think they did
not understand some question well. This was done for the purpose of ensuring the
collected data validity (Creswell, 2009).
Additionally, there was a need to be in connection with companies’ owners where it was
needed a patient and very careful approach due to their initial distrust. It required careful
and detailed explanation and going through the consent form in details in order to gain
trustful, supportive attitude and acceptance of the company’s owners. This attitude was
welcomed for this study due to necessary cooperation with interviewees and was a real
award to the researcher due to extensive time and effort spent by explaining that
participation in this study would not harm either the company’s employees or the
company per se.
The interview recordings were performed by researcher’s laptop computer. However,
after the interview was conducted, the interview recordings were copied on a universal
serial bus drive (USB) in order to be backed up. Once when interviewer arrived at his
home, the data were immediately transcribed to the paper. After the data were available
on the paper, the recordings were deleted from the USB and researcher’s laptop.
4.6 Ethical Considerations
This study is conducted by taking into account ethical considerations for participants’ and
business organizations’ privacy and confidentiality. This primarily means that the
participants’ identities and all the companies’ names stay anonymous and are preserved
in a safe place and never are revealed by any circumstances. In order to assure the
participants about this intention, the consent form was sent to them and the researcher
went through all of the details of the consent form if it was needed (please see Appendix
2). Before any data collection all the participants were clearly presented about the overall
aim and purpose of this study as well as why their participation was important for this
study. Upon the consent form was read by a participant and the details were explained,
they would be clear with that they can withdraw whenever they wished during the
research process.
According to Hart (2005) it is of a high importance to have respect to others. Therefore,
all the participants were treated by respect and honesty during their participation and they
were asked for the interviews being recorded. If they had refused interview recording, 
41
notes would have been taken in a notebook. After the interviews, all the participants were
sent an appreciation letter in order to be thanked for their time and effort in this study.
According to (Mörtberg et al., 2010, p. 106) it is very important “to be able to use
intuition, judgement, and to be able to communicate with the research subjects”.
Mörtberg et al. (2010, p. 106) continue that it is necessary “to perceive and to be open to
the unexpected and to contradictions”. The author of this study was led by this notion and
he did not react verbally negative to potential interview participants by judging their
decisions of taking or not a part in this study or for instance to refuse the interview is
being recorded but to be written.
There is the obligation of researchers to respect informants’ desires, values and needs
(Creswell, 2009). This is the reason why the participants of this study were treated with
flexibility i.e. the researcher was adapting his time in favour in theirs. This primarily
means that the interviews were held when it was most convenient for them, at the place
where they preferred and their choice if the interview will be held via a social media
software (also which social media software) or live were always taken in consideration.
4.7 Methodology criticism
Quantitative research method data collection is conducted usually by experimental
research and survey inquiries that compare variables and take into consideration the
examined size of population (Creswell, 2009). This kind of research method often
requires identification of predetermined variables and then the data collection can be
conducted by standardized forms such as for instance questionnaires. In comparison to
quantitative research method, the qualitative research method, as abovementioned, is to
understand the feelings and ideas in the natural setting of interviewed participants
Lichtman (2013) and in this study this has meant to be achieved through semi structured
interviews in order to understand the interviewed participants in their complex social and
cultural phenomena. Quantitative research more reflects seeking for objective knowledge
which is more characteristic to positivists and according to Coombes (2001) it suits to
researchers who are independent and remoted from the process of research. However, this
study is based on interpretive, but not the positivist paradigm, where the social reality is
more an assumption of researcher’s subjective knowledge. Additionally, and as
mentioned before, “qualitative research is fundamentally interpretive” (Creswell, 2009, p.
20). The abovementioned arguments support for qualitative but not quantitative research
method to be employed in this particular study.
42
5 Empirical Findings - Themes Classification
In this chapter, there is a short description of IT professionals and their companies
provided as well as the names of the emerged themes. Then, the empirical findings were
classified into the themes emerged that are described and the empirical findings
presented.
5.1 General interview details and emerged themes description
The semi-structured interview data are analyzed from six interviewees’ answers (IT
professionals) that were conducted at six different companies, operating in the Republic
of Slovakia. As mentioned before, the interviews took from 35 to 50 minutes, depending
on interviewees intention to elaborate shortly or lengthy on various questions. Instead to
refer to interviewees’ real names, in the text they are referred to as Interviewee 1,
Interviewee 2 and so on or IT professional 1, IT professional 2 et cetera. The same
pattern applies in the case of companies’ names where they are referred to as Company 1,
Company 2 etc. The answers of the first type of questions, i.e. general questions, with a
short description of interview initiation process can be found in the section 11.1 of this
thesis. However, general data of interviews’ details and companies are summarized in the
following table (Table 2):
Table 2: General details of IT professionals and their companies
Company Intervie
w date
Company’s
business
activity
Company
size/number
of employees
Interviewee’s
expertize
Commun
ication
Company 1 01/04/20
15
Import and
distribution of
children’s
garment
Small/25 General IT
professional
In
company’
s premises
Company 2 02/04/20
15
Import/export
of construction
materials
Medium/70 Cyber security
professional
In
company’
s premises
Company 3 03/04/20
15
Cooperative
for ethical
finance
Small/15 General IT
professional Viber
Company 4 04/04/20
15
Restaurant and
food delivery Small/11 General IT
professional Skype
Company 5 06/04/20
15
Point of sale
terminal
deployment
Medium/56 Cyber security
professional
In
company’
s premises
Company 6 07/04/20
15
Assembly line
production Small/18 General IT
professional Skype
43
Firstly, the answers from the general questions with the interview initiation process can
be found in the Appendix 3. Secondly, the themes that emerged were complete awareness
(CWA), high unawareness (HUWA), lack of resources (LOR), negligence (NGL), lack of
empowerment (LOE), predominant technological aspect (PTT) and partial compliances
(PTC). The emerged themes description is presented in this chapter but the complete
presentation of the themes that emerged from the participants’ answers is provided in the
chapter of data analysis in the tables 3, 4 and 5.
The questions provided by IT professionals on organizational, technological and
psychological aspects are taken into consideration about making decisions of cyber
security measures creation in SMEs by IT staff in Republic of Slovakia.
5.2 Complete Awareness Theme (CWA)
Only two IT professionals in SMEs show complete cyber security awareness in
considering the organizational, technological and psychological aspects. Those are IT
professional 2 and IT professional 5. Here is especially interesting that any of the other
companies uses cyber security standards and written cyber security policies which
indicates their low awareness of these four companies. IT professional from company 5
provided the following answer about the international cyber security standard that his
company implemented:
“We have implemented ISO 27001 which is related to
information security management systems. This is for us
very important because we work with serious computer
software which is of a high value to our customers. I am
also trying to persuade the management to invest their
resources to implement ISO 27002 and I think I am on the
good road to succeed in this.”
IT professional 5 here shows quite high awareness because he is trying to persuade the
management in his company to implement an additional international cyber security
standard i.e. ISO 27002. Although Company 2 does not have an international cyber
security standard implemented, there is implementation of a national cyber security
standard in this organization. There is also such a case where these two companies that
belong to this theme show a complete awareness in the technological aspect which is
excluded in the rest of other participants. This can be seen in their analysis of the threats
identified by antivirus software. On this question IT professional 2 replies with
explaining why this analysis is important to him:
 “Certainly, we use the antivirus software and I analyze the
each identified threat. It is very important to analyze the 
44
threats due to this approach increases the chances to find
out what is out there on the Internet that can endanger us.“
In the psychological cyber security aspect only these two IT professionals comply with
the high level of guilt and shame
Beside of more IT professionals of the six companies possess a high level of guilt and
shame proneness, only IT professionals 2 and 5 distinguish themselves in possessing the
trait of guilt. This shows their awareness of being ready to face cyber security issues and
problems that emerged by their mistake. Moreover, IT professional 5 is ready to go
beyond confession to the management of his mistake but he also already has a proposal
about how to solve this problem that has emerged by his mistake. This can be especially
understood when he is answering the last interview question about reporting his wrong
estimation and the need of additional company investment:
“I would immediately inform the management about the
issue and make the vendor to take all the responsibility of
this problem. If the vendor would not want to take the
responsibility of this problem, I would propose to sue them
in front of the court and plus, if we experience any damage
in our system because of their mistake, to incur them all the
costs of that damage in front of the court .”
The IT professionals 2 and 5 complied with all the three aspects completely which made
them the most aware about the cyber security and to belong to the theme of complete
awareness.
5.3 High Unawareness Theme (HUWA)
To the theme of high unawareness belong IT professionals who for example show some
kind of lack of knowledge which leads to them of being unaware of cyber threats that
come from the cyber space. Other examples of IT professionals being unaware is when
they say that they are too busy to respond to some cyber security requirements but they
do not know that complying with these requirements does not really take much time or
they simply overlook the compliance of most cyber security requirements. The lack of
time is expressed in the case of IT professional 4 in the organizational aspect when he is
not able to list any cyber security standards although this information could be quickly
acquired by browsing the Internet:
 “… (uncomfortably sighing) we are very busy with our
business in order to bother with that. I cover all the IT
aspects in the company so I do not have time to go into
cyber security details and finding out about the standards”.
45
His answer shows a high unawareness of cyber security because even he is very busy at
work, he could get at least informed about the cyber security standards names.
One of the best examples of IT professional’s lack of knowledge that endangers his
company tremendously is IT professional 3. While saying that his company does not use
an antivirus software, he provides the following explanation why this software is not
included as a part of technological cyber security measure in the business organization he
works for:
“There is no need for antivirus software in our company
because we use Linux operating system. There are no
viruses made for Linux (with a pleasurable smile on his
face).“
The abovementioned statement indicates a high level of technological cyber security
unawareness and later in the discussion we refer to sources that prove that viruses can
highly endanger Linux operating systems.
When it comes to the psychological aspect of cyber security there is an interesting finding
that isolates IT professional 6 from the other persons employed in this role. All the IT
professionals would spend some additional time at work in order to solve out an
accidentally emerged minor cyber security issue which is not the case with IT
professional 6. This IT professional would not stay at work for this purpose and this is
how he supports his decision:
“… if this that you are saying would be really just a minor
issue I would leave it for tomorrow. There are always some
minorities present in the system that do not require an
immediate attention and we are a really small and not so
important company on the market that someone would take
us as a target so that I would have to be more cautious.”
IT professional shows lack of knowledge by saying that the company he works for is too
small and important in order to be cyber-attacked but he is not familiar that the main
targets of perpetrators nowadays are SMEs as the trends show.
5.4 Lack of Resources Theme (LOR)
As previously mentioned, the lack of financial resources is one of the most prominent
findings that previous studies refer when tackling the question of why SME’s are more
exposed to cyber-attacks than large enterprises. This theme also emerged in this study in
the organizational and psychological but it was interestingly missed from the
technological cyber security aspect. Company 4 was among these organizations that
showed this problem when its IT professional expressed the lack of resources in order to
46
make a deeper analysis of cyber-security threats that endanger this company. This is how
he describes the reason of not analyzing the cyber-security threats:
“… to be straight, we are a too small company and with
too scarce resources to be able to allocate them for threats
analyzes that are identified by our antivirus program.
Honestly, I am aware this would be a good practice but this
company is just not able to achieve such a proactive
security approach.“
As we said before, the lack of resource allocation also emerged in the psychological
aspect of cyber security. Specifically, it was the case with Company 3 and Company 6
when it was to understand the level of guilt and shame proneness of their IT
professionals. IT professional 3 here expressed this issue by saying that:
“If the management requires that something need to be
achieved in the scope of certain budget then I have to
achieve that however I know. I would just ask them if they
were aware of the potential consequences but I am sure
they would already know about the matter while doing the
cyber security budget allocation…, our budget is quite
scarce.“
The situation in Company 6 is even worse due to this IT professional explained that the
company he works for does not even have enough financial resources to pay for the
proprietary software applications. This situation looked quite natural to him and he
explained it as:
“The situation you are asking about is currently the case in
our company. We do not have enough money to pay for all
the software licences when it comes to security so I use
some open source software in order to keep the cyber
security level to a reasonable extent.”
Having this theme emerged explains one of the reasons for SMEs vulnerability in the
cyber space and at the same time shows why these organizations a more often the
subjects to cyber-attacks then the big enterprises.
5.5 Negligence Theme (NGL)
The negligence is an unexpected but quite interesting and important finding of this study.
There are two kinds of forms of negligence emerged. The first form emerges when IT
professionals are aware that they could do something in order to improve the cyber
security measures in their organization but they simply do nothing about it. The second 
47
form of negligence emerges when IT professionals make excuses of why they do nothing
in order to improve their cyber security measures and one of such excuse is that they
simply state that nothing has been done for the measures improvement because they are
happy about the cyber security level in their company. The certain level of negligence is
noticed in all the three cyber security aspects.
The first form of negligence can be seen in IT professional 4 where he explains why the
company he works for does not have a written cyber security policy by saying that:
“We do not have any written policies about cyber security
and the employees are generally familiar what they should
or should not do (pause and laughter) …everyone is too
busy to think about breaking the rules. The load of work is
unbearable.”
However, when asked whether cyber security policy was important for SMEs he
answered:
“…it depends … if a specific company’s business depends
and relies on the cyber space it is highly important to
create one.”
From IT professional’s last statement it can be understood that he supports having a
written cyber security policy created only in business organizations that depend and rely
on the cyber space but the company he works for does not have a policy written. From
this it can be concluded that Company 4 does not depend and rely on cyber space which
is opposite to what IT professional 4 stated while answering the general questions where
he clearly explained that the business activities of Company 4 rely on the cyber space by
saying that:
“We have a software application for food online orders
that is web-based and where our customers can pay online
via that application or to pay when the food is delivered.
We use another application in the restaurant for food
orders, payments and table booking that can be accessible
via the internet and from this point we can say that we rely
our business activities on the cyber space pretty much.“
The first form of negligence also was present in the psychological cyber security aspect
when IT professionals answered the question about postponing the regular system
security scan in the favour of doing an important administrative work. Although some IT
professionals are aware about the importance of the regular system scans, they would 
48
postpone it in the favour of the important administrative work. This was the case with IT
professional 1 that explained:
“…regular system scans usually do not require my close
attention while they are performed. Anyway, if the
administrative work would be so important, I would see
what I could do about it and probably postpone the system
scan for a while.”
And this was also the case with IT professional 3 who explained:
“If they would ask me to do some administrative work, it
would be probably something with a high priority so I
would accept to finish with that and then later I would
perform the security system scan.”
The second form of negligence that emerges when IT professional make excuses such as
being happy about the cyber security level in their organization was provided in the cases
of absence of cyber security standard implementation and hardware and software
inventory list. For instance, this kind of excuse is expressed by IT professional 3 while he
was explaining why Company 3 does not have any cyber security standards implemented.
This is how he explains this absence:
“We do not have any standards implemented in our firm
and we think we still do not need them because we are
happy with our security level.”
The same IT professional made another kind of excuse when he was answering the
absence of procedures about the roles and accountabilities assigned in the occurrence of a
cyber-attack. This time he says that he does not believe an attack would happen in his
company by saying that:
“Hmm, let me think a bit…, err we do not have such kinds
of procedures. We have never had such a delicate situation.
We have the firewall and antivirus software which are
under my strict control so it is unlikely to happen here… “
This form of negligence also was found in IT professionals 4 and 6 in the technological
aspect of cyber security. More specifically, IT professional 6 just simply states the
absence of such a list while IT professional 4 even admits that having a complete list of
hardware and software is good to have but its absence is a lack of responsibility of
creating one. IT professional 4 says:
49
“I understand your point and I agree we should have one
but unfortunately we do not. Frankly speaking, I do not
know… maybe just a lack of responsibility.”
According to above presented, we can see that the negligence theme is quite a strong
emergence among the IT professionals in SME’s which even brunches off into two
different forms.
5.6 Lack of Empowerment Theme (LOE)
This theme emerges when IT professionals would like to create and implement some
particular cyber security measures but they do not have their management support. Such
cases consider the management being an obstacle but not the IT professionals due to IT
professionals are not in power i.e. they are not empowered to perform their cyber security
decisions into the force. These cases mostly emerged and were spotted in the aspect of
the organizational cyber security and most frequently found as an answer provided by IT
professionals about why any of cyber security standards are not implemented in their
organization. One of the IT professionals that are found to be in the lack of empowerment
by the management is IT professional in Company 1. This is how he explains himself
being limited to implement any cyber security standards:
“None of mentioned cyber security standards in your
question are implemented in our company. I am familiar
that ISO cyber security standards exist out there, …but the
management consider these standards still not necessary to
be implemented because they only want to have a
general/basic protection.”
The similar situation is found in Company 2 where its IT professional explained that
despite of already having a national cyber security standard implemented, he would be
eager to have implemented an international one. IT professional 2 expresses the lack of
being empowered in the following way:
“I would like to use international cyber security standards
in our company such as ISO but there is not management
support for that.”
When it comes to the system access permissions IT professional 1 feels the lack of
empowerment partly due to only sometimes he is being asked for advice but this asking
for advice more sounded like to be asked about something unofficially which practically
does not allow him to make these kinds of decisions. Here is an excerpt from his answer:
“…only the company’s owner decides about the system
access permissions strictly, …the company’s owner must 
50
decide about the permission but in some cases, the
company’s owner (mild smile), …approaches me, …he asks
for advice from me (feeling important).”
However, there is also the lack of empowerment, or we could better say, some kind of
concordance, from IT professional 4 where he would give up his professional
responsibility to the management in a certain circumstances. This was noticed during the
psychological cyber security aspect where IT professional 4 explained that he would give
up his responsibility to the management in the following way:
“I would ask them if they were sure they wanted me to
create the cyber security measures with the resources
available and if they would reply positively I would create
them. They are the management and they pay me so I would
obey what they require from me to do but it would be their
responsibility because they made the decision.“
The decision given by this IT professional shows a low level of guilt and shame due to
his readiness to easily give up his responsibility and to be disempowered.
5.7 Predominant Technological Aspect Theme (PTT)
The last theme that was clearly emerged was a dominance of complying with the
technological aspect by IT professionals when comparing to the organizational and
psychological cyber security aspect. This dominance was shown by realizing that all the
companies comply with system log analysis, system backups, advanced password rules
and Internet firewall rules i.e. with the two third of the technological fundamentals of
cyber security. This finding is quite disturbing due to, in this way, SMEs cannot cope
with the cyber security threats that would be prevented by the other two aspects and
therefore stay open for being harmed from the cyber space. For example, the dominance
of the technological aspect developed so far that some of the IT professionals even
created some sophisticated techniques for password rules where a software application
generates advanced passwords for the employees. This is a case in Company 3 where its
IT professional explained this feature in the following way:
“We use a strong password generator software application
that generates alpha-numeric passwords for our employees
where every employee has his or her personal password
…the passwords are changed every three months.“
Further, even the system logs analysis is mostly done manually, all IT professionals from
the six companies perform it regularly and in a timely manner. Moreover, if an additional
system log analysis is needed, some of the IT professionals spend their extra effort to 
51
dedicate their time to this action. Such an example represents IT professional from
Company 6 who explains doing the system log analysis as follows:
“I follow the logs regularly which means once a week and
doing this manually. If I doubt there were some suspicious
activities then I perform the analysis more often.”
Another interesting finding in the predominant technological cyber security aspect among
the IT professionals is that all of them besides using Internet firewall, they also adapt the
firewall rules to the needs of their organizational business needs. According to IT
professional 1 the firewall rules are applied and used as it is stated:
“We use the firewall …it is a need to use all the time
because it does its job very well. Our needs are to use the
port 80 and it is always open but if there is a need for some
applications to use some others, then I open them
according to these needs.”
As we mentioned above, this theme that was labeled as the predominant technological
aspect takes its wide primacy among the IT professionals across SMEs.
5.8 Partial Compliances Theme (PTC)
In the theme of the partial compliances are categorized all the IT professionals or firms
that only comply with some of the organizational, technological and psychological cyber
security aspects. That is, they show compliance but it is minor when considering the
whole of any of these three cyber security aspects. One of the examples is the IT
professional from Company 4 where it was realized that in the organizational aspect he
complies with using cyber security policy in practice requirement, information value
prioritization requirement and during cyber security measures requirements.
Aforementioned requirements represent only three from the eight requirements of the
organizational aspect and the similar cases exist in the other two cyber security aspects
with other IT professionals as well. However, this is how IT professional 4 shows his
compliance with using cyber security policy in practice by saying:
“…as I said we do not have a cyber-security policy created
but everyone in the company is aware that they have to
focus on their work activities and not to do Facebooking at
the worktime.”
When it comes to information value prioritization requirement, IT professional 4
complies with it by explaining:
52
“…we are a very small company and our most valuable
asset is prices of company’s services. We offer different
prices to different clients so if this information would be
revealed, the company would lose its reputation with the
clients and the competition could take advantage of that.”
Further, the compliance with during cyber security measures requirements is answered as
follows:
 “Certainly, certainly, if I or anyone of the employees notices
some strange and unusual activity, I shut down the internet
connection straight away. From my logic and personal
experience, I think this the best and the most effective
way.“
Therefore, the partial compliance theme emerges in all of the three cyber security aspects
where IT professionals mostly party comply with the cyber security requirements.
53
54
6 Data Analysis and Results
In this chapter, the analysis of the data from empirical findings classification chapter of
the six IT professionals is presented in regard to organizational, technological and
psychological aspects. The organizational aspect is analyzed by taking into consideration
the three phases of cyber security i.e. pre-cyber-attack, during-cyber-attack and postcyber-attack cyber security measures. The technological aspect is analyzed by bringing
up the importance of achievement of the basic cyber technological security measures.
Finally, the psychological aspect is analyzed by presenting the empirical findings that
take into consideration the general level of guilt/shame and later to distinguish which one
from these two dominates in the interview participants. In order to make this analysis
achievable, the constant comparison analysis tool was used from Leech and
Onwuegbuzie (2007) where the answers of IT participants and the emerged themes from
empirical findings chapter were analyzed.
6.1 The Analysis of the Organizational Aspect
There were eight questions created in order to elicit the IT professionals’ answers. These
eight questions were divided into three phases. In the first phase that represents the period
of the pre-cyber-attack, five questions were included that addressed the cyber security
standards, written cyber security policies, the rules used in practice, information value
prioritization and the system access permissions. The second phase contained only one
question that related the period of during-cyber-attack and examined whether some
measures exist in the case of a cyber-attack. The third phase that relates to post-cyberattack security measures, contained two questions that researched the potential presence
of cyber–attack analysis and the procedure about how to inform clients and other
stakeholders.
Due to extensive amount of empirical findings that were elicited from the six IT
professionals, their interview answers were categorized into the themes emerged. These
themes were placed and presented in Table 3.
Table 3: Organizational aspect interviewees' answers with the themes embedded
No Phase Questions Firm 1 Firm 2 Firm 3 Firm 4 Firm 5 Firm 6
1
Pre
Standards LOE CWA,
LOE NGL HUWA CWA LOE
2 Written cyber security policy HUWA CWA HUWA NGL CWA HUWA
3 Rules used in practice PTC CWA PTC PTC CWA PTC
4 Information value prioritization PTC CWA PTC PTC CWA PTC
5 System access permissions LOE CWA PTC HUWA CWA PTC
6 During Measures PTC CWA NGL PTC CWA PTC
7
Post Cyber- attack analysis PTC CWA HUWA LOR CWA HUWA
8 Informing clients NGL CWA NGL NGL CWA NGL
55
6.1.1 Pre-cyber-attack Security Measures
As we can see from the table above, the first question was intended to elicit if any cyber
security standards are used in the organizations that participated in this study, and to see
if the IT professionals are familiar with them. The empirical findings of this part showed
that only Companies 2 and 5 have implemented some kind of standards. More precisely,
Company 2 has implemented the national cyber security standard and Company 5 has
implemented an international cyber security standard, namely ISO 27001. The IT
professionals from these two companies also expressed their familiarity with cyber
security standards while the IT professionals from other four companies were not able to
number any of them. The empirical findings also show that Companies 1, 3, 4 and 6 do
not have any cyber security standards implemented in their organization. While the IT
professionals from Companies 1 and 6 explained the absence of standards was due to the
management’s decision, the IT professionals from Company 3 said that he was happy
with their cyber security level. The IT professional from Company 4 tried to support the
fact of not having any standards implemented in their company because of extensive load
of work and therefore being too busy to do anything for the standards initiation.
When it comes to companies’ cyber security policy, only two companies fulfill this
requirement. These two companies are Company 2 and 5. The IT professionals from
these two companies say that these policies were created by them and the management
and that it is necessary to have these two sides involved in this process due to on one
hand, the management is familiar with the business of the company but on another, the IT
professionals can assist with providing them with system possibilities and options
available. They also added that this policy has to be read and signed by each employee.
The IT professionals from Companies 1, 3 and 6 explained that they do not have a written
cyber security policy in the companies they work for but expressed that there are
unwritten agreements and rules about what things the employees are not allowed to do at
work. They explained that these unwritten rules were created in cooperation with the
management and the IT professionals. In opposite, the IT professional from Company 4
explained that his company does not possess any written cyber security policy and that it
is not needed because the employees know what activities are not allowed to be
performed and that even if they wanted to do them, they would not be able because
everyone is very busy at work. Interestingly, this IT professional expressed that it is
important to have such a policy but only for companies whose business highly depends
on cyber space. The IT professionals from Companies 1 and 6 stated that it is not very
important to have a written cyber security policy due to small companies do not employ
many people so these rules can be easily communicated between them while the IT
professional from Company 3 said that this kind of document is needed only to satisfy the
legal point of view. 
56
When the IT professionals were asked if the cyber security policy is used in practice, they
responded quite differently. The IT professional from Company 1 was pretty selfconfident that the so-called unwritten policy agreement is used in practice. The IT
professional from Company 2 said that the rules are generally obeyed although there were
some cases when some employees were caught not being compliant with the policy. He
also explained the procedure that if the rules are broken, the employees are warned not to
do it again but if they continue doing this they are reported to the management. It seems
that IT professional from Company 3 believes the unwritten policy is used in practice
because the employees know they would be fired if not complying with it and the IT
professional from Company 4 stated that the employees in the company he works for are
aware what they should not do although any kind of policy exists. The IT professional
from Company 5 explained that proxy settings are set in the way that the workers cannot
access any external websites that are not related to work activities and this was the reason
why he believes the compliance with the policy exists. Finally, the IT professional from
Company 6 provided a positive answer from the reason of existence of two additional
computers where if needed, employees could use them for their personal purposes.
The fourth question in the organizational cyber security aspect is about prioritization of
information assets, who decides about these priorities and what is the process of this
decision. Interestingly, all the companies have the prioritization of information assets.
However, in the Companies 1, 2 and 6 these priorities are set strictly by the management
and the prioritization process is not known by IT professionals. The IT professional from
Company 5 said that the priorities are decided by him, management and the ISO standard
and the IT professional from Company 3 stated that these are decided between him and
the management. This IT professional also added that the priorities come from his
manager but also explained that the manager sometimes asks his participation in how to
prioritize these data by saying that there are three data classes i.e. the most valuable data,
data of medium importance and the information of less confidentiality and importance.
Company 4 has only one priority in their information assets and it is the price list of
services they provide to the customers as they consider it highly and most important.
All IT professionals except the IT professional from Company 4 expressed the existence
of system access permissions in their organizations. The argument of IT professional 4
was that the system access permissions are not needed due to all the employees are able
to do each-others’ work so it is taken as an advantage by IT professional from this
company. Also all the IT professionals’ opinion except the one from Company 4 was that
the system access permissions decisions must be decided together i.e. between the
management and the IT staff. Among these five opinions only IT professionals from
Companies 5 and 6 supported the reason for their answers. They said that the decision
making on this issue must be made between the management and IT staff due to the
management has business but IT professionals the ICT expertize. However, while the 
57
practice of mutual system access permissions creation applies in Companies 3, 5 and 6,
the IT professionals from Companies 1 and 2 stated that the management tends to take a
complete control over this responsibility. Despite this being the practice in these two
organizations, the management sometimes still asks for opinion and consultation of these
two IT professionals when it comes to creating decisions of the system access
permissions.
While analyzing the answers of IT professionals in the phase of the pre-cyber-attack
decision making five different themes came into the spot. Here we could realize the
presence of CWA in the two companies which will be recurrent in IT professional 2 and
5 as they completely comply with all the requirements in all the three aspects and the
theme of PTC emerged ten times in the rest of the four companies. The occurrence of
PTC of the four companies in comparison with CWA in Companies 2 and 5 explains that
a low presence of cyber security awareness exist in the most of IT professionals that
participated in this study. The low awareness of IT professionals in the pre-cyber-attack
phase is also reflected by the emerging HUWA theme five times which can be seen in the
Table 3. In this phase there is also a significant influence of the management to IT
professionals because the LOE theme emerges four times and it is most dominant in the
requirement of cyber security standards implementation where the IT professionals
expressed their empowerment to bring their decisions into the force. Lastly and
interestingly, the least emergent theme is NGL but although it appears only two times, its
significance is very important for this study’s findings.
6.1.2 During-cyber-attack Security Measures
The question about existence of during-cyber-attack measures elicited the following
interviewees’ answers. Opposite to Company 3 that does not have any during-cyberattack security measures, due to belief that the internet firewall and antivirus software
represent an absolute protection, all the other IT professionals stated that they have a
procedure in the case of a cyber-attack happens. In Company 1 the measures reflect the
decision to turn off the Internet server because all of company’s data are stored at that
place. Additionally, if the employees in this organization notice any strange cyber
activities, they notify their IT professional. This measure is different in Companies 2, 4
and 6 where in a case of the cyber-attack, IT professionals turn of the Internet access.
This situation slightly differs in Company 2 where employees, if they cannot find their IT
professional, they have the right to turn off their computers by pressing the power button
for a longer period than usual. However, the IT professional from Company 5 seems to be
most cautious when it comes to organizing measures against the cyber-attack occurrence.
In the case of such an event, IT professional 5 firstly turns of the Internet and secondly
the Internet server. He explains that the Internet server also needs to be shut down due to
not knowing if some virus or malware is already placed in the system.
58
The dominant theme in this phase is PTC that shows that most of IT professionals have
created the organizational cyber security measures that are to be employed in the case of
cyber security occurrence. In addition, there are Companies 2 and 5 with their CWA.
However, the NGL theme emerges in one company, more specifically in IT professional
3 and it was present in the pre-cyber-attack phase in this IT professional as well.
6.1.3 Post-cyber-attack Security Measures
When IT professionals are asked to explain how they analyze whether, after being cyberattacked, that was an attack directed straight against their organization or it was an
isolated random attack, we realized that 50% of participants even do not perform this
kind of analysis. Such analysis is conducted by Companies 1, 2 and 5 but not by
Companies 3, 4 and 6. IT professional 3 says that this kind of analysis would be too
complex, time consuming and if they really wanted to be provided by this information,
they would ask their Internet provider to support them in this matter. Interestingly, IT
professional from Company 6 stated that such analysis is not necessary because the
company he works for is too small and not an interesting target that could attract cyberattackers’ attention. Finally, although the IT professional from Company 4 thinks that
analyzing cyber threats would be a good practice, he supported his opinion by too scarce
company’s resources in order to invest in this action. IT professionals from the
companies that do the analysis of cyber threats, employ different practices of doing this
process. While in Company 1, IT professional tries to find some patterns in internet
firewall and system logs, the IT professional in company 2, besides reading the system
logs, also waits to see if the particular cyber-attack will reoccur. However, IT
professional in Company 2 responds that this could be a long time process due to waiting
for a threat rehearsal sometimes requires a long time period. Besides confirming the
presence of threat analysis, IT professional 5 also described what indicators he considers
important when conducting such an analysis. First, he fortifies what types of data was
targeted by the perpetrator. Second, he estimates the level of data damage. Finally,
depending on the results, he makes an assumption if the particular attack was targeted
straight against the company or it was just an accidental random cyber-attack.
The last question that regards informing cyber security body and stakeholders after a
cyber-attack has happened elicited different answers from the IT professionals. Only
Companies 2 and 5 would inform the stakeholders, cyber security body or police but
firstly referring and discussing the issue with the management. IT professional from
Company 2 believes that the stakeholders should be informed because they are a part of
business and IT professional from Company 5 adds that they do not inform anyone in a
case of minority such as if the antivirus software identifies a single threat in the system.
Further, Company 1 would not inform anyone because of disbelief that it could be of any
help to someone in such a situation and Company 4 would not inform someone because
this issue should stay strictly confidential between the IT staff and management as they 
59
are both fully responsible for it. IT professional from Company 3 does not see any need
to report this kind of problem to stakeholders by supporting his answer that the
stakeholders should not get upset while IT professional from Company 6 would only
inform the management due to he simply does not see the reason why anyone else would
be informed in this matter.
When comparing the PTC theme with the theme of NGL, it does not have a significant
presence. However, the NGL theme seriously predominates in the post-cyber-attack
phase. Looking at Table 3 this predominance is obvious due to its presence in all the IT
professionals except in IT professionals in Company 2 and 5 where the CWA theme is
recurrent. The LOR theme has its presence which proves the previous studies findings of
why SMEs being more often attacked than large enterprises while HUWA continues its
presence like in the two previous phases analyzed.
In the next subchapter the analysis of technological cyber security aspect is presented.
6.2 The Analysis of the Technological Aspect
The empirical findings from the cyber security technological aspect contain six questions
that according to Julisch (2013) support technological foundation of cyber security. The
integral parts of the technological cyber security foundation are system logs analysis, the
presence of an updated software and hardware inventory list, performing system data
backups, analyzing the threats identified by antivirus software, using the advanced
password rules as well as the application of internet firewall rules.
In order to summarize the answers elicited from IT professionals in six companies, Table
4 was created and patterned in the same fashion like Table 3 that was presented in the
organizational aspect analysis above.
Table 4: Technological aspect interviewees' answers with the themes embedded
No Questions Firm 1 Firm 2 Firm 3 Firm 4 Firm 5 Firm 6
9 System logs analysis PTT CWA PTT PTT CWA PTT
10 Inventory list NGL CWA PTT NGL CWA NGL
11 System backups PTT CWA PTT PTT CWA PTT
12 Antivirus threat analysis HUWA CWA HUWA LOR, PTC CWA HUWA
13 Advanced password rules PTT CWA PTT PTT CWA PTT
14 Internet firewall rules PTT CWA PTT PTT CWA PTT
The log analysis is performed in all the six companies but their recurrence and methods
differ from company to company. When it comes to the frequency of log analysis,
Companies 3 and 6 perform it once a week but also more frequently if it is needed. In
Company 1, the log analysis is limited to be done only once a week, in Company 4, on an
occasional basis, while in Company 2 it is conducted three times a week but if it is known 
60
that there is a new tread in the cyber space, it is done more often. The only company that
performs the log analysis on a daily basis is Company 5. IT professionals in Companies
1, 3, 4 and 6 analyze the logs manually while in Company 2, besides the manual log
analysis, there are automatic e-mail notifications about the error logs that IT professional
2 receives in his electronic mail account. IT professional in Company 5 also receives the
error logs in his e-mail account but immediately performs the analysis of them when they
are received. Additionally, he explains that he divides the system logs into three groups,
namely error, debug and information that help him to perform their analysis
hierarchically.
Complete and up to date inventory list of hardware and software exists in 50% of
sampled companies. That is, the Companies 2, 3 and 5 have such a list but the rest of
them do not. IT professional 3 states that he has such a list and that it is always updated.
In Company 2 the media access control addresses of hardware devices are tracked
through the system logs. The IT professional from Company 5 provided the most
thorough answer. He explains that the list is always up to date and it is used for the
purposes such as to replace old fashioned hardware with the new one, to keep the
software license always up to date and to authorize the company’s hardware and software
in their information system. As aforementioned, Companies 1, 4 and 6 do not have such a
list but IT professionals from these companies provided different reasons for this. IT
professional 1 says that he creates the hardware authorizations while installing the new
devices, IT professional 4 agrees that such a list should be created but guesses that the
lack of responsibility may be the reason of not having it. Finally, IT professional from
Company 6 does not provide any reason for not possessing the list but admits that it is a
good idea to have one created.
System backup is the activity that is performed by all the six IT professionals. More
specifically, Companies 1, 2 and 4 back up their data on a daily basis while IT
professional from Company 2 added that beside the daily backup, all the company’s data
are backed up twice a week. In Companies 3 and 5, the complete data backup is done
once a week with addition that in Company 5, this activity is also performed on a regular
daily basis. IT professional 6 stated that all the data created on a daily basis are saved at
two places at the same time i.e. at two hard discs but all the company’s data are saved
every night. There is a different length when it comes to data storage. Company 1 stores
the backed up data for a month, Company 3 never deletes them and Company 4 stores its
data until the next backup. Company 5 stores its data for ten and Company 6 for three
years. However, in Company 2 the daily data are stored for two years but the complete
backed up data is preserved until the next backup. In the case of data damage, IT
professionals 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 can retrieve their data minimally after from 20 minutes until
2 hours. More specifically, Companies 1 and 3 can retrieve their data after 1 hour,
Company 4, from 20 to 25 minutes, Company 2, after 30 minutes and Company 5 can 
61
restore its data after one to two hour time. According to IT professional 6, this process
takes quite a time which is data retrieval after from 4 to 6 hours.
Compared to companies 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6, the Company 3 does not have an antivirus
software application implemented in its information system. IT professional 3 explains
that they do not need such an application because they use operating system on their
computer called Linux for which, as he self-confidently explains, computer viruses do not
exist. However, as our main point was to see if IT professionals analyze the threads
identified by antivirus software we focused on those answers as a priority. From that
perspective, Companies 1, 4 and 6 do not do the threat analysis because, as they argue,
they pay for the licence for the antivirus software and the whole responsibility belongs to
the vendor who they bought the software from. That is not the case with Companies 2 and
5. IT professional 2 analyzes the threats identified due to, as he says, importance to gain
wider knowledge and obtain more familiarity with the threats which can lead to better
knowing what he has to fight against. Finally, IT professional 5 beside the threat analysis
against their antivirus software vendor’s database, he also performs the analysis by
comparing others’ vendors’ antivirus software databases.
Surprisingly, all the companies use advanced password rules and there are no shared
passwords amongst their employees but only the personal ones. IT professionals from
Companies 1, 2, 4 and 5 say they use alphanumeric password rules which require that
their passwords must contain from letters and numbers. In Company 3, IT professional
explains that they have strong password generator software that generates alpha numeric
passwords for their employees while IT professional 6 responds that their password rules
consist of password requirements such as having eight characters that must be set up in a
case sensitive manner. When it comes to the frequency of passwords change, the
employees in Companies 2, 3, 4 and 6 are required to change their passwords every three
months but in Company 1 they have to perform this activity twice a year. IT professional
5 has a software application that every 85 days reminds the employees to change their
passwords. If they do not change it within the window period of 5 days, then they have to
ask him for help and explain why they have not changed it by then.
The last question that considers the technological cyber security aspect is Internet firewall
rules and what rules are applied against. All IT professionals stated they the Internet
firewall is used in their cyber security system. IT professionals 1, 3 and 4 answered that
the port 80 is opened by default but if some others ports need to be also opened then they
open them. Companies 2 and 6 apply the internet firewall rules according their
company’s business needs and IT professional 5 explained that the firewall rules are
applied for in-band and out-band connection as well and that the rules are decided by the
management. He also added that if there are some firewall rules exceptions needed, then
he informs the management and then they discuss together about the further decisions in
this matter.
62
From the Table 4 it can be clearly understood that the theme of PTT plays a dominant
factor which indicates the biggest awareness of the technological aspect in IT
professionals in comparison with the organizational and psychological aspects. The CWA
theme is constantly present in the same companies but the LOR theme appears only once.
This single appearance of the LOR theme indicates the readiness of SMEs to invest into
the technological aspect which does not seem to be the case with the psychological
aspect. In addition to the LOR theme, it seems that the theme of HUWA appears quite
rarely in the technological cyber security aspect. However, despite of the highest
awareness level in the technological aspect of cyber security in IT professionals,
comparing to the other two aspects, the NGL theme still emerges in this aspect and
remains to keep your presence, as we will see, in all the three aspects of the cyber
security.
In the following section the analysis of psychological cyber security aspect is presented.
6.3 The Analysis of the Psychological Aspect
The psychological aspect empirical data analysis is conducted by analyzing the interview
participants’ answers elicited from six questions. The six questions are divided into two
sets of questions. The first set of questions has aim to ascertain the existence of a general
level in guilt/shame proneness amongst the IT professionals. However, the second set of
questions, that otherwise considers during and post cyber security creation, is aimed to
distinguish whether the IT professionals are specifically prone to guilt or to shame.
The Table 5 below represents the summary of IT professionals’ answers and it is created
as in the same fashion as the previous two tables (Table 3 and Table 4) in previous two
subchapters.
Table 5: Psychological aspect interviewees' answers with the themes embedded
No Aim Questions Firm 1 Firm 2 Firm 3 Firm 4 Firm 5 Firm 6
15
Guilt/shame
general level
Postponing important administrative
work in favour of regular system scan NGL CWA NGL PTC CWA PTC
16 Staying at work longer because of
discovery of minor security issue PTC CWA PTC PTC CWA HUWA
17 Extensively explaining hesitation of
creating deficient CS measures PTC CWA LOR LOE CWA LOR
18
Guilt or shame
Reporting the lack of expertize to the
management and discussing the issue PTC CWA HUWA HUWA CWA HUWA
19 Reporting solved data leakage despite
no one knows about it HUWA CWA HUWA HUWA CWA HUWA
20 Reporting the wrong estimation and
the need of additional investment HUWA CWA HUWA HUWA CWA HUWA
63
6.3.1 The First Set of Questions – General Level of Guilt/Shame
When IT professionals from Companies 1 and 3 were asked whether they would postpone
an important administrative work in favour of the regular system scan or vice versa, their
responses were that if the administrative work was so important they would postpone the
regular system scan for a while. Different from this claim, IT professionals 2, 4, 5 and 6,
answered that they would postpone the important administrative work in the favour of the
regular system scan. IT professionals 4 and 6 explained that their main responsibility and
what they are paid for is to primarily take care of security, IT professional from Company
2 was assertive that his priorities are based on security as well and the IT professional 5
explained that the only exception to postpone the regular system scan would be if the
company is under a current cyber-attack which we consider as not postponing the regular
system scan.
Most of the IT professionals would stay at work in a case they spot a minor security
problem in their system in order to dedicate their time to fix the issue. However this is not
the case with IT professional 6. The IT professional from Company 6 states that there are
always some minor problems in the system and that the company he works for is too
small and unimportant to be attracted by cyber attackers. IT professionals from the rest of
companies provided different arguments why they would stay at work and fix the minor
security issue. That is, IT professionals 1 and 5 explained that they would not leave their
work until the issue is fixed because most of big problems start developing from the
minor ones. IT professional from company 2 explained that the cyber security job
position sometimes requires solving tasks that are out of working hours and IT
professional from Company 3 said he likes to leave work clear minded and not to think
there are unfinished tasks after he left. Finally, IT professional from Company 4
supported his argument of staying additional time at work by being paid to take care of
security and therefore it implies his responsibility.
When it comes to the way of dealing with creation of cyber security measures with
insufficient budget, 50% of participants would create the measures without hesitation and
50% would hesitate and put additional effort in order to overcome this problem. More
specifically, IT professionals 1, 2 and 5 would strive by every means to reassure the
management to create such insufficient cyber security measures while IT professionals
from Companies 3, 4 and 6 would create such cyber security measures without any
hesitation. IT professional 1 would explain the management that he would not want to be
a part of such insufficient security measures because he would not feel empowered
enough to do his job properly. IT professional from Company 2 expressed that he is
opened for facing challenges but that in this particular situation he would not see how to
deal with the situation because if financial resources are needed for example to buy a
software application license, he does not see the other way out than to pay for it. In
comparison to IT professionals from Companies 1 and 2, IT professional 5 seemed to be 
64
most organized and assertive while answering the question. He was organized because he
would first create a list with missing parts needed in order to satisfy the minimum
requirements of cyber security with the prices; then he would create a PowerPoint
Presentation where he would present the dangers to the management if the financial
resources are not allocated in the amount of that price; then he would explain that if the
management is not ready to invest that amount of money, the organization would not
need a cyber-security professional employee. Moreover, this IT professional assertively
stated that if the management would not accept to invest sufficient resources into cyber
security domain, he would quit his job due to inability to see how he would build his
future business career in that organization. As we mentioned before, the other 50% of
interviewed IT professionals would react oppositely in this type of situation. So IT
professional from Company 3 says that he would rely on such management decision but
he would ask them if they would be aware of the potential consequences anyway. If they
would answer positively, he would create such cyber security measures despite being
aware that they would be insufficient. This IT professional also noted that the budget in
his company is scarce. IT professional from Company 4 explained that the management
pays him the salary to be responsible for cyber security but he would ask them if they
were sure they want him to create such measures and if their answer would be positive,
he would create them. Additionally, he stated that the management’s positive answer
would automatically mean that they would become responsible if something goes wrong
in the future in this domain. Finally, IT professional from Company 6 stated that the
cyber security measures with insufficient budget allocation already exist in this
organization. He explained that he already uses some open source software in order to
somehow close the security gap in the system.
When it comes to the themes, the LOR theme emerges two times which shows the lack of
ability of SMEs to invest into cyber security but the theme of LOE also shows its
presence. It is interesting to notice that the LOE theme shows up in the psychological and
organizational aspects but not in the technological aspect of cyber security. The HUWA
theme emerges only once which looks encouraging but the theme of NGL is also present
in this aspect. However, the theme of PTC remained its emergence due to it shows the
partial compliance with the level of guilt/shame in the IT participants. Finally, the
presence of the theme of CWA is constantly present in Companies 2 and 5.
6.3.2 The Second Set of Questions – Distinguishing the Guilt and Shame
6.3.2.1 During CS Measures Creation
According to IT professionals’ replies, Company 1, 2 and 5 would report their lack of
expertise and try to find a solution by discussing the issue with their management, while
IT professionals from Companies 3, 4 and 6 would try to find this problem solution in
some other resorts. IT professional from Company 3 would rely on knowledge resources
from the Internet and ask friends and colleagues from previous work for help, while IT 
65
professional 6 would purely rely on the Internet information sources as this is already his
practice exercised for dealing with this issue. Similarly, IT professional 4 would consult
people from his field of work and ask for help due to, as he says, he would also help them
in return. When it comes to IT professionals who would discuss this issue with the
management, IT professional from Company 1 answered that there is no person who
knows everything and that everyone sometimes needs an advice; IT professional from
Company 2 said that he is not ashamed of not being perfect and that no one is. Finally, IT
professional from Company 5 explained that according to his experience, it is the best
practice to inform the management as they represent the most responsible body in
organization and are always supposed to provide problem solutions.
Three themes emerge in the phase of the during cyber security measures creation in the
second set of questions of the psychological aspect. They are PTC, CWA and HUWA.
Beside the CWA theme that is constantly present in IT professionals 2 and 5 there is also
the PTC theme emerged. The theme HUWA takes more than fifty percent in this part that
indicates quite a high cyber security unawareness among the IT professionals.
6.3.2.2 Post CS Measures Creation
After the interviewees were asked to respond if they would inform the management their
company’s important data leakage to the Internet but being able to solve the problem, IT
professionals from Companies 2 and 5 provided positive answers. To be more specific, IT
professional 2 expressed that from his point of view, it is regardless whether the
management finds or not about what had happened, they are supposed to know the truth
because the data are the most important asset of this organization and if the data are
endangered so the company as well as IT professional’s job position is. IT professional 5
explained that he would immediately inform the management as he could not be sure if
someone has already stolen the data by copying them from the Internet and that by
reporting this incidence, he would also protect his working position to a certain extent.
Oppositely, IT professionals from Companies 1, 3 and 6 do not see the reason for
informing the management if the damage has been fixed because they would not want to
upset and make them worry in that case. IT professional from Company 4 was a bit
undecided and said that he might have reported the major data leakage but for sure not
the minor one. When asked to explain why, he explained that if something like that
happened, the management would lose trust in him and it will be difficult to regain it
back.
When answering the question about reporting to management their wrong estimation and
therefore additional costs arose, IT professionals from Companies 2 and 5 answered they
would, but IT professionals from Companies 1, 3, 4 and 5 would not inform their
management about the infant issue. More precisely, IT professionals 1 and 6 would
provide their management with false information that the additional costs came from
some other issues because they would like to protect their reputation and their work 
66
position. IT professional from Company 3 would ask for a professional advice from his
friends who work in the same field of work but anyhow, he would not report the issue to
the management because they would lose their trust in him. In Company 4, IT
professional would try to solve this issue with the vendor from whom the cyber security
software/system was bought due to according to his opinion it is their responsibility to
solve this problem and he added that probably there are more IT professionals who would
approach to the vendor with the same problem so they would have to solve it anyhow.
However, as aforementioned, IT professionals 2 and 5 would report the issue and act in
the following way. IT professional 2 would inform the management, would be ready to
suffer all the consequences and would make a plea to the vendor to close the gap. He
would also include his management in this conversation. Finally, IT professional from
Company 5 after reporting this issue to his management would make the vendor to take
all the responsibility for what has happened. As he further explained, if there would be a
negative response from the vendor, he would propose to sue him and if meanwhile some
damage would occur with the company’s data, the vendor would be made to reimburse
the full cost of it.
In the IT professionals’ answers that are meant to distinguish their guilt and shame
proneness only two themes emerged. The first theme is CWA that is present only in two
companies, as previously mentioned and the second is HUWA. The presence of the
HUWA theme is very disturbing because it shows the high unawareness in all the IT
professionals, except in the two ones with CWA. Such amount of HUWA indicates a
very high level of IT professionals’ unawareness in the psychological aspect of cyber
security and represents an important finding in this study.
In the chapter that follows, we discuss the data that were acquired from our analysis.
67
68
7 Discussions
This section starts with a general discussion and then the implications to research and
practice follows. At the end of this chapter the strengths and weaknesses are described.
7.1 General discussion
The theoretical framework that is brought in this thesis emphasizes the importance of
treating the field of cyber security in SMEs from organizational, technological and
psychological aspects. However, it is insufficient only to have these three aspects
considered in SMEs but it is very important to stress and to keep in mind that these three
aspects must be taken into consideration with the same attention i.e. they must be treated
equally and any of them can be neglected. Therefore, only and just only if all the three
aspects are fulfilled completely, there could be a cyber-security equilibrium achieved.
However, it must be understood that achievement of this equilibrium does not guaranty
an absolute cyber security with a hundred percent of safety but it just minimizes the
possibilities for SMEs to be harmed to the extent of the existing cyber-attacking trends
among SMEs. That is, the cyber security must be treated seriously and an overall
cooperation between the management and the IT staff must permanently exist when the
cyber security measures are being decided and created. This mutual cooperation between
the IT staff and the management is necessary due to it brings an opportunity for cyber
security alignment with organizational business goals which improve company’s business
development and therefore strengthens its sustainable competitive advantage on the
market.
7.2 Implications to research and practice
Further, by comparing the dealing of the three cyber security aspects from our proposed
theoretical framework among IT professionals, we saw that the awareness of the
organizational aspect comes after the technological aspect that the IT professionals are
most aware about. Here we came across the fact that why the lack of financial
investments as described in the study by Rodriguez and Martinez (2013) is taken as the
strong argument of why SMEs are being more frequently cyber-attacked than the large
enterprises as the theme of LOR emerged in all of the three cyber security aspects. Aside
from IT professionals 2 and 5 who we already seen being fully aware of all the
requirements in all the three aspects which also emerged in the theme of CWA and aside
from the lack of financial resources that is indicated by the theme LOR, from the rest of
IT professionals’ answers we could identify unawareness, negligence and in some of the
cases even the lack of IT professionals’ empowerment by their management.
One of the key points that have to be mentioned here is that despite the third pillar of
‘Europe 2020 strategy’ represents the trust and security (European Commission, 2013),
four out of six SMEs in this study do not have implemented and are not able to list any of 
69
international, national or EU cyber security standards. Moreover, these SMEs also do not
have written internal cyber security policies but rely on, as they call, unwritten rules and
agreements communicated with the employees. Although the Republic of Slovakia
belongs to European Union, different themes emerged as to show why there is a very
slow response across the IT professionals in this country about written cyber security
policies and cyber security standards implementation. The reasons for the low cyber
security response to this cyber security requirements emerged through the themes such as
LOE and HUWA. However, when it comes to written cyber security policy creation the
theme of NGL emerges which implies the IT professional’s awareness of advantages of
having a written cyber security policy but simply doing nothing in order to create or at
least to initiate the creation of such a document with the management. Moreover, the
NGL theme emerges as a very frequent theme and requires our attention to be identified.
Also, the study shows that one third of IT professionals are not empowered by their
management to apply some cyber-security standards. Specifically this happens in
Companies 1 and 6 where the management simply decided not to implement any
standards. Therefore, the aforementioned argument helps us understand that there is also
a presence of the lack of IT professionals’ empowerment by their management and we
add this as a contribution to SMEs being more exposed to cyber-attacks than the large
enterprises. The additional argument is especially provided by the emergent LOE theme
in the organizational and psychological cyber security aspects. Additionally, the
theoretical framework according to which this study was conducted elicits empirical data
that reveal interesting patterns. Here we must distinguish Companies 2 and 5 because
they are compliant with all of the three aspects proposed without any exceptions and this
is an emergent theme that we labeled as CWA. It is very important to recall about two
points.
First, these two IT professionals are educated in the field of cyber security and opposite
to the other interviewees who are general IT professionals, these two interviewees are
cyber security professionals (please see Table 2). Second, compared to other companies
which employ general IT professionals these two cyber security professionals are only
responsible for the field of cyber security in the companies they work for. The first fact
can make us assume that low awareness of the organizational, technological and
psychological aspects of cyber security in SMEs may come from the reason that, at least
in this study, most of SMEs employ general IT professionals. Additionally, the general IT
professionals are in charge of the whole ICT in those organizations which is not the case
with the cyber security professionals who have to deal only with the cyber security and
not with the general field of ICT. Therefore we could link the first reason of low
awareness as being the lack of appropriate education but the second maybe the lack of
financial resources to employ a person who would only be responsible for cyber security.
Although the results of the first reason are well supported by this study, we can only 
70
guess that participated SMEs do not have additional person for cyber security employed
because of the lack of financial resources so we will keep it as a finding that the lack of
the proper education may be the reason of SMEs being more attacked than the large
enterprises.
Another thing that comes into the fact is that, as we could see, IT professionals are most
aware of the technological aspect because they fully satisfy four out of the six
organizational aspect components. This was realized by the PTT theme emergence that
shows a special IT professionals’ dedication to the technological cyber security aspect.
This finding tends to agree with Kajtazi (2013) who points out that organizations often
underplay organizational aspect of security strategy and overplay the technological
aspect. However, remaining two technological components that are unfulfilled show that
only two out of the six companies possess the technological cyber security foundation.
The reasons of the two remaining technological components being unfulfilled are
emerged through the themes of NGL, HUWA and LOR. Therefore, IT professionals’
negligence, their high unawareness and the lack of resources are the main contributors
that the technological foundation cyber security aspect is not fulfilled. This finding pretty
much justifies Verizon Risk Team’s report from 2012 where it is stated that 80% of
successful cyber-attacks come from the reason that SMEs do not have established the
basis of the technological cyber security aspect. For instance, we could see that Company
3 is not in a possession of the antivirus software because its IT professional believes that
there are no viruses produced for Linux operating system. This is of course a fallacy
because a whole an array of studies refer to issues with viruses in Linux operating
systems (Harrison, 2005; Mateti, 2006; Safford and Zohar, 2005; Schmidt et al., 2008;
Van Oers, 2000). Further, IT professionals 1, 4 and 6 do not analyze the threads that are
identified by antivirus software due to they believe that once the antivirus licence is paid,
the whole responsibility belongs to the antivirus vendor. This is technically maybe correct
but this also shows IT professionals’ low awareness or as it was originally emerged, the
theme of high unawareness.
If we go back to negligence that emerged through the NGL theme, we could spot that
when IT professionals 4 and 6 say that they are not in possession of the hardware and
software inventory list because they are happy about the cyber security level in their
organization, it shows they neglect to establish the technological cyber security
foundation and therefore their happiness is of a subjective nature. Additionally, the lack
of appropriate education i.e. to be educated specifically in the cyber security field again
comes to the fore. Precisely, IT professionals 2 and 5, who are at the same time cyber
security professionals, use the most sophisticated log analysis system of general IT
professionals. As mentioned before, it is automatic e-mail notifications about the error
logs that they receive in their electronic mail account. This automatic alert method could
be something that these cyber security professionals learnt in their conventional education 
71
or they were educated how to search for some easier methods in order to improve the
cyber security. Here we could see that the theme of CWA in aforementioned IT
professionals supports the argument of the lack of appropriate education of IT
professionals because they show complete cyber security awareness in all of the three
cyber security aspects.
A new insight in the field of cyber security that is brought by this thesis inevitably
represents the psychological aspect in our theoretical framework. As it was mentioned
earlier, it is based on the level of guilt and shame proneness and their relation to CWB. It
is assumed that the persons with a high level of guilt and shame proneness less likely
involve into CWB. According to the findings presented in this thesis, the IT professionals
are the least aware of this aspect. More precisely, two third of IT professionals do not
comply with the components of this aspect where one third has a low level of guilt and
shame and one third has a high level of guilt and shame but they are more prone to shame
than to guilt. As it was previously explained, it is advised to have employed people with a
higher level of guilt and shame but while people with the high level of guilt is more likely
to report the issue, apologize and tend to correct their mistake, the ones with the higher
level of shame are less ready to report their mistake and confront the problem. For
example, IT professionals 1 and 4 show high level of guilt and shame but they are more
prone to shame due to they fail to report important security issues to their management
which tells us that if there is an important security issue caused by their mistake, they
would try to avoid to admit what happened i.e. to confront with the problem and to look
for its solution together with the management. Generally, their excuses not to report their
mistakes mostly reflected the fear of losing the trust from the management which would
be difficult to gain back as well as that their job position would be endangered. As it was
seen through the themes emerged in this study, while the low level of guilt/shame
proneness was characterized by the NGL, HUWA, LOR and LOE themes, there was an
extremely amount of HUWA theme emerged when guilt and shame was to be
distinguished. IT professionals from Companies 3 and 6 expressed the lack of
investments and this is especially the case in Company 6 where the cyber security
measures are created without sufficient financial resources so the IT professional in this
company uses some open source software for which the company does not have to pay as
it is reflected by the theme LOR. The negligence comes into the play in Company 6
where the IT professional would leave his work at the end of the work time despite
knowing that there is a cyber-security issue in the company’s system. The negligence also
comes to the play when IT professionals 1 and 3 would postpone the regular system scans
in the favour of important administrative work which shows that for them, security is a
secondary but not the primary issue. The both examples are realized by the theme of
NGL. However, it is worth noting that there are IT professionals 2 and 5 who show that
they are in possession of high level of guilt which emerges in the themes of CWA. As
abovementioned, the high level of guilt refers to confronting with the reality of situation 
72
i.e. with reporting the mistake to the management and working together on the issue
solution.
7.3 Strengths and weaknesses of the thesis
One of the weaknesses of this thesis represents the emergence of dealing with the
psychological aspect of cyber security due to this master thesis is a part of master
program of information systems which belongs to the field of informatics but not to the
field of psychology. Psychology is not one of the subjects of this particular master’s
program requirements although it can be found in the fields of informatics and
information systems (Gregor et al. 2014; Shaw, Ruby, and Post, 1998). Moreover, despite
that the author of this study read the literature of psychological nature, he is neither a
student nor an expert in the field of psychology. However, one of the strengths of this
study is that it confirms the significance of psychology by finding that it plays an integral
part of cyber security and by showing that it must be treated with the organizational and
technological aspects equally.
The another weakness of this research is that the interview questions were not primarily
created based on the overall aim of this study but on the theory which can give the reader
a hint that it is more of a positivistic nature. Therefore, the theoretical framework played
a dominant role against the study participants. However, this study holds a philosophical
approach of interpretivism that aims to elicit participants’ personal views in their
everyday work settings which are empirically supported based on their professional and
working experience. Thereafter, the participants’ answers were recorded, transcribed and
interpreted in the researcher’s subjective manner by using coding analysis.
Although new insights of cyber security were brought into the organizational and
psychological aspects by the theoretical framework of this study, it is failed to bring new
insights into the technological aspect of cyber security. The new insights of
organizational and psychological aspects are presented in the conclusion section of this
thesis but one of the insights of the organizational aspect is that some of cyber security
standards are recommended to be implemented by SMEs. However, even if SMEs had
higher awareness about this, they might be unable to perform such an implementation due
to the lack of financial resources which is referred to in the previous studies.
Finally, this study is conducted only on the territory of Republic of Slovakia, more
specifically in its eastern part in the second largest city by the name Kosice. This is a
weakness due to the findings are referred only to this particular city. However, the
strength of this master dissertation is that its theoretical framework can be applied to any
other city in any other country and therefore to gain new results and findings that could
be of a significance source of knowledge in cyber security.
.
73
74
8 Conclusions
In the world of business, it is well known that SMEs represent the backbone of global
economy but at the same time we know that they are much more vulnerable to cyberattacks than the big enterprises are. In order to decrease their vulnerability, the theoretical
framework that focuses on cyber security decision making by IT professionals was
created with the overall aim.
The overall aim of this master’s dissertation is on organizational level and it was to bring
new insights about organizational, technological and psychological aspects in cyber
security and to understand their influence on cyber security on SMEs. It must be admitted
that no new insights were brought to the technological aspect except that at least the
cyber security foundation must be met in order to decrease success of cyber perpetrators
in their harmful aims. However, two new insights of organizational aspect were brought
to the surface. The first one is that any of cyber security national, EU or international
standards are highly recommended to be applied due to they represent a useful security
guide for IT professionals even if only partly adopted. The second insight is that
organizational aspect can be divided into three phases in order to be easier to tackle
which are namely pre, during and post-cyber-attack decision making. When looking from
an organizational perspective, these three aspects have a huge influence on cyber security
in SMEs due to they take into consideration organizational tasks that tackle cyber security
in three different phases as mentioned above; technology which is the tool for tackling
the cyber space; and psychology that tackles IT professionals’ traits that come into play
when making cyber security decisions.
The organizational, technological and psychological aspects have a low awareness on
SMEs when looking at it from IT professionals’ perspective. This argument can be
supported by the fact that only two out of six IT professionals fulfilled all the aspects’
components. The rest of IT professionals were most aware about the technological, then
there was a medium awareness about the organizational and lastly, the lowest awareness
level was about the psychological aspect. This is quite a disturbing finding due to
according to Julisch (2013), these three cyber security aspects must be treated equally in
order to minimize the dangers that come from the cyber space.
This thesis confirmed two arguments about why SMEs are in general more frequently
cyber-attacked than the large enterprises. The first is the lack of financial investments in
cyber security in SMEs (Rodriguez and Martinez, 2013) and the second is that IT
professionals often do not satisfy the cyber security foundation of the technological
aspect (Julisch, 2012; Verizon, 2012). However, there are additional reasons found by
this study. First, only two out of six organizations fully comply with all of the
components of the three cyber security aspects and these two organizations employ
specifically cyber security experts i.e. the employees who are educated in the field of 
75
cyber security. Additionally, these two employees are strictly responsible for and
dedicated to cyber security but not any other tasks. These findings helped us conclude
that SMEs should employ people who are educated in the first place in the field of cyber
or at least information security in order to improve their cyber security level. If it would
be difficult to find these experts on labour market then these organizations could motivate
their general IT professionals to improve their knowledge in this field through attending
some cyber security certifications. Second, SMEs are not fully aware that any of the
organizational, technological or psychological cyber security aspect must not be
overemphasized but all the three aspects must be treated equally and considered with the
same attention due it leaves additional gaps that open a gate for cyber perpetrators to
achieve their aims. Third, there is a certain level of negligence of IT professionals which
was found when certain IT professionals (IT professionals 1, 3 and 4) were aware that by
employing some particular actions, the cyber security could be improved in their
organization but they simply do not do anything about it. And finally fourth, it is found in
some organizations (Companies 1 and 6) that the absence of cyber security standards
comes directly from management decision, so despite of the IT professionals’ awareness
on this issue, these standards cannot be deployed. This finding is defined as the lack of IT
professionals’ empowerment.
Once we have achieved to complete the overall aim abovementioned, that is considered
to be a part of tactical level, it is easier to answer the research questions that are more of
strategic nature and to draw the final conclusions.
Research question 1
What is the awareness level of IT professionals among SMEs for dealing with cyber
security measures creation from technological, organizational and psychological
aspects?
The awareness level of IT professionals among SMEs for dealing with cyber security
measures from technological aspect is the highest. This level is found the highest due to
although only two organizations fully comply with the technological cyber security
aspect, all the companies comply with four out of six components of this aspect (Table 3).
There is the medium awareness of IT professionals of organizational cyber security level
because, although only two organizations fully comply with the organizational cyber
security aspect, all the companies comply with two out of six components of this aspect
(Table 4). Finally, the IT professionals are the least aware of the psychological aspect of
cyber security due to only two companies out of six fully comply with the components of
this aspect and IT professionals from other organizations would not report the mistake
they created which refers to low level of guilt or shame or only the high level of shame
proneness (Table 5). However, in overall, this study found that awareness level of IT
professionals in SMEs is low due to despite the IT professionals are most aware of the 
76
technological aspect, even this aspect’s components are not fully met by four out of six
employees.
Research question 2
What are the reasons that SMEs are more open to cyber-attacks than large enterprises?
As it is mentioned in the second aim achievement above, beside the low financial
investments and unfulfilled components of cyber security technological aspect, this study
found additional factors that contribute to the reasons of SMEs being more open to cyberattacks than the large enterprises. The first contributor is the lack of appropriate education
of IT professionals, the second is that IT professionals in SMEs are dedicated to the
whole ICT company’s sector to be responsible for but not only to the tasks of cyber
security. The third contributor is that there is a low awareness of the three cyber security
aspects and that they are not treated equally. The forth contributor is negligence that is
identified as the awareness that something should be done but this is neglected by IT
professionals and the fourth contributor is the lack of empowerment of IT professionals
by their management, especially when it comes to cyber security standards
implementation.
Cyber security must be considered as an important integral part of organizations’ ISs
which requires a complex understanding and it represents an extreme popular field
nowadays. This importance particularly comes from the reason that in attempt to achieve
their competitive advantage, organizations tend to find resort in ISs that find their
implications trough creation and maintenance of organizations’ most important asset
today which is information. The complexity of cyber security implies that the creation,
maintenance and information flow occurs in cyber space that requires two prerequisites.
The prerequisite that includes information creation and maintenance are humans and the
prerequisite that ensures the flow of information is ICT infrastructure. The popularity of
cyber security arises from a straightforward reason. That is, the information, humans and
the ICT infrastructure must be kept safe which is to be ensured by cyber security.
This master’s dissertation primarily dealt with cyber security in SMEs and one of its
limitations was that it was limited to the territory of Slovakia. However, despite being
aware of national business culture, standards and legislations it is a good question if cyber
security can be treated purely from a national level due to cyber space does not know for
national borders. Moreover, we could see that four out of six organizations operate
internationally which means that they can be cyber-attacked from any part of the world.
That is exactly why the field of cyber security represents a special and interesting field
for scientific research.
77
8.1 Future Research
This master’s dissertation provides further opportunities for future research. One of these
opportunities could be to apply the same theoretical framework to SMEs in the capital
city of Slovakia, Bratislava as well as across the other countries in or out of EU borders.
It would be interesting to see what is the level of IT professionals’ awareness towards the
organizational, technological and psychological cyber security aspects in the other
countries and what is the level of equality that these three aspects are treated by SMEs.
Moreover, there is a need to widen the depth of the new psychological aspect proposed
by this study which also requires further testing. The second opportunity for future
research could be to provide some new insights about the technological cyber security
aspect due to this master’s dissertation failed to do that but stuck with the technological
cyber security fundamentals. The idea should be to go beyond these technological
fundamentals and to broaden and innovate in this field. The third, as this master’s
dissertation presented, there are plenty of standards and initiatives for cyber and
information security provided by different organizations and institutions. Some of
examples are ISO standards and Europe 2020 strategy created by European Commission.
So maybe it would be an interesting topic for research to explore why these standards and
initiatives are mostly unknown and not followed by SMEs and whether it is a common
practice among the SMEs in EU in general or it is only the case in Republic of Slovakia.
The fourth opportunity for the future research is to examine the relation between the
cyber security IT professionals and the level of cyber security in organization they work
for and between general IT professionals and the level of cyber security in their
organizations. More specifically, the aim of such research could be to examine whether it
is true and to what extent that inappropriate education i.e. the education that is not related
to cyber security but in some other ICT field plays a contributor for SMEs being more
under cyber-attacks than the large enterprises. To more simplify, to find whether cyber
security professionals are more aware about technological, organizational and
psychological cyber aspects of cyber security than the general IT professionals. The fifth
opportunity for a future research could be to understand what is the level of
empowerment of IT staff is in SMEs and what the most frequent contributors of
organizational, technological and psychological aspects are that the management wants to
have a complete control over. In this thesis we saw that the management did not empower
IT staff when it came to cyber security standards implementation. Therefore, it would be
interesting to see if there are additional components over which IT staff has the lack of
empowerment. Finally, an interesting finding of this master’s dissertation is that one of
important contributors for SME being more often the victims of cyber-attack is
negligence of IT professionals. It would be useful to find out more about the negligence
amongst the IT professionals in SMEs due to according to this master’s dissertation, it
plays an important finding that lowers cyber security in SMEs. For example, we can
guess that IT professionals’ unawareness comes from lack of appropriate education, and 
78
at the same time expecting the general IT staff to take care of cyber security which is not
their professional domain. However, this is opposite to negligence that actually comes
from awareness i.e. when an IT professional is aware that something needs to be done but
s/he simply do not do anything about it. Therefore it should be additionally understand
how negligence is connected to awareness and therefore for instance to find if the IT
professionals in SMEs are negligent about applying cyber security standards because they
are aware that they are not empowered by the management.
79
80
References
Anderson, E., 2015. SMEs failing to guard against cyber attacks, Government warns. The
Telegraph, [online] Available at:
< http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/businessclub/11430701/SMEs-failing-to-guardagainst-cyber-attacks-Government-warns.html> [Accessed 8 March 2015].
Ashford, W., 2014. SMEs believes they are immune to cyber attack. Computer Weekly,
[online] Available at: < http://www.computerweekly.com/news/2240216202/SMEsbelieves-it-is-immune-to-cyber-attack-study-shows> [Accessed 8 March 2015].
Atoum, I., Otoom, A., and Amer, A. A., 2014. A holistic cyber security implementation
framework. Information Management & Computer Security, pp. 251-264.
Ayyagari, M., Beck, T. and Demirguc-Kunt, A., 2007. Small and medium enterprises
across the globe. Small Business Economics, 29(4), 415-434.
Baheti, R. and Gill, H., 2011. Cyber-physical systems. The Impact of Control
Technology, pp. 161-166.
Ban, L. Y. and Heng, G. M., 1995. Computer security issues in small and medium-sized
enterprises. Singapore Management Review, 17(1), pp. 15-29.
Batsell, S. G., Rao, N. S. and Shankar, M., 2005. Distributed intrusion detection and
attack containment for organizational cyber security. Available at:
<http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.105.9322&rep=rep1&type=p
df> [Accessed 25 February 2015].
Berg, B. L., 2004. Qualitative research methods for the social sciences (5th ed.). Boston:
Pearson.
Bernard, H.R., 2002. Research Methods in Anthropology: Qualitative and quantitative
methods. 3rd edition. AltaMira Press ,Walnut Creek, California.
Bernard, H. R., 1988. Research methods in cultural anthropology. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
Berry, C. M., Carpenter, N. C. and Barratt, C. L., 2012. Do other-reports of
counterproductive work behavior provide an incremental contribution over self-reports?
A meta-analytic comparison. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97(3), pp. 1-24.
Borbás, L., 2014. Supporting SMEs in Central-Eastern Europe. Volume of Management,
Enterprise and Benchmarking in the 21st Century, pp. 87-106.
Bradley, M., and Vaizey, E., 2015. Cyber security ‘myths’ putting a third of SME
revenue at risk. UK Government, [online] Available at: 
81
< https://www.gov.uk/government/news/cyber-security-myths-putting-a-third-of-smerevenue-at-risk> [Accessed 8 March 2015].
Brooke, S., 2015. Target cyber hack shows how vulnerable smaller businesses are to
digital attacks. Real Business, [online] Available at:
< http://realbusiness.co.uk/article/29399-target-cyber-hack-shows-how-vulnerablesmaller-businesses-are-to-digital-attacks> [Accessed 8 March 2015].
Bulgurcu, B., Cavusoglu, H. and Benbasat, I., 2010. Information security policy
compliance: an empirical study of rationality-based beliefs and information security
awareness. MIS Quarterly, 34(3), pp. 523-548.
Byres, E. & Lowe, J., 2004. The myths and facts behind cyber security risks for industrial
control systems. In Proceedings of the VDE Kongress, vol. 116, pp. 213-218.
Carley, K, 1993. Coding choices for textual analysis: A comparison of content analysis
and map analysis. In P. Marsden (Ed.), Sociological methodology, Oxford: Blackwell. pp.
75–126.
Choo, K. K. R., 2011. The cyber threat landscape: Challenges and future research
directions. Computers & Security, pp. 719-731.
Cohen, D. and Crabtree, B., 2006. Qualitative research guidelines project. Available at:
< http://www.qualres.org/HomeSemi-3629.html> [Accessed 04 April 2015].
Cohen, T. R., Panter, A. T., and Turan, N., 2013. Predicting counterproductive work
behavior from guilt proneness. Journal of Business Ethics, 114(1), pp. 1-26.
Cohen, T. R., Wolf, S. T., Panter, A. T. and Insko, C. A., 2011. Introducing the GASP
scale: a new measure of guilt and shame proneness. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 100(5), pp. 1-73.
Coombes, H., 2001. Research using IT. Palgrave Macmillan.
Creswell, J. W., 2007. Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among the five
approaches. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Creswell, J. W., 2009. Research Design: qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Creswell, J.W., 2012. Educational Research. Planning, Conducting, and Evaluating
Quantitative and Qualitative Research. 4th ed. Pearson Education, Boylston Street,
Boston, USA.
82
CSIRT, 2009. Computer Security Incident Response Team. Ministry of Finance of the
SR. Available at: < https://www.csirt.gov.sk/> [Accessed 25 February 2015].
CSTB (Computer Science and Telecommunications Board)., 1991. Computers at Risk:
Safe Computing in the Information Age. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, pp.
1-320.
Dhillon, G. and Backhouse, J. 2000. Technical opinion: Information system security
management in the new millennium. Communications of the ACM, vol. 43(7), pp. 125-
128.
Dhillon, G., and Backhouse, J., 2001. Current directions in IS security research: towards
socio-organizational perspectives. Information Systems Journal, 11(2), pp. 127-153.
Dimopoulos, V., Furnell, S., Jennex, M. and Kritharas, I., 2004. Approaches to IT
Security in Small and Medium Enterprises. In AISM, pp. 73-82.
Doherty, N. F. and Fulford, H, 2006. Aligning the information security policy with the
strategic information systems plan. Computers & Security, 25(1), pp. 55-63.
Dutta, A. and McCrohan, K., 2002. Management’s role in information security in a cyber
economy. California Management Review, 45(1), pp. 67-87.
European Commission, 2003. Commission recommendation concerning the definition of
micro, small and medium-sized enterprises. Official Journal of the European Union
2003/361/EC. Available at: <http://eurlex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:124:0036:0041:EN:PDF>
[Accessed 5 June 2015].
European Commission, 2013. Digital Agenda for Europe: Trust and security - analysis
and data – Pillar actions overview. European Commission. Available at:
< http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/trust-and-security-analysis-and-data> [Accessed 25
February 2015].
European Commission, 2014. Digital Agenda for Europe: Action 29: Combat cyberattacks against information systems. European Commission. Available at:
< http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/pillar-iii-trust-security/action-29-combat-cyberattacks-against-information-systems> [Accessed 25 February 2015].
European Commission, 2014. Enterprise and Industry SBA Fact Sheet 2014 – Slovakia,
pp. 1-17. Available at: < http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/sme/facts-figuresanalysis/performance-review/files/countries-sheets/2014/slovakia_en.pdf> [Accessed 16
February 2015]. 
83
European Parliament, 2013. Directive 2013/40/EU of the European Parliament and of the
Council on attacks against information systems and replacing Council Framework.
Official Journal of the European Union. Available at: < http://eurlex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2013:218:0008:0014:EN:PDF>
[Accessed 25 February 2015].
Fiol, C. M., 2001. Revisiting an identity-based view of sustainable competitive
advantage. Journal of Management, 27(6), pp. 691-699.
Fox, S. and Spector, P. E., 2005. Counterproductive work behavior: Investigations of
actors and targets. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, pp. 105-107.
Glaser, B. G. and Strauss, A. L., 1967. The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for
qualitative research. Chicago: Aldine.
Gostev, A., 2012. Cyber-threat evolution: the year ahead. Computer Fraud & Security,
pp. 9-12
Gregor, S., Lin, A. Gedeon, T., Riaz, A., and Zhu, D., 2014. Neuroscience and a
Nomological Network for the Understanding and Assessment of Emotions in Information
Systems Research', Journal Of Management Information Systems, 30, 4, pp. 13-48.
Guariniello, C., and DeLaurentis, D., 2014. Communications, Information, and Cyber
Security in Systems-of-Systems: Assessing the Impact of Attacks through
Interdependency Analysis. Procedia Computer Science, 28, pp. 720-727.
Hansen, L. & Nissenbaum, H., 2009. Digital disaster, cyber security, and the Copenhagen
School. International Studies Quarterly, pp. 1155-1175.
Harrison, P. (2005). Linux quick fix notebook. Prentice Hall PTR. Chicago
Hart, C., 2005. Doing your masters dissertation. London: Sage.
Hathaway, O. A., Crootof, R., Levitz, P., Proctor, H., Nowlan, A. E., Perdue, W., and
Spiegel, J., 2012. The Law of Cyber-Attack, pp. 1-71.
Hu, Q., Hart, P., and Cooke, D., 2007. The role of external and internal influences on
information systems security–a neo-institutional perspective. The Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 16(2), pp. 153-172.
Hunton, P., 2009. The growing phenomenon of crime and the internet: A cybercrime
execution and analysis model. Computer Law & Security Review, 25(6), pp. 528-535.
Infosec and ISO, 2013. INFORMATION SECURITY & ISO 27001: An Introduction.
Infosec and ISO27001v3-uk. Available at: 
84
< http://www.itgovernance.co.uk/files/Infosec_101v1.1.pdf> [Accessed 25 February
2015].
ISO/IEC, 2012. Information technology — Security techniques — Guidelines for
cybersecurity. ISO/IEC27032(E). Available at:
< http://webstore.iec.ch/preview/info_isoiec27032%7Bed1.0%7Den.pdf> [Accessed 25
February 2015].
ISO/IEC, 2014. Information technology — Security techniques — Information security
management systems — Overview and vocabulary. ISO/IEC27000(E). Available at:
< http://standards.iso.org/ittf/licence.html> [Accessed 25 February 2015].
Investment in Slovakia, 2013. KPMG in Slovakia, pp. 1-74. Available at:
< https://www.mzv.sk/App/wcm/media.nsf/vw_ByID/ID_1822BC4B663925F9C1257AB
8004F2D94_SK/$File/Investment-Slovakia-2013.pdf> [Accessed 15 February 2015].
Jee, S., 2014. SMEs often a ‘weak link’ for cyber attacks, experts warn. Computer World
UK, [online] Available at:
< http://www.computerworlduk.com/news/security/3583875/smes-often-a-weak-link-forcyber-attacks-experts-warn/> [Accessed 8 March 2015].
Jouini, M., Rabai, L. B. A., and Aissa, A. B., 2014. Classification of security threats in
information systems. Procedia Computer Science, 32, pp. 489-496.
Julisch, K., 2013. Understanding and overcoming cyber security anti-patterns. Computer
Networks, 57, Elsevier B.V., pp. 2206-2211.
Kajtazi, M., 2013. Assessing Escalation of Commitment as an Antecedent of
Noncompliance with Information Security Policy. Doctoral dissertation, Linnaeus
University Press, pp. 1-164.
Kaufmann, J., 2011. Poststructural analysis: Analyzing empirical matter for new
meanings. Qualitative Inquiry, 17(2), pp. 148–154.
Kindervag, J., Holland, R., Balaouras, S. and Mak, K., 2011. Planning For Failure.
Forrester Research Inc., pp. 1-16.
Kotter, J. P., 2012. Leading change. Harvard Business School Press, pp. 1-199.
Krawczyk, D., Bartlett, J., Kantarcioglu, M., Hamlen, K. and Thuraisingham, B., 2013.
Measuring expertise and bias in cyber security using cognitive and neuroscience
approaches. In Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), IEEE International
Conference, pp. 364-367.
85
Kritzinger, E. and von Solms, S. H., 2010. Cyber security for home users: A new way of
protection through awareness enforcement. Computers & Security, 29(8), pp. 840-847.
Kshetri, N., 2005. Pattern of global cyber war and crime: A conceptual framework.
Journal of International Management, 11(4), pp. 541-562.
Kumar, N., Mohan, K., and Holowczak, R., 2008. Locking the door but leaving the
computer vulnerable: Factors inhibiting home users' adoption of software firewalls.
Decision Support Systems, 46(1), pp. 254-264.
Leech, N. L. and Onwuegbuzie, A. J., 2007. An array of qualitative data analysis tools: A
call for data analysis triangulation. School Psychology Quarterly, 22(4), pp. 557.
Lichtman, M., 2013. Qualitative Research In Education : A User's Guide. Los Angeles:
SAGE, pp. 1-368.
Loch, K. D., Carr, H. H. and Warkentin, M. E., 1992. Threats to information systems:
today's reality, yesterday's understanding. MIS Quarterly, pp. 173-186.
Lopes, I. and Oliveira, P., 2014. Understanding information security culture: a survey in
small and medium sized enterprises. In New Perspectives in Information Systems and
Technologies, Volume 1, Springer International Publishing, pp. 277-286.
Maisey, M., 2014. Moving to analysis-led cyber-security. Network Security, pp. 5-12.
Mattern, T., Felker, J., Borum, R. And Bamford, G., 2014. Operational Levels of Cyber
Intelligence. International Journal of Intelligence and Counter Intelligence, 27(4), pp.
702-719.
Mateti, P., 2006. Viruses, Worms and Trojans. Available at:
< http://cecs.wright.edu/people/faculty/pmateti/Courses/4420/Viruses/> [Accessed 18
May 2015].
McFarlan, W. F., McKenney, J. L. and Pyburn, Philip, 1983. The information
archipelago-plotting a course. Harvard Business Review, pp. 145-156.
Montesino, R. and Fenz, S., 2011. Information security automation: how far can we go?.
In Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES), 2011 Sixth International Conference on
IEEE, pp. 280-285.
Mörtberg, C., Bratteteig, T., Wagner, I., Stuedahl, D., and Morrison, A., 2010. Methods
that matter in digital design research. In: I. Wagner, T. Bratteteig, & D. Stuedahl, (eds).
2010. Exploring digital design. London: Springer Verlag. pp. 105-144.
86
Myers, M. and Avison, D., 2002. Qualitative research in information systems. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Ng, B. Y., Kankanhalli, A. and Xu, Y. C., 2009. Studying users' computer security
behavior: A health belief perspective. Decision Support Systems, 46(4), 815-825.
Nissenbaum, H., 2005. Where Computer Security Meets National Security. Ethics and
Information Technology, pp. 61-73.
Ponemon Institute, 2011. Second Annual Cost of Cyber Crime Study. Independently
conducted by Ponemon Institute LLC, pp. 1-30. Available at:
< http://www.hpenterprisesecurity.com/collateral/report/2011_Cost_of_Cyber_Crime_St
udy_August.pdf> [Accessed 8 March 2015].
Potts, M., 2012. The state of information security. Network Security, 2012, pp. 9-11.
Raiu, C., 2012. Cyber-threat evolution: the past year. Computer Fraud & Security, pp. 5-
8.
Reed, R. and DeFillippi, R. J., 1990. Causal ambiguity, barriers to imitation, and
sustainable competitive advantage. Academy of Management Review, 15(1), pp. 88-102.
5H]HN76]DWNRZVNL7ZLWNRZVND-9VNR-DQG=LDUHN09
Cooperation in Ensuring Cyber Security – Analysis and Recommendations. The
Kosciuszko Institute, pp. 1-47.
Richardson, R., 2008. CSI computer crime and security survey. Computer Security
Institute, pp. 1-30.
Robbins, S. P., DeCenzo, D. A. and Gao, J., 2007. Fundamentals of management.
Pearson Prentice Hall.
Rodriguez, C. and Martinez, R., 2013. The Growing Hacking Threat to Websites: An
Ongoing Commitment to Web Application Security. Frost & Sullivan, pp. 1-25.
Safford, D., & Zohar, M. 2005. A trusted linux client (tlc). Technical Paper, IBM
Research.
Sahito, F. H. and Slany, W., 2012. Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging and the
Challenge of Balancing Human Security with State Security. Human Security
Perspectives, pp. 38-66.
Schmidt, A. D., Schmidt, H. G., Clausen, J., Yuksel, K. A., Kiraz, O., Camtepe, A. &
Albayrak, S., 2008. 
87
Schneier, B., 2008. The psychology of security. In Progress in Cryptology–
AFRICACRYPT, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 50-79.
Shank, G. D., 2002. Qualitative research: A personal skills approach. Prentice Hall.
Shaw, E., Ruby, K. and Post, J., 1998. The insider threat to information systems: The
psychology of the dangerous insider. Security Awareness Bulletin, 2(98), pp. 1-10.
Chicago
Siegel, C. A., Sagalow, T. R. and Serritella, P., 2002. Cyber-risk management: technical
and insurance controls for enterprise-level security. Information Systems Security, 11(4),
pp. 33-49.
Sommestad, T., Ekstedt, M. and Johnson, P., 2009. Cyber security risks assessment with
Bayesian defense graphs and architectural models. In System Sciences, HICSS. 42nd
Hawaii International Conference on IEEE, pp. 1-10.
Spector, P. E., Bauer, J. A. and Fox, S., 2010. Measurement artifacts in the assessment of
counterproductive work behavior and organizational citizenship behavior: Do we know
what we think we know? Journal of Applied Psychology, 95(4), pp. 781-790.
Spradley, J. P., 1979. The ethnographic interview. For Worth, TX: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
Symantec Team, 2012. Internet security threat report: 2011 trends. Symantec
Corporation, pp. 1-52. Available at:
<https://www.symantec.com/content/en/us/enterprise/other_resources/bistr_main_report_2011_21239364.en-us.pdf> [Accessed 15 February 2015].
Symantec Team, 2014. Internet security threat report: 2013 trends. Symantec
Corporation, vol. 19, pp. 1-98. Available at:
< http://www.symantec.com/content/en/us/enterprise/other_resources/bistr_main_report_v19_21291018.en-us.pdf> [Accessed 15 February 2015].
Tangney, J. P., and Dearing, R. L., 2002. Shame and guilt. Guilford Press.
Tawileh, A., Hilton, J. and McIntosh S., 2007. Managing Information Security in Small
and Medium Sized Enterprises: A Holistic Approach. Highlights of the Information
Security Solutions Europe, SECURE Conference, Warsaw, pp. 1-11.
Turban, E. R., Sharda, D., Delen, D., King & Aronson, J. E., 2010. Business intelligence:
a managerial approach. 2nd edition, Prentice Hall, pp. 1 – 292.
Van Oers, M., 2000. LINUX VIRUSES–ELF FILE FORMAT. VIRUS, 123.
88
Verizon Risk Team, 2012. 2012 data breach investigations report. Verizon Technical
report, pp. 1-80. Available at:
< http://www.verizonenterprise.com/resources/reports/rp_data-breach-investigationsreport-2012_en_xg.pdf> [Accessed 14 February 2015].
Vives, A., 2006. Social and environmental responsibility in small and medium enterprises
in Latin America. Journal of Corporate Citizenship, 2006(21), pp. 39-50.
Von Solms, R., and Van Niekerk, J., 2013. From information security to cyber security.
Computers & Security, 38, pp. 97-102.
Walsham, G., 1995. Interpretive case studies in IS research: nature and method.
European Journal of Information Systems, 4(2), pp. 74–81.
Walsham, G., 2006. Doing interpretive research. European Journal of Information
Systems, 15(3), pp. 320–330.
Watters, P. A., McCombie, S., Layton, R. and Pieprzyk, J., 2012. Characterising and
Predicting Cyber Attacks Using the Cyber Attacker Model Profile (CAMP). Journal of
Money Laundering Control, 15(4), pp. 430-441.
Weill, P. and Ross, J. W., 2005. IT governance: How Top Performers Manage IT
Decision Rights for Superior Results. International Journal of Electronic Government
Research, 1(4), pp. 63-67.
Yin, R., 2009. Case study research: design and methods. 4th ed. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
89
90
Appendix 1 - Interview Guide
Dear interviewee,
Thank you for accepting to participate in this study. My name is Milos Zec, acting as a
researcher on this study, while currently I am a master’s student in Information Systems
program at Linnaeus University in Sweden. Your participation in this interview will be
completely anonymous. This means, that your name, surname and other personal details
as well as the details of the company you work for will stay forever confidential. The
purpose of this interview is to research how IT professionals create their decisions in
small and medium size enterprises, particularly tackling the organizational, technological
and organizational aspects that may influence such decisions. Therefore, I, as the
researcher will ask you several questions that will not depend on correct or incorrect
answers, considering that each answer depends on the context you operate within.
Further, you will be kindly asked to be type recorded while answering the questions but if
you are not comfortable with it, the paper notes will be taken. Additionally, if your
decision to take your participation in this study is positive, you will be able to withdraw
at any moment without any prior explanation.
We will first start with some general questions, followed by questions that relate to the
organizational, technological and psychological aspects.
Type of questions Interview questions
General
Could you please provide us with some general details
about the company you work for (for example, number of
employees, core of business, domestic or international
business operations)?
General
Could you please tell us how many people are responsible
for cyber security in the company you work for and are
they general IT professionals or specifically educated for
the field of cyber security?
General
In your opinion, how much is your company dependent on
the cyber space (for example, e-mail collaboration, online
money transactions such as payments, etc.)?
General How much do you think cyber security is important for the
company you work for?
Type of aspect Period of cyberattack Interview questions
Organizational Pre-cyber-attack
Are any of the national, EU or international
cyber security standards implemented and used
in your organization? Please list them. If not, 
91
how much you are familiar with them?
Organizational Pre-cyber-attack
Is there any cyber security policy created in your
organization and if there is, who created it (did
you also as an IT professional take part in
creation of this document; do you think it is
important for small and medium enterprises to
have cyber security policy)?
Organizational Pre-cyber-attack
If there is a security policy in your organization,
are you of opinion that it is used in practice or it
only exists formally?
Organizational Pre-cyber-attack
Who decides about the value of information
system assets and prioritization of the
information? What are the processes in order to
assess these asset risk exposure?
Organizational Pre-cyber-attack
Who decides about system access permissions?
Is it you or management or both? What is your
opinion about who should decide about this and
why?
Organizational During-cyberattack
Are there any prescribed roles and
accountabilities about measures if a cyber-attack
happens in the real time (for example to turn off
servers or the Internet connection on purpose, in
order to stop the attack)?
Organizational Post-cyber-attack
Please explain how is it decided whether a cyberattack is a single isolated accident case or it is
only a part of a large attack that is directly meant
for this particular organization?
Organizational Post-cyber-attack
Does someone from the company inform
company’s clients, stakeholders or for example
national cyber security body if a cyber-attack
occurs? Who spreads the information and in your
opinion, how important is it to inform those who
may be affected or who may need to record the
attack)?
Type of aspect Interview questions
Technological Does your company track and analyze system logs and how the
system logs are analyzed?
Technological Is there a complete inventory list of hardware and software in order
to authorize them in your information system?
Technological Do you do system backups (how often, what data, how long are data
stored in the system, how quick can you retrieve backup data)?
Technological Does your organization use antivirus software and does it analyze
identified threats?
Technological Do you use passwords in order to protect your information system 
92
(password rules, frequency of changing passwords, shared or only
personal passwords)?
Technological Is Internet firewall used in your organization and what the firewall
rules are applied against?
Type of
aspect
Aim, type and
period of cyber
security measures
creation
Interview questions
Psychological Level of guilt and
shame/general type
You are just about to run a regular IS security scan
but you unpredictably receive important
administrative work to accomplish. Would you
postpone the regular system scan or the given
administrative work? Please explain your decision
on this matter and describe how you would feel
after you made the decision.
Psychological Level of guilt and
shame/general type
At the end of your worktime you discover a minor
security gap in IS. Would you leave this error to
be corrected for tomorrow or you would stay an
additional three or four hours needed to close this
security gap? Please explain your decision.
Psychological Level of guilt and
shame/general type
The management in your organization requires
from you to create cyber security measures but
you are aware there are no enough financial
resources available for that. Would you anyway
create deficient measures with the resources
available or you would hesitate to do so by
extensively explaining all the reasons and dangers
of management’s requirements and try to pursue
them this way to invest more?
Psychological
Distinguishing the
guilt and shame
proneness/during
CS measures
creation
While creating cyber security measures you
realize that you are in lack of expertize in one
particular domain, but no one else can realize this.
Would you report your lack of expertize to the
management and discuss the issue or you would
find a resort in some other solution?
Psychological
Distinguishing the
guilt and shame
proneness/post CS
measures creation
You discover that there is important information
data leakage to the Internet from your information
system. No one from the company you work for
knows this has happened but will probably never
find it out and you are able to correct the mistake.
Would you inform the management about the
accident or you would not. Please explain your
decision.
Psychological Distinguishing the You realize the organization you work for would 
93
guilt and shame
proneness/post CS
measures creation
greatly benefit from buying and implementing a
certain cyber security software/system, which is
very costly. However, you succeed to persuade the
management to invest into it. How would you feel
and what would be your actions if after certain
amount of time you realize that this costly
investment was a wrong decision. In order to
correct the mistake another 50% of overall
investment on the software/system is needed to
correct your mistake. Would you inform the
management and explain your decision?
94
Appendix 2 – Consent Form
Research title: A study on IT professionals’ Organizational Cyber Security Awareness
while making decisions about cyber security measures across SMEs
Name of researcher, academic program, university and research info: Milos Zec,
Master Program in Information Systems, Linnaeus
University, mz222ch@student.lnu.se m.workplace@gmail.com
Research purpose: The purpose of this study is to understand the level of IT
professionals from organizational, technological and psychological aspects when making
decisions about cyber security in SMEs
Research process description: There will be an interview where you will be asked
questions about how cyber security measures are created in your organization. You will
be able to choose to allow the interviewer to record your answers or if you are
uncomfortable with the recording, notes can be taken. Your answers will be analyzed for
the purpose of this study and there is also a possibility for using them for writing
scientific articles.
Research benefits: The benefit of this study is to contribute to rising of cyber security
awareness of IT professionals in SMEs and in that way to help them to decrease cyberattacks in these organizations. This study also aims to find the additional reasons of cyber
security failure in SMEs that are not of financial investment nature.
Risk and discomfort: This research does not bring any discomforts to interview
participants because only the questions relevant to cyber security measures creation will
be asked. Your name and the name of the company you work for will be never revealed
to anyone except the researcher. Only the information about the number of employees,
your professional role and importance of cyber security to your organization will be
exposed in the study.
Participant’s rights about information: All the collected data through the interview
will be available to you and your company at request at any time. You will be able to
withdraw the interview process and request that the data collected not to be used for this
study.
Confidentiality: The interview answers will never be shared with the third parties and
will be used only for the purpose of this research and also for the purpose of writing
scientific articles that could be published in scientific conferences worldwide. In the case
of recordings, after they are transcribed on the paper or electronic format will be deleted
so if you would wish to have the recording of your answer you can receive it after the
interview. 
95
Research inquires: If you have any additional inquires about this research you are
welcome to contact the researcher on his e-mail address that is stated above. If you
require to see the interview guide before the interview, feel free to contact and ask the
researcher for it.
Please tick the boxes below in order to express your preferences:
x I understand this study nature and consent to take participation in it
x I consent for my answers being recorded
x I understand that my answers will be taken only for the purpose of this study and that
anyone else will not have access to them except the researcher
x I agree that the data collected through interview with me can be used for the purpose
of writing scientific articles and can be published in scientific conferences worldwide
x I am deeply aware that I can withdraw my participation in this study at any time and
without any explanation
Date: ___________________
Signature of the participant: ______________________
Name of the researcher: Milos Zec
Yes No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Y
96
Appendix 3 - Empirical findings from the general types of questions
Company 1
The first interview of this study took place in company’s premises between 10 and 10:30
o’clock, on 1st April 2015. There was a warm welcome from the Interviewee 1 who
offered a cup of coffee and introduced himself. He is a general IT professional who takes
care of overall company’s IT activities so the cyber security is also under his
responsibility. Then he explained that the company he works for operated internationally
because it imports children’s garments from abroad and distributes it on the domestic
market i.e. the Republic of Slovakia. He continued by saying that it was a small company
with 25 employees. He further expressed that “…my company is quite dependent on the
cyber space because we use e-mail correspondence with our suppliers from abroad as
well as with our distributors here in Slovakia… “, and added “…we also use online
money transactions. “. The interviewee from Company 1 said that he considers cyber
security as a very important and integral field of IT and that it is also important for his
company due to mainly of sending and receiving the online payments that must be
secured. He concluded his answer by saying that “The cyber security is very important
for the company I work for and I am of opinion that this importance will be growing over
the time as the general ICT field is developing in an extreme pace. “.
Company 2
The interview of Interviewee 2 took place between 12 and 12:35 o’clock in the meeting
room of Company 2 on 2nd April 2015. This interview was held during the lunch time so
some food was served and questions and answers were provided while having lunch. The
interviewee is an IT professional who is specialized in the field of cyber security and he
is the only person whose main responsibility is to be in charge of company’s cyber
security. The core business of this company is importing and exporting construction
materials and therefore it operates internationally. It is a medium business organization
that employs 70 people. When being asked about the company’s dependency on the cyber
space, Interviewee 2 replied “We are very dependent on the cyber space as we
collaborate with our suppliers and clients by electronic mail. Beside this, we have a web
page where we advertise our business and where purchases can be made. Moreover,
these purchases can be paid online which is a very sensible part of our business. “. He
also added “Internet is very useful for our business because we use it for multiple
purposes such as finding new clients and suppliers as well as making products research.
“. Interviewee 2 explained that the importance of cyber security of his company is very
high because without the cyber space, they would not be able to keep pace with the
competition. For the end he concluded “We have to have a mechanism of keeping our
business safe and the tool to help us do this is the cyber security. “.
97
Company 3
The third interview was held on 3rd April 2015 between 18 and 18:50 o’clock via the
social media software called Viber. This company is placed in the outskirts of Kosice city
and after the working hours due to preoccupation of the Interviewee 3. The interviewee
introduced himself and the company by saying the number company’s employees was 15.
Therefore we concluded that it was a small company. The company’s business field is
cooperative for ethical finance and Interviewee 3 is the only IT person in charge for all IT
activities including the cyber security domain. The business of Company 3 is related to
domestic market as well as to international due to its cooperation with some business
organizations abroad. The question about company’s dependency on the cyber space was
answered in the following manner “… our business is heavily dependent on the Internet
because all of our transactions with clients and investors are online. We also regard our
marketing activities to the internet and most of our business communication is done
online via VOIP (Voice Over Internet Protocol). “. After Interviewee 3 explained that all
of business operations of the company were performed in the cyber space, he was asked
about the importance of the cyber security in his organization that he responded by saying
that “… obviously, the cyber security is a very important domain of our business when we
do almost everything over the Internet. “, and added “It would be hard to imagine our
business without the cyber security as it would be extremely endangered. “.
Company 4
The interview with Interviewee 4 was held over the social media software called Skype
because at the time of interview the IT professional was abroad. The time when the
interview took place was in the late evening hours i.e. from 21:30 until 22:10 o’clock on
4th April 2015. Interviewee 4 described that the company he works for is a restaurant and
also has the service of food delivery. He also said that it was a small company that has 11
employees and that it only operates in the domestic market. The interviewee is a general
IT professional who takes care for all the ICT activities in the company which is also
cyber security. Therefore he is not a specialized cyber-security professional. When asked
to express the company’s dependence on the cyber space, the interviewee responded “We
have a software application for food online orders that is web-based and where our
customers can pay online via that application or to pay when the food is delivered. “. He
also added that “We use another application in the restaurant for food orders, payments
and table booking that can be accessible via the internet and from this point we can say
that we rely our business activities on the cyber space pretty much. “. The interviewee at
the end concluded that “Therefore, I am of opinion that the cyber security is quite
important for our overall business and operations. “.
98
Company 5
The fifth interview was held in the company’s premises of Company 5 after working
hours between 17:10 and 17:45 o’clock on 6th April 2015. The interviewee was a cybersecurity professional with a master degree in the field of cyber security. His main
responsibility in this company was to work with cyber security and he was the only
person who was in charge in this field. The core business of the company is point of sale
terminal deployment and it belongs to medium enterprises due to employment of 56
persons. The company operates only on the territory of Slovakia. Interviewee 5 explained
that their company is highly dependent on the cyber space as they have to perform online
software installations very often and also the installed software maintenance on a daily
basis. He also continued by explaining that they use electronic mail and online payments
which are performed in the cyber space as well. When being asked about his opinion of
cyber security importance in the company, he responded “Without cyber security our
company would have been wiped off a long time ago and would not exist (laughter). “. He
continued “All the operations that are the core of our business are crucial for our
company’s development and survival and these activities have to be closely watched all
the time. “. He added “…otherwise, we could easily disappear over a night. “.
Company 6
The last interview took place from 11 to 11:40 o’clock on 7th April 2015. The interview
was held via Skype due to Interviewee 6 preferred this type of communication and the
interview guide had been previously sent to him as he wanted to get introduced about the
questions before the interview took place. This company operates internationally and its
core business is assembly line production. It belongs to small enterprises due to it
employs 18 people. Interviewee 6 is a general IT professional which means that he is
only one person who takes care of overall ICT in the company where the field of cyber
security is included. The interviewee 6 described that the company’s information system
consists from web site, VOIP, CRM (Customer Relationship Management System) and
online money transactions and responded “Our business requires many activities to be
performed in the cyber space so I consider our organization has to thank for its existence
a lot. “. When being asked about importance of cyber security for his organization,
Interviewee 6 replied “I see the cyber security as an important part of our business
operations because the cyber-crime has been in its increase and develops fast. “. He then
concluded “My friends who work in this field told me some almost unbelievable stories to
what extent the cyber attackers are ready to go in order to achieve their aims. I think the
times are getting tougher and tougher for us who work in this field. “.
99