Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
Available online 6 December 2023
1084-8045/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Network and Computer Applications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jnca
Review article
Towards defining industry 5.0 vision with intelligent and softwarized
wireless network architectures and services: A survey
Shah Zeb a,∗
, Aamir Mahmood b,∗
, Sunder Ali Khowaja c,f
, Kapal Dev d,e,g
, Syed Ali Hassan a,b
,
Mikael Gidlund b
, Paolo Bellavista h
a School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (SEECS), National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST), Islamabad, 44000, Pakistan
b Department of Computer and Electrical Engineering, Mid Sweden University, Sundsvall, 851 70, Sweden
c Faculty of Engineering and Technology, University of Sindh, Jamshoro, 76090, Pakistan
d Department of Computer Science and CONNECT Center, Munster Technological University, Cork, T12 P928, Ireland
e Department of Institute of Intelligent Systems, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South Africa
f Faculty of Computing, Digital and Data, Technological University (TU) Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
g Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lebanese American University, Byblos, Lebanon
h Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Bologna, Bologna, 40136, Italy
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Industry 5.0
Computational intelligence
Next-generation wireless networks
Softwarized network architectures
Intelligent Network-in-Box
Multi-tenant service orchestration
Network management and orchestration
Open RAN
Factories-of-the-Future
Human–robots collaboration
Industrial communications
Industrial digital twins and Metaverse
A B S T R A C T
Industry 5.0 vision, a step toward the next industrial revolution and enhancement to Industry 4.0, conceives
the new goals of resilient, sustainable, and human-centric approaches in diverse emerging applications such
as factories-of-the-future and digital society. The vision seeks to leverage human intelligence and creativity
in nexus with intelligent, efficient, and reliable cognitive collaborating robots (cobots) to achieve zero waste,
zero-defect, and mass customization-based manufacturing solutions. However, it requires merging distinctive
cyber–physical worlds through intelligent orchestration of various technological enablers, e.g., cognitive cobots,
human-centric artificial intelligence (AI), cyber–physical systems, digital twins, hyperconverged data storage
and computing, communication infrastructure, and others. In this regard, the convergence of the emerging
computational intelligence (CI) paradigm and softwarized next-generation wireless networks (NGWNs) can
fulfill the stringent communication and computation requirements of the technological enablers of the Industry
5.0, which is the aim of this survey. In this article, we address this issue by reviewing and analyzing current
emerging concepts and technologies, e.g., CI tools and frameworks, network-in-box architecture, open radio
access networks, softwarized service architectures, potential enabling services, and others, elemental and
holistic for designing the objectives of CI-NGWNs to fulfill the Industry 5.0 vision requirements. Furthermore,
we outline and discuss ongoing initiatives, demos, and frameworks linked to Industry 5.0. Finally, we provide a
list of lessons learned from our detailed review, research challenges, and open issues that should be addressed
in CI-NGWNs to realize Industry 5.0.
1. Introduction
Intelligent, resilient, and dependable NextG-wireless network
(NGWN)1 architectures are anticipated to have CI-native network softwarization embedded throughout the entire transformative networking
assembly or network-in-a-box— a combination of emerging hardware
and software solutions and hyper-converged infrastructures within a multitier core/access network (Ray et al., 2021). It can enable a myriad
of supporting features such as zero-touch network management &
orchestration (MANO) solutions, seamless mergence of standardized
∗ Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: szeb.dphd19seecs@seecs.edu.pk (S. Zeb), aamir.mahmood@miun.se (A. Mahmood).
1 Note that important acronyms are defined in Table 1.
(e.g., 3G/4G/5G) and non-standardized networks (WiFi, terrestrial/nonterrestrial) and a multitude of personalized, user-centric, scalable,
and intelligent services employing multi-tenant softwarized networks
(Hashima et al., 2022). Such intelligent and softwarized CI-NGWN
networks are envisioned to form a technological enabler for meeting
the diverse communication and computation requirements of Industry
5.0 applications and services (Ji et al., 2021), which are based on three
core elements; resilience, sustainability, and human-centric industry (Maddikunta et al., 2021).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2023.103796
Received 2 August 2023; Received in revised form 3 November 2023; Accepted 26 November 2023
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
2
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 1. Industry 5.0 core elements and their envisioned technical enablers.
Resilience refers to the increase in industrial production while
reducing the disruptions and times of crisis. The sustainability mainly
addresses environmental factors, such as energy reduction and reuse of
the available resources. The human-centric approach places the human
interests and needs at the core of the production process, including
personalization and machine interaction. Concerning the core elements
of Industry 5.0, vital communication and computation paradigm components and their subdivision in NGWNs are illustrated in Fig. 1.
Nevertheless, the emerging vision, design objectives, and technological requirements associated with the Industry 5.0 concepts are in a perpetual
state of evolution, and intelligent and softwarized NGWNs are poised to
form an essential framework towards realizing them. Hence, to summarize
the multitude of emerging concepts, definitions, and requirements within
Industry 5.0 and intelligent NGWNs, the subsequent subsections provide, (1)
a brief overview of the building blocks of Industry 5.0 in Section 1.1, (2) the
NGWNs and CI and their roles for adopting emerging communication and
computation paradigms to support Industry 5.0 in Section 1.2, and (3) a
discussion towards the research trends, limitations/gaps in existing surveys,
and motivation, taxonomy and contributions of our survey in Section 1.3,
respectively.
1.1. The rise of industry 5.0 vision
The world is experiencing the fourth industrial revolution, or Industry 4.0, which is one of the future projects that the German Government
outlined in its 2010 ‘‘High-Tech Strategy 2020’’ action plan (Zaidi
et al., 2020; Wollschlaeger et al., 2017). The end goal was to enhance
digitization in smart production and develop automated control under
the vision of mass production, similar to the preceding three industrial
revolutions (Tange et al., 2020). However, one of the key differences
among different revolutions lies in utilizing the state-of-the-art enabling
technologies of the respective age, as illustrated in Fig. 2, e.g., the
introduction of diverse ICT technologies facilitates the migration from
electronics-based Industry 3.0 to Industry 4.0 (Aceto et al., 2019).
Hence, the digitized revolution of Industry 4.0 has reshaped today’s
industries by increasing the efficiency and intelligence in manufacturing and automation processes (Chen et al., 2020). Lately, academia and
researchers have started to discuss holistic as well as elemental vision for the
next industrial revolution or Industry 5.0 with a focus on identifying the necessary components, such as defining the vision, outlining the requirements,
and determining the building blocks. Further details on these discussions
are presented below.
1.1.1. Industry 5.0 vision
Industry 5.0 aims for mass customized production with zero waste,
minimum cost, and maximum accuracy, while a critical component
in Industry 4.0 was mass production with minimum wastage and
enhanced efficiency (Yetış et al., 2020; Maddikunta et al., 2021).
Table 1
List of important acronyms.
Acronym Definition
3GPP 3rd Generation Partnership Project
6G Sixth-Generation
AI Artificial Intelligence
AEC AI-assistive Extreme Communications
AMRs Autonomous Mobile Robots
B5G Beyond 5G
CI Computational Intelligence
Cobots Collaborating Robots
CCPS Cognitive Cyber–Physical Systems
CFE Cloud–Fog–Edge
DT Digital Twin
ERLLC Extremely Reliable and Low Latency Communications
ELPC Extremely Low Power Communication
FeMBB Further-enhanced Mobile Broadband
FoFs Factories-of-the-Future
HCI Hyper-converged Infrastructure
ICT Information and Communications Technology
IIoT Industrial Internet-of-Things
ICAR Integrated Communication and Ranging Services
KPI Key Performance Indicator
LDHMC Long Distance and High Mobility Communication
mMIMO Massive Multiple-Input and Multiple-Output
mLLMTC Massive Low Latency Machine Type Communication
MBBL Mobile Broadband and Low-Latency
MEC Multi-access Edge Computing
NGWNs Next-Generation Wireless Networks
NIB Network-in-Box
NFV Network Functions Virtualization
NG-IoT Next-Generation IoT
O-RAN Open Radio Access Networks
QoS and QoE Quality-of-Services and Quality-of-Experiences
RIS Reflecting Intelligent Surfaces
SDN Software-defined Networking
THz and mmWave Terahertz and Millimeter Wave
UAVs Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
UmMTC Ultra-massive Machine Type Communication
However, the Industry 5.0 concept is still a new construct and yet to
be evolved entirely. For example, while leading industry researchers and
practitioners have presented various definitions and observations in the literature regarding the Industry 5.0 vision (as discussed in Maddikunta et al.
(2021, Sec. II)), the identification and clear understanding of the new set
of emerging and enabling technologies within the Industry 5.0 technological
framework and their specific roles, requirements, and associated impacts are
still lacking. Nonetheless, all relevant Industry 5.0 concepts emphasize
humans and robots working in harmony to create an intelligent society
where humans perform the creative tasks of innovation while robots
(cobots) carry out the rest. In this regard, European Commission
(EC) coined the futuristic blueprints to add resiliency, human-centered,
and sustainable approaches to the Industry 5.0 vision (Research and
Innovation, Jan 2022, 2021, 2020). The next industrial revolution
(c.f. Fig. 2) enables people empowerment (i.e., workforce, digital
society) in nexus with the goals of mass-customization in optimized
supply chains, e.g., adaptability and scalable product varieties, bringing
positive impacts and benefits for different fields of society.
1.1.2. Why industry 5.0
The industries of the future need to play a functional part in
developing solutions to imminent societal challenges (Xu et al., 2021a;
Sharma et al., 2022; Sindhwani et al., 2022), e.g., (1) preserving environmental and natural resources and a climate change (sustainability),
(2) circular production models, emerging enabling ICT technologies,
and revision of policies for energy consumption for efficient utilization
of natural resources in the event of external shocks, e.g., COVID-19
pandemic (resiliency), and (3) digital hyperconnectivity and evolving
digital skills for people empowerment and social stability (humancentric value). It is imperative for Industry 5.0 components to realize
and enable the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) or Global
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
3
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 2. Main enablers and goals for the different industrial revolutions up to Industry 5.0.
Goals outlined in Agenda 2030 of the United Nations (UN) (Nations,
July 2017).
1.1.3. Building blocks of industry 5.0
In the face of imminent societal challenges, FoFs in Industry 5.0 aim
at providing innovative solutions via integration of current and emerging technologies and techniques. Notably, there have been significant
advancements in various emerging technologies, e.g., robotics (Xiloyannis et al., 2021), industrial IoT (Mahmood et al., 2022b), computer vision (CV) (Janai et al., 2020), big data analytics and computation technologies (Ma et al., 2021), beyond 5G wireless networks (Huang et al.,
2021), and artificial intelligence (AI) (Du et al., 2021b), which enable
the new vertical and horizontal industrial applications. Some promising
examples and industrial applications of an upcoming changing trend
are cloud manufacturing, the deployment of artificial-, virtual-, and
extended-reality (AR-VR-XR) in mesh-connected digital twins (DTs)
of factory, supply chain management, DT-enabled cobots, automated
guided vehicles (AGVs), predictive maintenance, intelligent healthcare,
and smart education (Research and Innovation, Jan 2022). It is not long
before humans will start interacting closely with AI- and DT-enabled
cobots systems and machines inside the FoFs.
Additionally, Industry 5.0 aims to introduce other critical features
to the existing Industry 4.0 paradigm. For example, Matrix Production, based on grid-layout categorized and standardized manufacturing
cells, combines the concepts of cell manufacturing (Leng et al., 2021),
lean productions (Ganjavi and Fazlollahtabar, 2021), cell-neutral and
smart wireless networked multirobot systems (Chen et al., 2020), and
AGVs (Vakaruk et al., 2021). Matrix production discards the monolithic
rigid production and enables hyper customization by decoupling the
warehouse logistics and manufacturing floor production and using the
control software to connect multiple manufacturing cells in matrix
grids for sustainable, flexible, resilient and customized productions
flows (Systems, Jan 2021). By using individually configurable loadhandling pallets and racks from conveyor decks, these autonomously
navigating AGVs can easily pick up and transport different workpieces
or tools from warehouses depending on process/production flow demands. Similarly, other enhanced features also exist, e.g., zero-defect
and smart additive manufacturing (Powell et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2020b), monitoring and predictive maintenance (Borghesi et al., 2021),
human–robot collaborative manufacturing (Proia et al., 2021), renewable energy resources (Zhang et al., 2022), and green industries (Ma
et al., 2020).
1.1.4. Industry 5.0 and NextG wireless networks
The foundational building blocks of the fifth industrial revolution
powered by enabling communication and computation technologies
of softwarized NGWNs paves the way for new opportunities with a
focus on diverse applications and customized services. In this respect,
NGWNs unlock new business model opportunities for firms to create
and capture value from this technology. However, it requires all actors
(e.g., leading telecom and vertical industries) to collaborate toward
realizing the economic impact that would give a fair return on their
investments. Furthermore, understanding customer needs (i.e., connectivity requirements) is a prerequisite to understanding successful value
creation and capturing. Therefore, the real value of NGWNs is defined by
improving the manufacturing processes in terms of their responsiveness to the
demand, efficiency, capacity utilization, and product/service customization
and innovation requirements in Industry 5.0. In this sense, it requires the
human- and value-centric design of NGWNs through verticals-technology
joint design to enable the actual realization and adaptation of Industry 5.0
goals.
1.2. NextG wireless networks as industry 5.0 technological enablers
Lately, with the deployment of 5G networks, a broad spectrum
of research is being carried out to envision next-generation wireless
networks or 6G wireless systems—closely integrating the omnipresent
AI into every aspect of transformative and emerging networking systems to enable hyper-flexible intelligent end-to-end (E2E) softwarized
networking architecture (Jiang et al., 2021b; Letaief et al., 2022; Alwis
et al., 2021). Primary goals include (1) AI-native service-oriented architecture that possesses the inherent features of flexible and enhanced
service-based architecture (SBA) to provide heterogeneous personalized
6G services, (2) high data-transportation and intelligent edge networks,
and (3) support for knowledgeable and autonomous human-centric
systems. In this regard, CI integration can play a big part in realizing
the 6G vision.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
4
S. Zeb et al.
Computational Intelligence (CI) paradigm provides intelligent communication, computation, and functional storage capabilities to numerous applications by utilizing (van Eck et al., 2006; Wang et al.,
2009; Zeb et al., 2022a), (1) state-of-the-art computational algorithms,
e.g., deep neural networks, fuzzy systems, evolutionary AI, and swarm
AI, (2) hyperconverged computing infrastructure (HCI) such as
cloud/edge computing infrastructures, on-premise private data centers, public data lakes, and (3) enabling communication technologies,
e.g., NG-IoT and broadband IIoT, cognitive CPS systems, mmWave/
THz-based mMIMO wireless systems, and RIS technology. The International Data Corporation (IDC) estimates the global spending on AI
will increase from 85.3 billion US$ in 2021 to over 204 billion US$ in
2025 ((IDC), Sep 2021).
1.2.1. CI-native NextG wireless networks (CI-NGWNs)
A new concept of CI-native intelligent and softwarized NGWNs,
i.e., CI-NGWNs, is emerging following the convergence of CI paradigms,
SDN- and NFV-enabled communication networks, coupled with softwarized service architectures (i.e., microservices architectures), which
can provide the powerful integrated solution to sustain the needs of
Industry 5.0 vision and diverse functional requirements (Ji et al., 2021;
Duan et al., 2020). It enables fully automated and intelligent network
resource management and operations to deploy dynamic network functions and connection services providing a high degree of flexibility in
numerous demanding scenarios (Bonati et al., 2021b; Roy et al., 2021;
Tataria et al., 2021). Some of the examples include,
1. Integrated network softwarization that combines the capabilities of
SDN, NFV, and microservices architectures to create a more agile
and adaptable network infrastructure. Thus, enabling organizations
to respond to changing demands and requirements more efficiently,
improving their overall competitiveness.
2. AI-native service-based architecture to support machine learning and
advanced analytics for optimizing network operations, resource allocation, and service delivery.
3. Multi-tenancy and service orchestrations of multiple services for different tenants, enabling efficient resource utilization and streamlined
service management. It allows for the orchestration of services in
real-time, ensuring optimal user experience.
4. Open and programmable RAN architectures in CI-NGWNs fosters innovation and ensures seamless interoperability between different
vendors, contributing to a more diverse and competitive market
5. Time-sensitive networks (TSN) over wireless systems support the implementation of TSNs, which ensure the timely delivery of critical data
and computation services in wireless networks. This is particularly
important in Industry 5.0 applications, where meeting ultra-low
latency and ultra-high reliability requirements is critical.
As a vital technological driver in Industry 5.0, emerging softwarized CINGWNs features/services can unlock new levels of productivity, efficiency,
and innovation by facilitating the integration of new groups of ICT technologies and techniques into the Industry 5.0 framework.
1.3. Research methodology, motivations and contributions
This subsection provides the adopted research screening method,
and motivations and contributions of our paper, followed by its organization.
1.3.1. Research screening methodology
The method for selecting the most relevant and authentic literature
is summarized in Table 3. For the publication screening process to
be reliable, the screening process was repeated through three separate
independent campaigns. Our findings are compiled from 2000 to 2022
for selected search strings (c.f. Table 3). Prior to final processing, it is
essential to establish whether the compiled data is relevant to the area
of interest, i.e., to determine whether it is based on the papers’ abstract,
introduction, and conclusion. The search database contained a number
of articles with the keyword ‘‘digital‘‘ or ‘‘twin’’ in the title or abstract,
which is not intended to refer to the ‘‘digital twin’’ or ‘‘virtual image’’
of the process as a whole. Similarly, we encountered the same situation
while searching for industrial IoT, zero-defect manufacturing, computational intelligence, Industry 5.0, and other relevant data. We applied
the detailed pre-processing check based on screening procedures and
excluded articles of this sort from the final database of literature for
our current survey paper.
1.3.2. Our motivation
Industry 5.0 and CI-NGWN have already become critical topics in
academia and industry, as discussed earlier in Section 1.1, 1.2, and
1.3.1. We reviewed each manuscript that was included in the database
of gathered literature, received through the screening methodology
described previously.
Literature Review and Limitations. Many research works are published on Industry 5.0 and CI-NGWNs, focusing on defining vision/
goals, emerging technologies, possible applications, and new use cases.
In this context, we categorized and described part of the available literature
as well as reviewed works in Table 2 based on the important enabling
elements of CI-NGWNs and their conformity with the Industry 5.0 vision.
We attempt to identify common ground and propositions at the intersection
between Industry 5.0 and CI-NGWNs, particularly how CI-NGWNs provide
enhanced communication and computation services that might serve as a
technology enabler for fulfilling the Industry 5.0 vision. It is clear from
Table 2 that each of the authors has investigated Industry 5.0 from
his own unique point of view. To account for this, we provide some
concluding remarks and categorize the nature of the discussion in
the reviewed literature based on how thoroughly it covers the CINGWN features, i.e., High Coverage, Medium Coverage, Low Coverage and
Unavailable.
From literature review content, it has been revealed that there has
been limitation of less coverage of the Industry 5.0 vision concerning
numerous features of CI and NextG wireless networks, i.e., O-RAN,
softwarized NIBs, service provisioning, cloud/edge-native computing network architecture and others. For example, Nayak et al. and Bhat et al.
in Nayak and Pargiri (2020) and Bhat and Alqahtani (2021), respectively, reviewed the various features relevant to some of CI techniques
and applications in 6G vision, while Shahzadi et al. in Shahzadi et al.
(2021) have addressed the human-centric features in futuristic 6G.
Note that the evaluation of the survey literature in Table 2 is not
limited to only selected CI-NGWNs features mentioned for gaps (M, L
and ✗), e.g., CI, CFE, softwarized networks, DT implementation, and
others. Several other important factors such as B5G/6G network architecture objectives and features, metaverse functionalities, cognitive
services, human–machine interactions, multi-tenancy, enabling technologies and their requirements for Industry 5.0, zero-touch network
management, localization, and many others, are also taken into account
during the evaluation of selected reviewed surveys. For example, Zeb
et al. (2022a) focused on the industrial DT implementation with CI
and CFE computing perspective into account, however, state-of-the-art
research, key discussion and in-depth details on Industry 5.0 vision,
B5G/6G networks, softwarized service orchestration, metaverse, are
completely missing. Similarly, the focus in Maddikunta (2021) is solely
on emerging technologies for Industry 5.0 ecosystem, while it lags
on the technical in-depth key analysis and discussion relevant on
aforementioned critical factors relevant to CI-NGWNs as well as how
emerging technologies can realize the true digitization in Industry 5.0.
Similarly, fewer attempts have been made to identify and elaborate the
KPIs of three pillars of Industry 5.0 vision (i.e., sustainability, resilience,
and human-centric) and how various critical features of CI-NWGNs
can meet these KPIs. Hence, for the sake of simplicity and to avoid
confusion, we omitted and did not write every feature in Table 2, which
were already missing in all selected surveys. However, the missing
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
5
S. Zeb et al.
Table 2
Summary and categorization of the reviewed studies concerning Industry 5.0.
Authors & Year
Reference Numbers
Remarks on Topic(s) of the Survey &
Compliance with Industry 5.0 Vision)
Cloud–Fog–Edge (CFE)
Computational Intelligence
CFE-CI (Sustainability)
CFE-CI (Resiliency)
CFE-CI (Human-Centric)
Softwarized Networks
Service Orchestration
Digital Twin Implementation
Private 5G Networks & O-RAN
Frameworks, Projects & Demos
Our Survey Highlights
(Related Sections & Enhancements)
Draghici et al.,
2022
Draghici and Ivascu (2022) Sustainability and Innovation in Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ ✓ M L ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ Our comprehensive survey presents an overview of NGWNs with CI-enabled
capabilities, e.g., CI-native CFE architecture, O-RAN, network intelligence,
softwarized service orchestration & others, which are expected to contribute to
meeting the critical communication & computation needs of Industry 5.0 & its
components in terms of sustainability, resiliency, and human-centricity. In this
aspect, survey motivation is provided in Section 1.3.2, key contributions in
Section 1.3.3, and outline/taxonomy of our survey structure in Fig. 3.
Brief highlights of some of all enhancements discussed for gaps in features
(M, L, & ✗) and corresponding related sections in survey are given below.
• Covered detailed discussion on required technological enablers and frameworks for multiple symbiotic complex systems in Industry 5.0 (c.f. Section 2.1).
• Provided in-depth overview of wide-array of design objectives, features, &
vision of network-in-box (NIB) architecture of CI-NGWNs for supporting
Industry 5.0 Enablers (c.f. Section 1.2 & Fig. 5).
• State-of-the-art discussion on Sofwarized Networks and Service
Orchestration features (e.g., DT functions, AI functions, mesh-services, etc. )
for enabling true service-oriented digitization for Industry 5.0 (c.f. Section 3.1).
• Taxonomy on softwarized architectures impact (significance, drawbacks,
& usecases) on Industry 5.0 is also provided in Table 4.
• Proposed and discussed a multi-tenant softwarized service provisioning
framework based on softwarized CI-NGWNs architecture with the hierarchical
automation and control pyramid (c.f. Fig. 6) .
• Presented the open and intelligent 6G network architecture, focusing on
the Open RAN framework for RAN/edge automation, as well as the resulting
end-to-end network intelligence requirements (e.g., Private Networks)
and constraints (c.f. Section 4).
• Provided an overview of envisioned end-to-end network intelligence-native
6G architecture that is based on various standardization efforts over time
(c.f. Section 4.1 & Fig. 9), while RAN transformation to open and disaggregated
RAN & challenges/limitations in intelligent closed-control loop in O-RAN
architecture is provided in Fig. 10 and Table 5, respectively.
• Industry 5.0 will dynamically automate operations and boost efficiency
using CI techniques and CFE computer designs, which have the low coverage in
literature. Thus, in Section 5.1 & 5.2 & Fig. 13, we gave an in-depth & enhanced
evaluation of state-of-the-art CI and CFE methodologies, possible advantages,
technical features, research obstacles, and related work specifically for different
targeted domains in Industry 5.0, e.g., manufacturing, robotics, and others.
• CI techniques and CFE computing are also examined for three Industry 5.0
building elements (Sustainability, Resilience, & Human-Centric). Similarly,
Section 5.3 thoroughly examines Industry 5.0 needs for CI-CFE
integration to enable smart services like AI-analytics, CCPS, IIoT, and others.
• Covered in-depth overview of composite, customized and unified standalone
enabling services that can be supported by multi-tenant softwarized architecture,
e.g., services for time-sensitive networking and zero-touch service management
(c.f. Section 6) Network-function-as-a-service (c.f. Section 6.3) AI-as-a-service
(c.f. Section 6.4), DT-as-a-service and metaverse (c.f. Section 6.5), and
Navigation/Tracking-as-a-service (c.f. 6.1).
• Provided details on Industry 5.0 guidelines, project demos, and frameworks
in Section 7, while ongoing projects closely related to Industry 5.0 in Table 6.
Sindhwani et al.,
2022
Sindhwani et al. (2022) Social Value Creation in Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ M ✓ L ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Khowaja et al.,
2022
Khowaja et al. (2021b) Private AI and Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ L ✓ L M ✗ ✗ ✗ M
Khowaja et al.,
2022
Khowaja et al. (2022) Model Inversion Attacks concerning Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ L ✓ M ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ M
Zeb et al.,
2022
Zeb et al. (2022a) Industrial Digital Twins for Industry 4.0 ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Farsi et al.,
2021
Farsi et al. (2021) Sustainability and Reliability in Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ L L ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Maddikunta et al.,
2021
Maddikunta (2021) Enabling Technologies for Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ ✓ L ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ L ✗
Thakur et al.,
2021
Thakur and Sehgal (2021) Cyber–physical Systems for Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ M ✓ M ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
fraga et al.,
2021
Fraga-Lamas et al. (2021) Sustainability and Circular Economy for Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ L ✗ ✗ ✗ L
Du et al.,
2021
Du et al. (2021a) Fault Diagnosis with Edge AI in Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ L ✓ L L ✗ ✗ ✗ L
Shahzadi et al.,
2021
Shahzadi et al. (2021) 6G and Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ ✓ L L L L ✗ ✗ ✗
Bhat et al.,
2021
Bhat and Alqahtani (2021) 6G and Human-centric Industry ✓ ✓ L L ✓ L ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Wang et al.,
2021
Wang et al. (2021a) Explainable AI and its use case in Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ M M ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ L
Rupa et al.,
2021
Rupa et al. (2021) Medical Data Protection Concerning Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ L ✓ M ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Jain et al.,
2021
Jain et al. (2021) UAVs and Secure Communication in Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ M ✓ L ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Chin et al.,
2021
Chin (2021) Emotional Intelligence in Context of Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ L L ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Elim et al.,
2020
Elim and Zhai (2020) Nexus between Society 5.0 and Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ ✓ L L ✗ ✗ L ✗ ✗
Nayak et al.,
2020
Nayak and Pargiri (2020) 6G and Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ ✓ L L L ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Longo et al.,
2020
Longo et al. (2020) Factory of the Future: Industry 5.0 M ✓ L L ✓ ✗ ✗ L ✗ ✗
Javaid et al.,
2020
Javaid et al. (2020) Healthcare and Industry 5.0 M ✓ L L L ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Martynov et al.,
2019
Martynov et al. (2019) Digitalization with Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ L L L ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Kent et al.,
2019
Doyle-Kent and Kopacek (2019) Digital Society in Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ L L L ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Javaid et al.,
2019
Haleem and Javaid (2019) Healthcare and Industry 5.0 M ✓ L L L ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Nahavandi et al.,
2019
Nahavandi (2019) Human-centric Solutions for Industry 5.0 L ✓ L L ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Demir et al.,
2019
Demir et al. (2019) Human–Robot in Industry 5.0 M ✓ ✓ L ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Ozdemir et al.,
2018
Ozdemir and Hekim (2018) AI and IoT for Industry 5.0 ✓ ✓ L L L ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Han et al.,
2017
Han et al. (2017) Human–Robot Collaboration in Industry 5.0 M ✓ L L ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
Our Article —
Intelligent, Resilient and Softwarized NextG Wireless
Networks for Industry 5.0 Vision
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
✓ High Coverage M Medium Coverage L Low Coverage ✗ Absent/Unavailable
Table 3
Methodology on screening papers.
Searching tndex Content and evaluation
Search Time-period From: January 2000, To: October 2022
Article Database IEEE Xplore, Scopus, Science Direct, and Google
Scholar.
Articles Type Early Access and Published Peer-reviewed
Technical Conferences
and Journals.
Screening Procedures Each paper’s relevance to the research topic is
determined by its
abstract, introduction, and conclusion.
Search Strings ‘‘Industry 4.0’’, ‘‘Industry 5.0’’, ‘‘resilience’’,
‘‘sustainability’’,
‘‘human-centric’’, ‘‘digital society 5.0’’,
‘‘factories-of-the-future’’,
‘‘zero-defect manufacturing’’, ‘‘digital twin’’,
‘‘computational
intelligence’’, ‘‘industrial IoT’’, ‘‘softwarization’’,
and ‘‘6G’’, etc.
features were taken into consideration and covered/discussed in detail
onward in our survey (c.f. Fig. 3).
Based on the facts mentioned above, softwarized CI-NWGNs is expected to open up novel opportunities for defining Industry 5.0 research
and development as a critical technological enabler in the foreseeable
future.
1.3.3. Scope of the survey and our contributions
In this comprehensive survey, we aim to provide an in-depth analysis of the path toward Industry 5.0, with a particular focus on emphasizing the significance of CI-NGWNs as a critical component. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to extensively
cover the wide range of CI-NGWNs elements in the context of Industry
5.0, contributing significantly to the existing body of research. We
highlight and summarize the key enhancements and corresponding
related sections/content concerning gaps in the current knowledge
base, as presented in Table 2. This approach helps to identify areas that
require further research and development, ultimately contributing to
the ongoing progress in the field. The three key elements of the Industry
5.0 vision—human-centric, sustainable, and resilient—are supported
by six groups of technologies acting as essential enablers. In essence,
we investigate thoroughly, (1) fundamental technological enablers,
exploring their roles, requirements, and the associated impacts that
serve as the foundation for the Industry 5.0 vision, and (2) how KPIs
of intelligent, resilient, and reliable softwarized CI-NGWNs can meet
and fulfill the enhanced communication and computation requirements
of technological enablers within Industry 5.0 framework. Moreover,
we discuss and cover the design objectives, features and vision of
softwarized NIBs architecture in CI-NGWNs that provide the enhanced
features of multi-tenant softwarized service architecture, O-RAN, network intelligence, and others. Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
6
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 3. An overview of the survey outline and taxonomy.
our survey contains the recent works carried out till 2022 in the fields
of computational intelligence and NGWNs as they relate to Industry 5.0.
By including the most up-to-date research, we ensure a contemporary
and relevant analysis of the ongoing developments in the field. To
facilitate a clear understanding of the relationships between the various
components and enablers of Industry 5.0 and CI-NGWNs, the pictorial
illustration of the scope and taxonomy of this survey is shown in Fig. 3.
Hence, the impact of this study lies in the following key contributions:
• Technological Enablers and Requirements: Important requirements of technological enablers concerning Industry 5.0 vision are
identified and discussed in this paper.
• CI-NGWNs and NIBs: The design objectives, vision, and NIBs architecture of CI-NGWNs have been categorized and discussed to meet
the diverse KPIs of technological enablers in Industry 5.0.
• Multi-tenant Softwarized Architecture: An industrial automation
and control software framework that allows providing customized
and intelligent services for Industry 5.0 applications, has been described and explored in the paper in the light of the technological
transition in industrial automation.
• Open and Intelligent RAN: Seeks to focus on numerous underlying
concepts, actions, and challenges involved in developing open and
intelligent 6G architecture for Industry 5.0 with a focus on Open RAN
framework and ensuing end-to-end network intelligence.
• CI in Industry 5.0: In Industry 5.0 framework, sustainable, humancentric, and resilient features are explored and discussed as a result
of the combination of CI and cloud–fog–edge computing networking
features.
• Potential Enabling Services: The paper explores and discusses the
potential enabling services for Industry 5.0, including DT-as-a-Service,
NFV-as-a-Service, Tracking-as-a-Service, AI-as-a-Service, and others.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
7
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 4. The framework illustration provides a quick overview of the concept of Industry 5.0 as well as broad vision/definition, technological enablers and main goals.
• Summarized ongoing projects and Demos: Lastly, projects currently underway and completed, publications, demos, and collaborations related to Industry 5.0 are discussed.
• Lessons Learned and Research Challenges: Lessons learned from
the reviewed research, recommendations and roadmap for future
research challenges were presented to the community based on the
reviewed research.
1.3.4. Paper organization
The rest of the article is organized as illustrated in Fig. 3. Section 2
gives an overview of the critical requirements of the technological
enablers of Industry 5.0 vision with NIBs architecture of CI-NGWNs,
followed by Section 3 that provides a discussion on multi-tenant softwarized service provisioning and control framework for Industry 5.0
applications. Section 4 discusses the virtualization in RAN of NGWNs
which brings the new deployment options for numerous scenarios.
Similarly, Section 5 discusses the role and requirements of both CI
techniques and CFE towards Industry 5.0, while the customizable and
new potential services enabled by multi-tenant softwarized service
provisioning and control framework are covered in Section 6. Section 7
covers the ongoing research work, projects and demos relevant to
Industry 5.0. Finally, Section 8 provides the lesson learned and recommendations, research challenges and the future opportunities, while
Section 9 provides concluding remarks.
2. Technological enablers of industry 5.0 vision and how CINGWNs KPIs can support it
The optimization and/or expansion of existing Industry 4.0 application requirements (e.g., extended coverage, enhanced features) and
new vertical and advanced applications in Industry 5.0 incurs enhanced
communication and computation service requirements. In this section,
we first discuss the critical technological enablers to realize the Industry
5.0 vision (Section 2.1), followed by the enhanced KPIs of CI-NGWNs
that can facilitate the required technological enablers needed for the
Industry 5.0 vision (Section 2.2).
2.1. Required technological enablers
The industry 5.0 enabling technologies are multiple complex systems resulting from the seamless convergence of emerging technologies and paradigms that bind physical and cyberspaces to realize the
resilience, sustainable and human-centric vision, as depicted by the
framework in Fig. 4. Together with the required enabling Industry 5.0
technologies, this vision is expected to have multifold impacts on economic, societal, ecological, and policy dimensions (Right, Fig. 4). The
CI-NGWNs can provide the medium for meeting the enabling communication and computation requirements within Industry 5.0 framework
by utilizing the enhanced features through tailoring CI within softwarized NIBs architecture. The successful working symbiotic relationship between multiple complex systems and supporting technological
frameworks in tandem can only enable the true multi-dimensional
potential of the Industry 5.0 features (Research and Innovation, 2021,
2020). The primary Industry 5.0 technological enablers are as follows
(Center, Fig. 4).
2.1.1. Human–machine interaction
Human–machine interaction technologies can enable the hyperconnectivity between machines and humans to provide human-centric
innovation, solutions, and intelligence, e.g., cognitive and affective
computing, digital assistance, visual insights, smart management, and
control. Following enabling technologies supports human-centric value
design in Industry 5.0.
Cognitive and Cyber–Physical–Social Systems (CCPSS) is a rapidly
growing interdisciplinary technology that combines cognitive computing architecture at the nexus of three critical spaces of machine/cobots
to deliver intelligent solutions (Wang et al., 2019a). These three crucial
cobots spaces are cyber, physical, and counterpart social (human)
components for enabling human–machine interaction. By integrating
machine learning and artificial intelligence with brain-inspired Affective computing designs, CCPSS uniquely combines the best of both
worlds through human intelligence to aid the Industry 5.0 vision (Zhou
et al., 2022).
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
8
S. Zeb et al.
Autonomous Mobile Robots (AMR). By combining functionalities of
both AMRs and AGVs, multidirectional production lines can be laid out
in matrix productions instead of the linear layout possible with conventional conveyors (Ranjha et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021b), since AMRs
understands the surrounding environment (Systems, Jan 2021). In the
plant and between the warehouses and loading bays, AMRs ensure the
movement of components inside and among work cells. Several of the
processing tasks related to AMRs, including collision avoidance and
visual navigation, are migrated to the on-premises cloud/edge.
Augmented Reality Technologies integrate virtual information with
the real world to provide computer-generated perceptual information,
e.g., AR-VR-XR (Schein and Rauschnabel, 2021; Marques et al., 2021).
The technical uses include multimedia, 3D-modeling, real-time intelligent interaction, sensing, visual insights, and more.
Cognitive Service Provisioning. It provides the customized standalone services to meet the service demands of previously discussed
human-centric applications (Ding et al., 2020; Calvo and D’Mello, 2010;
Li and Deng, 2020), such as (1) tracking technologies, e.g., real-time
monitoring of industrial workforce, navigational support to AMRs, (2)
multi-lingual support for natural language processing (NLP) applications, (3) CV for human cognitive abilities, e.g., gesture recognition,
pattern recognition and (4) cognitive APIs for CCPSS-based cobots.
2.1.2. Real-time virtual simulation and digital twin
Digital twin technology integration enables the real-time cyber
world through creating a virtual/digital images of counterpart physical
assets, includes devices, process, sensors. DT technology realizes two
critical functional aspects.
• DT of Physical Assets and Process Optimization: By bridging the
physical and cyber world, DT models the entire complex system comprised of deployed industrial assets, enabling them to communicate
and interact intelligently to take action and optimize the multi-fold
value of the output production process (Wang et al., 2022c; Minerva
et al., 2020). Together with IIoT and CPS, DT can facilitate this
true digital hyperconnectivity in FoFs (Zeb et al., 2022a), i.e., for
remote maintenance and predictive maintenance inside the factory
ecosystems (Lv et al., 2022). Similarly, massive interconnected DT
systems integrated with augmented technologies can efficiently utilize human intelligence for management and control purposes (Wang
et al., 2021c).
• Virtual Simulation and Modeling: In addition, DT provides visualized access to multi-scale and multi-dimensional dynamic modeling of
factory processes, machine parts, and other complex systems (Schluse
et al., 2018). Based on the digital images, 3D virtual simulation can
be implemented to provide insights into factory operations and test
new products, resulting in the establishment of operational safety for
human-centric purposes before machines or complex factory systems
deployments (Mortlock et al., 2022). Similarly, virtual simulations
of the deployed systems can be carried out to take measurements
for checking green environmental and social impacts; hence assisting
in redesigning and redeployment for maintaining value-based green
production policies.
2.1.3. Artificial intelligence-native smart systems
AI-native smart functions can identify and predict the incoming
causalities in complex and dynamic industrial assets, e.g., cobots, factory processes, worker’s conditions, critical events, which leads to
necessary automated actions. For Industry 5.0 vision, AI-native systems
need to possess the following characteristics.
Required AI System’s Features. The AI-based innovative system gives
the ability to intelligently handle unexpected critical events autonomous and without human intervention (Kim and Ben-Othman, 2020).
However, the problem resides in traditional AI systems since they only
function and operate with past historical data (Lo et al., 2022). In a
real-world scenario, the data is relatively less, and data quality varies.
Moreover, the time-series spatial data has a lot of complex statistical
cross-correlations among numerous dependent variables, which vary
drastically with the type of heterogeneous data sources, and interrelated dynamic relationship among numerous random systems (Zeb
et al., 2021). Similarly, state-of-the-art DNN algorithms, i.e., Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM), Bi-LSTM, Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU),
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)-based algorithms, are typically
used to capture the complex correlations in past historical time-series
data. Besides, not always past correlation holds out same in the future
because of additional causal relationships within the observed data
variables, which affect the future prediction. In such cases, causal AI
can capture the essence of causality and complex correlations to adopt
intelligent choices and actions through integrating human-decision
making and reasoning (Cheng et al., 2022a).
Individual and Person-centric AI. A human-centered AI system focuses on AI algorithms that emerge from continuous human inputs and
collaborative learning from human insights (Liu et al., 2021b). Humancentered AI regards continuous improvements through human input,
enables explainable AI paradigms (Ahmed et al., 2022), while allowing
humans and cobots to work together in practical ways, e.g., CCPPS systems (He et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2019). For example, AI-driven informed
algorithms, such as data-driven physics-informed models, are able to
learn from incoming data and embedded mathematical physics models.
They emulate brain learning, even in unclear, high-dimensional, and
partially understood scenarios (Ahmed et al., 2022).
Secure and Energy-Efficient AI. Data is an integral part of realizing
the potential of AI systems. Generally, centralized cloud or private
on-premise database resources are utilized to perform computations
relevant to the AI learning process (Lu et al., 2020). In the cloud, distributed computation-based AI models are applied, i.e., data is shared
between different geo-distributed computing infrastructures, including
data servers (peers) (Chergui et al., 2021). However, sharing data
among different geo-distributed peers increases security risks. Moreover, increasing data computation increases the energy efficiency cost
of deployed infrastructure for AI-based computations (Hazra et al.,
2021). Hence, a robust, resilient, and energy-aware computing design is
critical for realizing the goal of secure and energy-efficient AI models.
2.1.4. Data infrastructure, sharing and analytics
Hyperconverged data infrastructure forms a foundational building block in providing computing and data storage functions, enabling the AI- and DT-based system functionalities. Hence, increasing
the importance of cyber-safe data transmission, storage, and analysis
technologies with the required certain features.
Communication Interfaces. Over-the-air, industrial access networks
require a communication interface with extreme reliability, ultra-low
latency, high data rates, and massive connectivity support to transfer the bulk of collected and sensed informational data to storage
infrastructure for further processing (Vitturi et al., 2019; Liu et al.,
2021e). Similarly, data sharing mechanisms and interoperability in
heterogeneous systems need to be enhanced, increasing the importance
of designing new data-sharing protocols for enabling secure and safe
data transmission (Liu et al., 2021c; Dash et al., 2022).
Scalable and Multi-level IT Infrastructure. SDN/NFV-assisted scalable (upgradable) and multi-level (cloud/edge) computing IT infrastructure is needed to handle the diverse critical communication and
computation requirements that can dynamically provide customized
data-related services in every scenario (Tzanakaki et al., 2013; Chaudhary et al., 2018). For this, softwarization across computing IT infrastructure and emerging service-oriented architectures (e.g., microservices, anything-as-a-service) are gaining importance for enabling the
customized softwarized service provisioning paradigms. Similarly,
blockchain network, AI-based solutions, and private enterprise networks can provide better services for cyber-security in computing
infrastructure (Shao et al., 2021; Kao and Liao, 2021), e.g., data
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
9
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 5. Hyper-level illustration of NIB architecture in CI-native NGWNs to support the technological enablers of Industry 5.0 vision.
integrity, secure communication, privacy preservation, detecting intrusion attacks.
Autonomy over Shared Infrastructure Resources. Softwarization
in IT infrastructures enables autonomy and control over the softwarized shared network resources by adopting the multitenant architecture (Kappes et al., 2019; Duan et al., 2012), where softwarized services orchestration can provide the required secure and service-aware
communications over virtual private networks.
Big Data Analytics and Management. Data analytics combines the
power of AI frameworks and high data computations in search of
extracting critical information from big data to gain knowledge (Mohamed et al., 2020; Lv et al., 2017). This increases the importance of
data management, e.g., data traceability, data quality, data features
extraction, data storage and backup, and data fusion. Similarly, the data
preprocess mechanisms gain importance for AI applications due to the
unlabeled and raw nature of initially collected big data (Wang et al.,
2019b).
Edge Computing and Micro Cloud. The edge computing paradigm
brings the centralized cloud capabilities closer to the end-users, reducing end-to-end response time, latency, and communication resources
in mission-critical applications, e.g., migrating from cloud DT to edge
DT. However, to enable an edge computing paradigm, micro clouds
are needed (Ghosh et al., 2022; Duan et al., 2020; Schluse et al.,
2018). In the edge computing paradigm, a new micro cloud-based
infrastructure comprises of compute nodes arranged in small clusters
with local storage and secure networking, allowing repeatable, reliable
remote deployments and on-demand computing services at the edge of
the network (Yang et al., 2018; Elkhatib et al., 2017).
2.1.5. Bio-inspired technologies
Bio-inspired technologies interconnect humans and industrial assets
(e.g., cobots) through communication devices or sensors that use the
biologically inspired sensing methodology.
Embedded Bio-sensor Network Technologies. Any physical environment digitally interacts through the embedded sensor networks
(ESNs)—the mesh network of sensor chips/nodes or computers with
many sensors embedded in the physical environment (Liang et al.,
2018). The nodes in ESNs are small and inexpensive chips, each providing specific sensing functions. With wireless Internet connectivity,
these embedded sensor networks map the physical world and transmit
data information to a centralized cloud, enabling a wide range of
applications (Cornet et al., 2022; Vitturi et al., 2019), e.g., wireless
body area networks (WBANs) for smart health IoT applications, IIoTbased connectivity for enabling CPS systems. One emerging trend in
sensor technology is the robust biosensors—innovative analytical devices that integrate the physiochemical and biological sensing element,
i.e., analyte-based sensory, to enable sensing. Biosensors applications
are environmental monitoring, toxin detection, drug and pathogen
discovery in health applications, and food monitoring (Abid et al.,
2021).
2.1.6. Energy efficiency
All technologies mentioned above require many energy resources to
operate and provide critical functions, which eventually increases the
importance of enabling technologies to adopt green technologies and
strategies for achieving goals of emission neutrality.
Integration of Renewable Energy Sources. Numerous enabling industries, e.g., manufacturing and automation factories, run on the energies
created through fossil fuel-based resources (coal, oil, and natural gas),
which causes harm to the environment through greenhouse gases (Potrč
et al., 2021). Instead of fossil fuels, renewable energy resources must
be adopted for emission-neutral goals (Potrč et al., 2021). Some examples of renewable energy sources are solar energies, wind energy,
hydropower resources, geothermal energies, Hydrogen, and synthetic
non-carbon fuels.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
10
S. Zeb et al.
Energy-autonomous Sensor Systems (EAS). EAS are designed to
operate and/or communicate in known or unknown environments that
provide data communication, sensing, and storage without connecting
to a power source, e.g., grids, batteries (Rosa et al., 2021). One example of an EAS system is wireless powered communication networks
(WPCNs), where power is transferred over the air to enable data transfer (Niyato et al., 2017). In WPCNs, energy harvesting paradigms are
typically deployed, enabling battery-free information transfer (Jameel
et al., 2020a), e.g., ambient backscatter communication and cooperative communication or providing low-power data transmissions (Ponnimbaduge Perera et al., 2018), e.g., simultaneous wireless information
and power transmission (SWIPT) paradigm.
2.2. CI-NGWNs architecture to support industry 5.0 enablers
The integration of CI-NGWNs and the critical pillars of Industry 4.0
(i.e., IIoT, CPS, and DT), next-generation IoTs (NG-IoT), and SDN/NFVenabled cloud/edge computing architecture are poised to form critical
drivers in supporting a wide range of enabling requirements incurred
by the industrial and societal changes in Industry 5.0 scenarios, as
illustrated in Fig. 5.
2.2.1. Design objectives
The design objectives of CI-NGWNs lie in the domain of supporting
enhanced communication and networked computation requirements
for Industry 5.0 vision (Tataria et al., 2021) (c.f. Section 2.1). These
design objectives are,
• Automated and distributed services using multitenancy approaches in
CI-NGWNs service architecture to beflexible, self-optimized, and selfadapting and ensure diverse QoS and QoE requirements in numerous
industrial applications.
• Capabilities of maximum and efficient re-usability of shared networking
infrastructure.
• Open integration between numerous industrial applications and CINGWN ecosystem to create new and diverse business models for
operators and service providers.
• Increased performance and lower cost of conventional hardware-defined
systems (HWS) using hyper-converged infrastructure (HCI)—software-defined IT infrastructure that virtualizes all HWS elements,
i.e., computing, storage, networking.
• Integration of big data analytics and AI/ML-based functionalities
across all layers in the network, i.e., core, access network, and edge
network.
• Ensuring security, privacy, and energy efficiency (100×) goals in the
entire CI-NGWN architecture.
2.2.2. Vision and CI-NGWNs NIB architecture
To support above design objectives, CI-NGWNs are leaning towards
the network-in-box (NIB) architecture where CI features and network
softwarization is embedded across all network layers (Ji et al., 2021;
Duan et al., 2020; Bonati et al., 2021b; Roy et al., 2021). As a result, intelligent and software-based functionalities have their roots integrated
at each functional layer of CI-enabled NIB architecture for softwarized
NGWNs (Left, Fig. 5). This eventually enables delivering of CI-native
functions and features (Right, Fig. 5), e.g., service orchestration and
provisioning, open RAN support, multi-tenant infrastructure, and AI
analytics. Together these enabling CI-native features in unison can
provide the required on-demand composite functions atop the NIBs
of CI-NGWNs to meet the critical communication and computation
requirements of technological enablers of Industry 5.0 vision. Some of
the description of important enabling CI-native functional features is as
follows.
• The inclusion of CI technologies (swarm AI, evolutionary AI, and
others) in conjunction with computing and storage capabilities at
cloud–fog–edge level of network hierarchy (e.g., MECs) can bring
the required functional edge intelligence closer to the physical layer.
The nexus of blockchain technology, federated learning-based distributed computing paradigms and private networking (e.g., private
5G) reduces the security and privacy concerns in NIB architecture.
• It integrates multitenancy-enabled softwarized service orchestration
and provisioning architecture for providing customized services and
modular functions, e.g., DT services, ICAR services, private virtualized network resources, cognitive APIs, AI frameworks, data processing, etc.
• It enables the transition from 5G service-based architecture (SBA)
to AI-native service architecture for provisioning enhanced services,
e.g., mLLMTC, UmMTC, ERLLC, MBBL, FeMBB, LDHMC, ELPC, and
AEC. Moreover, it facilitates connectivity-based interaction between
softwarized modular functions and AI-native architecture services.
• The O-RAN ALLIANCE standards are leading to radio access networks
(RAN) that are open, intelligent, virtualized, and fully interoperable
based on operator-defined specifications.
• It enables the flexibility in network functions using zero-touch network and service management paradigm, i.e., service-aware networking, new resources allocations, application deployments at edge
nodes, dynamic setup of dedicated network resources for service
provisioning, network slicing, automated monitoring and control,
etc,.
• It provides the support for integrating diverse access network technologies in industries, i.e., 5G New Radio (NR), evolved LTE, UAVand satellite-based terrestrial network access, fixed access, WLANs
(WiFi-5, WiFi-6), and wired networks (e.g., Industrial Ethernet, Fieldbus communications). Similarly, inclusion of higher mmWave and
THz spectrum along with non-orthogonal multiple access schemes
and reflecting intelligent surfaces (RIS) increases the high data rates
connectivity and spectrum efficiency.
We discuss the convergence of functional layers, i.e., smart application layer, control layer, analytics layer, and sensing layer (Left, Fig. 5)
of the hyper-level network-in-box architecture in the following sections,
where the architecture is tailored down into the envisioned framework
of multi-tenant softwarized service provisioning (c.f. Fig. 6), an emerging end-to-end NI-native 6G architecture (c.f. Fig. 9), and zero-touch
TSN-enabled hybrid NIBs architecture (c.f. Fig. 14).
3. Softwarized network control and service provisioning for industry 5.0
In the following subsections, we discuss the technological transition in various layers of automation pyramid in Industry 5.0 service
architecture framework to support softwarized service provisioning,
followed by the various customized industrial services scenarios.
3.1. Multi-tenant service-oriented industrial architecture
The 5C smart automation architecture generally consists of five
hierarchical levels/layers top to bottom, i.e., configuration, cognition,
cyber, conversion, and connection (Jiang, 2018, CPS 5C architecture). Therefore, with the convergence of CI-NGWNs, SDN/NFV-enabled
cloud/fog/edge-native computing paradigms, and the critical Industry 4.0
pillars (e.g., IIoT, CPS, and DT) to the 5C smart automation architecture,
the technological transition between different layers of the pyramid arises
with various functions of the 5C automation layers now embedded into the
new layers as shown in Fig. 6, i.e., infrastructure layer, computational intelligence layer and service layer. These new layers serve as the building blocks
of Industry 5.0’s multi-tenant softwarized service provisioning platform.
Softwarized Architecture. Under the vision of mass production and
mass customization in Industry 5.0, the multi-tenant softwarized architecture is poised to become a key driver in supporting wide range
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
11
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 6. An illustration of multi-tenant softwarized service provisioning framework in Industry 5.0 scenario where CI-enabled NGWNs, CPS, IIoT, DT, and cloud/edge computing
converges with the hierarchical automation and control pyramid.
Fig. 7. Illustration of evolution of softwarized service provisioning architectures and
their compliance with Industry 5.0.
of new and on-demand service requirements in zero-defect manufacturing and matrix production systems (Ibarra-Junquera et al., 2021).
The novel framework can be observed from Fig. 6 that closely integrates multiple function layers of smart automation pyramid and
enables interactions/communication among numerous provisioned services, comprised of multiple customized functions. Note that each layer
of the envisioned automation pyramid (Left, Fig. 6) is able to provide
the foundational new function blocks that are required to enable the
software-based service provisioning to industrial applications. These
foundational new function blocks include virtualization functions, AInative functions, DT placements, and others (Right, Fig. 6). Moreover,
as illustrated in Fig. 7, it can closely integrate the principles of serviceoriented architecture (SOA) and microservices (MS) architecture support
to enable true digitization in Industry 5.0 vision (Ghosh et al., 2022;
Peng et al., 2018; Cao et al., 2020). The SOA and MS architectures in
Fig. 7 differ based on database utilization and decoupling of associated
service-based components from a standalone monolithic approach to
provision the final customized and unified service deployment.
Significance. The significance of softwarized architecture are as follows.
• The industrial assets or industrial applications at the smart connection layer provide the service requests to the centralized service layer
according to the demanding industrial application requirements.
• Centralized management centers at the service layer can orchestrate
and provision the required on-demand services needed at the smart
connection layer, by utilizing cloud/edge-native computing infrastructural resources efficiently, which can be easily scaled, deployed
and monitored.
• Moreover, various monitoring control feedbacks and data transmission for management can be sent directly to the service layer in
real-time for further resource planning or control purposes.
In this regard, Table 4 provides the taxonomy of various softwarized
service architectures that have unique significance and drawbacks concerning numerous industrial use cases.
Service Provisioning. To provision the on-demand incoming service
requests, the service layer uses the composite mixture of underlying
layers functions to orchestrate and deploy the orchestrated service to
the industrial assets of numerous industries (Duan et al., 2020). Each
layer provides the functional blocks for the following functions. (From
top-to-bottom of pyramid in Fig. 6).
3.1.1. Service layer
It integrates the functions of top three 5C architecture layers,
i.e., cyber layer (twin model for machine components), cognition layer
(integrated simulation and synthesis) and configuration layer (selfconfigure/adjust/optimized for resilience), and customized service provisioning paradigm to enable the true softwarized cloud/edge-native
microservices architecture. Service layer comprises of two functional
blocks.
• Cloud/Edge-native DevOps. Service layer supports the cloud/edgenative multi-tenancy in industrial service architecture to orchestrate
and deploy multiple diverse services for serving multiple industries,
utilizing the underlying shared CI-enabled networking infrastructure. The custom-built industrial applications, such as ERP softwares,
self-automated control and management operations, monitoring and
visualization, can be orchestrated and deployed utilizing the functionalities of composite service blocks, based on the diverse service requests of industrial systems and their end-to-end requirements (Song
et al., 2020).
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
12
S. Zeb et al.
Table 4
Taxonomy of various softwarized service architectures with their significance, drawbacks and expected usecases scenarios in Industry 5.0.
References Softwarized
architecture
Significance Drawbacks Industrial
usecases
Megargel et al. (2020),
Villamizar et al. (2015)
Monolithic • Simpler design, easy development and
deployment
• Better Performance
• Lack of adoption to new technologies
• Codebase gets bigger with increase in App
scope, leading to lower quality of code,
increased cost and time consuming to
manage
• Industrial Apps with small scope
• Small business and factory
• Startups
Duan et al. (2012),
Kyusakov et al. (2013),
Atmojo et al. (2020),
Mendoza-Pitti et al. (2021)
SOA • Maintenance, reusability, and reliability of
services
• Parallel service development
• Investment costs, i.e., human resources,
tools, technology and development, etc,.
• Extra overhead to validate services
interaction among each others
• Enterprise Apps with complex
and medium-scale operations
• Complex service management
Di Francesco et al. (2019),
Chowdhury et al. (2019),
Ibarra-Junquera et al.
(2021), Ghosh et al. (2022)
Microservices • Microservices are easy to develop, test and
deploy
• Multiple skilled teams and developer
design parts of softwarized components in
services and Apps due to the decoupling of
microservices, leading to agile development
• Fully automated vertical scaling (i.e., run
same microservices on new bigger machine
in future) and horizontal scaling (i.e., add
more designed microservices in same
service/App.
• Complexity (service mesh communication)
• Security concerns (API attacks, Service
intrusions)
• Various programming languages for
diverse microservices
• Complex large-scale systems
with numerous industrial Apps
• Zero-defect Manufacturing
and Matrix Productions
• Society 5.0
Eismann et al. (2021),
Pelle et al. (2021), Xu
et al. (2021c), Cicconetti
et al. (2020)
Serverless • Incorporates function-and/or
backend-as-a-service
concepts to microservices architecture
• Infrastructure-less dependency (e.g., no
database handling, business logic)
• Extremely fast deployment and enhanced
scalability of services
• Vendor lock-in (e.g., AWS Lambda, Azure
Functions, Kubeless)
• Only for short real-time processes (i.e., one
time tasks, auxiliary processes)
• Client-heavy Industrial Apps
• Service provisioning in eventdriven scenario (rapidly changing)
• High-latency background tasks
Moreover, multi-tenancy also introduces the shift in monolithic software components to cloud/edge-native microservices architecture
(Chowdhury et al., 2019). Thus, the integration of agile software
development and IT operations (DevOps) strategies enables the development and scaling of custom-built smart factory-based microservices
closer to the physical layer (i.e., factory floor). The opensource software orchestrator tools, such as Kubernetes (K8s) and OpenStack,
can be adopted at the service layer to support the cloud/edge-native
scalable service orchestration and deployment.
• Service Mesh and Composite Service Blocks. Depending upon the
on-demand service requirements, the unified service management
and orchestration (SMO) function block in control and management
plane of service layer selects the mixture of appropriate softwarized
functions, i.e., AI analytics function layer (AFL), virtual systems function layer (VFL), DT function layer (DTFL), and any infrastructure
layer-related functions (Di Francesco et al., 2019). It helps in creating
and assigning group of composite service blocks for multi-tenant
industrial service application. The service mesh layer enables the
required distinct group of softwarized functions in composite service
blocks are closely managed and controlled by unified SMO through
bi-communicating with the unified MO of underlying layers. Moreover, it controls service-to-service communication over entire network infrastructure. This enables the centralized service management
and control center capabilities, helping in orchestrating, deploying
and managing industrial service applications remotely from anywhere
over the Internet infrastructure (Atmojo et al., 2020).
3.1.2. Computational intelligence layer
This layer integrates the three critical core function layers, i.e., AI
analytics, virtual systems, and DT systems that work in tandem to enable the paradigm of softwarized intelligent services orchestration and
deployment for industrial end-systems. The purpose of these function
layers are,
AI Analytics Functional Layer (AFL). AI-powered systems can provide
diverse and customized AI-native intelligent functions for numerous
applications, i.e., business analytics, zero-touch agile network, monitoring and control. Depending upon the application requirements, these
AI-native functions select and build the appropriate AI model from
available AI models repository to provide the customized intelligent
roles, such as data mining and clustering, intelligent decision-making
and control (Al-Doghman et al., 2022). Combining AI-native functions
with analytic tools, AFL layers can analyze and extract the high value
information at the big datalakes that store arriving large volume of
data from heterogeneous data sources in various layers. Examples of
data sources are factory processes, industrial assets, core networked
devices, DT applications, service application data, data from virtualized
industrial network, customer feedbacks, machine data. Some of the
critical analytic operations are summarized in Fig. 8, which show the
four stages of analytic application types and their description with
respect to the value and difficulty of analytic tasks. By integrating high
power computing capability (HPC) with AI analytics, high power data
analytic (HPDA) can be applied at the big datalakes with the increase
in the value and difficulty of analytic tasks (Lv et al., 2017).
Virtual Systems Function Layer (VFL). Virtualization or virtual system functions offer the dedicated, distributed and isolated physical
resources over inter/intra-connected HCI systems (infrastructure layer)
based on the on-demand service requirements (Leivadeas and Falkner,
2021). Following types of virtual functions are provided by VSFL.
• Virtual Storage/Server Functions (VSF): Virtual server involves the
partitioning of computer server having large memory, GPU, CPU
and disk resources into small multiple virtual machines (VMs) with
dedicated resources assigned to it (Ahmad et al., 2015). Similarly,
virtual storage integrates the networked storage devices over multiple
machines into single virtual storage device which facilitates dynamic
storage resource allocation as well as data backup and recovery
tasks. VSF provides both the required virtual machines and/or virtual
storage resources required over the entire enterprise network.
• Virtual Compute Functions (VCF): Virtual compute services are enabled through the usage of virtual servers and virtual storage since
compute resources integrates the memory, GPU, CPU and storage
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
13
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 8. Illustration of AI analytics-based Gartner Analytic Ascendancy model integrated
with critical functional layers of industrial automation pyramid and their functional
roles description.
resources, which are accessible to the multiple users (Abdel-Basset
et al., 2019). VCF blocks over infrastructure layer resources provides
the virtual compute services to the multiple incoming on-demand
service requests.
• Virtual Network Functions (VNF): Network virtualization through
SDN/NFV functionalities enables the management and control of
entire enterprise network (dedicated and shared) through softwaredefined single or multiple administrative entities (Alam et al., 2020;
Hong et al., 2018; Barakabitze et al., 2020), thus providing the
autonomy over enterprise network. Some of the virtual network
functions are, (1) SDN routing and switching functions, (2) serviceaware routing, (3) provision of virtual network and tunneling over
internet, e.g., virtual private network, virtual fog/edge networks (3)
traffic analysis, e.g., deep packet inspection, QoS and QoE measurements, (4) optimization of application access requests over network,
e.g., load balancers, (5) security functions, e.g., network firewalls,
network intrusion detection, etc., and (6) 5G core network components, e.g., radio network controller, user plane function (UPF), data
network, network slice selection function (NSSF), core access and
mobility management functions (AMF), etc.
• Container-based Virtualization: Containerization or container-based
virtualization approaches have been adopted due to the requirement for scalability, flexibility, and agility in DevOps processes for
cloud/edge networked computing paradigms, microservice provisioning, and the disadvantage of dependence of VMs on a single
operating system and hypervisor (Bachiega et al., 2018). Container
are different from VMs; they do not use hypervisor and easily carry
all packaged softwarized components (i.e., runtime libraries and
OS dependencies) of microservices/applications (Ramanathan et al.,
2021). Containerization thus enables the improved and enhanced
integration of virtualization functions, working in tandem with stateof-the-art cloud/edge-native networked computing architecture (Choi
et al., 2021).
DT Function Layer (DTFL). DT function layer uses the functionalities
of AFL and VFL to provide the following DT functions, (1) Virtual simulation and performance prediction (Schluse et al., 2018), (2) Product
lifecycle and predictive maintenance, (3) machine failure analysis, and
(4) configuration design, motion planning, and control development.
3.1.3. Infrastructure layer
Infrastructure layer forms the backbone between the underlying
smart connection layer and the upper layers. Following functions and
roles are integrated into this layer.
HCI Resources. Infrastructure layer is composed of SDN/NFV-based
inter/intra-networked HCI physical systems that provide the cloud/fog/
edge (CFE) computing capabilities, Elasticsearch-enabled datalakes,
and network resources to industrial end-systems on smart connection
layer (Chaudhary et al., 2018; Tzanakaki et al., 2013).
Industrial Access Networks. The industrial access networks, providing a communication interface for the operation technology (OT) domain, enable field-level communication among controllers, machines,
and within machines at the routing, control, and sensor level based on
the IEC 61784-2 and IEC 61158-1 standards (Mahmood et al., 2019).
At present, due to diverse industrial connectivity requirements, various
wired solutions for the industrial networks exist, such as Ethernetbased (e.g., PROFINET, EtherCAT) and field-buses (e.g., PROFIBUS).
However, these variants lead to various issues in realizing the Industry 5.0 vision, including hardware/protocol heterogeneity and multiple
solutions for enterprise-wide connectivity while maintaining a strict
boundary between OT and IT networks (Mahmood et al., 2021; Ashjaei
et al., 2021). Eliminating or at least thinning this boundary between
IT and OT domains is the prerequisite to improving the efficiency and
agility of the industrial processes. Time-sensitive networking (TSN), is
a step towards this, where the IEEE 802.1 time-sensitive networking
(TSN) task group is developing a set of standards (through various
TSN profiles) to extend the best-effort Ethernet networking model to
provide deterministic streaming services (Mahmood et al., 2022b). Still,
the missing part towards achieving a full-scale network connectivity is
the inclusion of wireless access to support massive sensing, mobility,
and customizable/agile processes. However, the prominent industrial
wireless standards (e.g., ISA100.11a, WirelessHART, Industrial WLAN
by Siemens) are designed mainly to support low-rate and/or localized
wireless access for industrial monitoring/control applications. These
standards operate on unlicensed frequency bands (making them prone
to interference issues) and provide short-range connectivity to a limited
number of devices. On the other hand, 5G-and-beyond networks with
service-based architecture, various RAN and Core enhancements, and
5G-TSN integration(c.f. Fig. 14) are becoming attractive to provide
robust, scalable, unified, and customizable wired-wireless connectivity
for Industry 5.0.
Autonomy and Control. It can provide the autonomy and control
over HCI resources and industrial access networks. For example, an
enterprise can solely own the access networks and locally install HCI
resources providing total autonomy over enterprise network (Duan
et al., 2012). Similarly, different vendors can also provide the enhanced
infrastructure layer resources in the form of softwarized services to
various industrial enterprises, which can also be closely integrated with
the locally owned enterprise network. Thus enabling the new digitized
and diverse business models for different IT and OT vendors (Mahmood
et al., 2022a).
Data-to-Information Functions. Datalakes closer to access networks
layer collect and store raw machine data, ERP data, IIoT data and
controller data from end-systems on smart connection layer (Duan
and Da Xu, 2021). That raw data carries an inherent property of
5V’s, i.e., volume, velocity, variety, veracity and value. By applying
one of the data-to-information (DTI) functions (i.e., pre-process and
data fusion) over the collected raw data to extract information and
create knowledge helps in value creation throughout a product life
cycle (Tsang et al., 2021). Similarly there are other functions embedded
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
14
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 9. An overview of emerging end-to-end NI-native 6G architecture based on various standardization efforts.
in the DTI functions layers, e.g., data features engineering. Note that
based on the obtainable knowledge, useful action can be taken at
the manufacturing floor, such as increase production efficiency by redesigning process based on the customer feedback, increased resources
supply for customized flows from production warehouse in zero-defect
manufacturing.
4. Open and intelligent 6G network architectures
As apparent from previous discussions, Industry 5.0 can be characterized by an increasingly complex ecosystem, requiring an everexpanding multitude of service classes and their disparate time-varying
traffic profiles. A forthcoming pathway to address this complexity
challenge is the convergence of the firepower of three promising technologies, namely artificial intelligence, edge computing, and beyond-5G/6G
networks. The convergence is already happening, with an intention
of accelerating the automation and optimization of NextG wireless
networks to support diverse QoS requirements while capitalizing on
edge computing and AI/ML. In this context, Automation is required
to cope with new scenarios in network/edge planning, operation, and
management for vertical industries and enterprise use cases, while also
creating the space and opportunity for new infrastructure owners and
service providers. Meanwhile, optimization is necessary to extend the
computing and fast-growing AI/ML applications to the edge so that
each network element can provide low latency, high reliability, and
pervasive intelligence services.
Be it reducing the data transfer size to the cloud or processing
urgency, the data handling must occur closer to the data source,
i.e., at the network edge. The edge is defined as a continuum of ‘‘edge
zones’’ comprising four key areas: device, premise (on-site, e.g., enterprise campus), access, and metro (upstream aggregation point like
service provider) edge (5G Americas (White Paper), 2022). As evident
by names, each edge zone can fulfill different computing/processing
requirements well-suited to close the loop (data generation to data processing) according to its local environment without data transmission to
a central server. For instance, IIoT devices (e.g., AMRs) can make navigation decisions with autonomous and intelligent local computation
considering their local environment. Meanwhile, the AMRs’ integration
within the matrix production environment can rely on the on-premise
edge for collective intelligence and load training data to the access or
metro edge.
Therefore, the need for intelligent edge automation in NextG networks is vital for Industry 5.0 for automation and optimization for
various tasks such as distributed data collection, real-time processing,
situational awareness, and network slicing under traffic dynamics.
Nevertheless, this new capability comes with its own set of challenges,
especially it will require an open and intelligent network infrastructure
to support automation, control, and management of network resources
and services. Being intelligent implies handling the complex task of
efficient management of information flows and, consequently, network
infrastructure as every industry and use case will demand different
architecture.
This section aims to elaborate on various underpinning concepts, activities, and challenges of creating such an intelligent 6G architecture. In
particular, we discuss the open and intelligent 6G network architecture, with
a focus on Open RAN framework for RAN/edge automation, and ensuing
end-to-end network intelligence requirements and challenges.
4.1. Envisioned 6G architecture
To accelerate the needed automation and optimization in NextG
networks for on-demand heterogeneous service deployment, beyond-5G
and 6G networks are rapidly transitioning from inflexible and monolithic to agile, disaggregated, and cloud-native architectures based on
softwarization and virtualization, with the provision of network component’s reprogrammability. The transition aims to provide multi-tenancy
transparent communication network infrastructure for instantly orchestrating end-to-end physical resources and virtual network functions (VNFs) across various network domains. Herein, the separation
between the control functions and the hardware fabric as well as
the introduction of standardized control interfaces will define custom
closed-control loops, enabling edge intelligence and real-time analytics; thus realizing the autonomous, self-organizing networks (SON)
effectively.
In this respect, the standardization initiatives are already reflecting
the desired architectural redesign, which will further require enhancing
NI-nativeness at various network levels (see Section 4.3). Fig. 9 summarizes envisioned (re)-design of end-to-end network architecture based
on the current standardization efforts in 3GPP (3GPP TR 23.700-91,
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
15
S. Zeb et al.
2020), ETSI (Wang et al., 2020a) and O-RAN (O-RAN Alliance, 2023),
where following are the notable points:
• The redesign decouples software (network functions) from the hardware to enhance overall network operations, and enables end-toend softwarization, where the traditional physical network functions (PNFs) are complemented by VNFs and cloud-native network
functions (CNFs).
• It includes overarching AI-driven entities (i.e., controllers), responsible for the orchestration and control of PNF, VNFs, and CNFs across
all network domains. Orchestration relates to lifecycle management
of service and network functions, including instantiation, scaling,
and termination, as well as control e.g., for context-aware parameter
tuning of network functions.
• Also, it transitions the classical access-core split into micro-domains
or edge zones to increase the management granularity of physical
infrastructures in the micro-domain.
Fig. 9 shows the expected deployment and operation of controllers/orchestrators in various micro-domains, including Core, Transport, Edge (hosting the RAN’s cloud part), and Far Edge (consisting of
radio units (RUs) and the fronthaul). Note that the E2E Orchestrators
operate at a global network level (i.e., in core network deployments
and service-related applications in private network deployments (Mahmood et al., 2022a)) while Edge/Fog Orchestrators on the mobile edge
level. Meanwhile, the Controllers introduce enhanced RAN versatility by
shifting the network functionalities closer to the user; Non-Real-Time
controllers for less time-critical network functionalities at a limited
number of sites, and Real-Time Controllers for fast-timescale functionalities (e.g., radio resource and interference management) to meet QoS
targets.
This novel end-to-end 6G architecture is expected to enable new
functionalities, including (Bonati et al., 2021a): (i) service differentiation to provide demand-based virtual network slices over a common physical infrastructure, while meeting multi-tenancy and multiservice requirements, (ii) split network functions across multiple software and hardware components, provided by multiple vendors, (iii)
capture/expose the KPIs, and network analytics through open interfaces, and (iv) real-time control of the entire network infrastructure
via (third party) software applications. Jointly, these functionalities
will enable fine-grained network automation and optimization, so that
the network functions and their allocated resources can be adapted to
traffic dynamics and meeting diverse, heterogeneous QoS requirements.
Over the last few years, multiple independent alliances and forums
have initiated research on accelerating this transformation by increasing infrastructure virtualization, combined with embedded intelligence,
to deliver more agile services and advanced capabilities to end-users.
Open RAN is such an initiative that enables such transformation via
open and intelligent RAN automation, which we discuss in detail in
the following section.
4.2. Evolution towards Open RAN
Compared to current RAN technology, provided as a hardware and
software integrated platform, the ambition for Open RAN initiatives is
to create a multi-vendor RAN solution that allows for the separation
(or disaggregation) between hardware and software with open interfaces and standard network elements, hosting control and management
software in the cloud.
vRAN vs Open RAN. Before going further, the distinction between
virtual RAN (vRAN) and Open RAN is important. Virtualization, which
transforms network function into VNFs, decouples VNF software such
that it can run on the commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) hardware.
However, in vRAN setup, the interfaces between network elements
may still be closed or proprietary (Garcia-Saavedra and Costa-Pérez,
2021). In contrast, Open RAN refers to a set of standards for creating
Table 5
Learning-based closed-control loops in an O-RAN architecture with the challenges and
limitations.
Objective:
Control
and learning
Time
scale
Devices
scale
Data input Challenges
and limitations
AI models,
Slices,
Policies
Non-RT
(>1 s)
> 1000 KPIs at
HCI-level
Orchestrating
many
N-RT RICs and
CUs/DUs/RUs
User Control
& Session
Management
Near-RT
(>10-
1000 ms)
> 100 KPIs at CU
-level, e.g.,
no
of users
sessions,
PDCP traffic
Processing
multiple
streams from
numerous CUs
& sessions
MAC-level
management
e.g., RAN
slicing,
scheduling
policies
Near-RT
(>10-
1000 ms)
> 100 KPIs at MAClevel, e.g.,
buffering,
PRB
utilization
Mission-critical
operations &
decisions
for several
DUs/UEs
NR
management
e.g.,
beamforming,
scheduling
resources
RT
(<10 ms)
10–100 KPIs at PHYlevel, e.g.,
CSI
estimation
Support and
deployment of
AI
models at DUs
Device
management
e.g., DL/UL
management,
modulation,
blockage
detection,
ranging
RT
(<1 ms)
1 KPIs at
Devicelevel, e.g.,
I/Q
samples,
RSSI, ToA
Requirement of
standardization
at DU-and/or
RU-level
open internal interfaces as well as defines an disaggregated architecture to introduce new capabilities of RAN automation, and service
management and orchestration.
RAN Functional Splits. RAN has stringent latency requirements, demanding interworking between NFs accordingly. Therefore, some NFs
are virtualized at the cloud using central units (CU) while many RAN
functions occur at distributed units (DU) (located closer to the cell site),
where a DU is split into a baseband unit (BBU) and a radio unit (RU). In
this respect, the Functional splits refer to the points along the protocol
stack where CU and DU signal processing can be separated from the
RU. Meanwhile, how CU and DU functions can be distributed in various
edge-zones is deployment scenario and use case dependent.
Fronthaul Interface: CPRI & eCPRI. The fronthaul interface in 4G
architecture, called as common public radio interface (CPRI) connects
the DU signal processing to the RU. In 4G, the DU-RU split was designed
such that the daterate of a maximum of 600 Mbit/s of fronthaul interface was needed for 10 MHz of radio channel bandwidth. On the other
hand, in 5G systems, with a radio bandwidth of 100 MHz and above and
massive multiple-input multiple-output (mMIMO) antennas, fronthaul
bandwidth of hundreds of Gbit/s is required. To support this, the 3GPP
has introduced an enhanced-CPRI (eCPRI) interface while to reduce the
overall fronthaul bandwidth an increased number of functional splits
are possible. In fact, 3GPP defines eight functional splits, where parts of
the DU’s functions can be combined with the RU. Which split to employ
leads to several ramifications, such as (1) additional DU electronics and
energy-consumption costs if combined with the RU, (2) the distance
(affecting latency) between the two elements, and (3) high-performance
computing needs to process signals at the DU. Importantly, eCPRI still
contains vendor-specific elements.
Fig. 10 summarizes the various stages of evolution of RAN architectures,
from traditional to open and disaggregated RAN.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
16
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 10. RAN transformation: Evolution from traditional RAN to open and disaggregated RAN architecture.
Disaggregation and Intelligence in O-RAN. The O-RAN Alliance (ORAN Alliance, 2023), which is a consortium of network operators
created in 2018, is working to realize NextG networks by developing specifications, reference architecture, and open interfaces to intelligently manage/control multi-vendor infrastructures to delivering
critical, high-performance services. To achieve this goal, O-RAN proposes an architectural changes using two core principles. First, O-RAN
embraces and promotes the 3GPP functional splits, where a typical
Base Station’s (BS) functionalities are virtualized as network functions
and distributed across various network nodes, i.e., CU, DU, and RU.
This facilitates the instantiation and execution of diverse networking
processes at different network points. Therefore, one of O-RAN’s work
groups is focused on creating an open, interoperable fronthaul interface
to enable the integration of DUs and RUs from different vendors; thus,
enabling a true multi-vendor ecosystem. Second, which is likely to be
an crucial architectural component of 6G systems, is the introduction
of the RAN Intelligent Controller (RIC) that allows operators to deploy
customizable control plane functions. RIC comes in two variants:
• Non-real time RIC (non-RT RIC) provides an open platform for
policy-based RAN control using rApps, including mechanisms for enabling artificial intelligence and machine learning for more efficient
network management and orchestration. The non-RT RIC is expected
to perform operations with higher than one second time granularity.
• Near-real time RIC (near-RT RIC) is aimed at abstracting the control
processes, typically embedded in BS, and executing those processes
as third-party applications xApps in the cloud. The near-RT RIC handles procedures at timescales of tens of milliseconds and implement
intelligence through data-driven control loops.
In both variants, RIC facilitates RAN optimization through closedcontrol (action to feedback) loops, between RAN components and their
controllers. O-RAN envisions different loops operating at timescales
that range from 1 ms (e.g., for real-time control of transmission
schemes) to thousands of milliseconds (e.g., for network slicing, traffic
forecasting). Table 5 summarizes the timescale-related information and
challenges in RICs.
Although the O-RAN architecture is gaining momentum among
operators, vendors and researchers, the challenges related to its implementation for true NextG networks (i.e., built as data-driven, open,
programmable, and virtualized) are largely to be handled. In the literature, there are various ongoing efforts towards answering such
important concerns, including (Bonati et al., 2021a) (i) the functionalities/parameters to be controlled by each network entity, (ii) distribution of network intelligence, (iii) validation and training of data-driven
control loop solutions, and (iv) provision of access to data and analytics
from the RAN to the AI agents while minimizing the overhead.
Towards these concerns a few notable studies are Bonati et al.
(2021a), Niknam et al. (2020), Mollahasani et al. (2021), Abedin et al.
(2021) (for an extensive review see Polese et al. (2022)). In Bonati
et al. (2021a), Niknam et al. (2020), the potential and challenges of
data-driven optimization approaches to network control over different
timescales are discussed for disaggregated O-RAN architecture. In Bonati et al. (2021a), the authors optimized the scheduling policies of
co-existing network slices (NS). In this respect, while leveraging O-RAN
interfaces to collect edge data, the authors demonstrated closed-loop
integration of real-time analytics and control through DRL agenets for
RAN control through xApps at near-RT RIC. In Niknam et al. (2020),
an intelligent radio resource management scheme with LSTM-based
traffic congestion handling is demonstrated on a real-world dataset. The
LSTM model, trained at non-RT RIC, is used for inference at near-RT
RIC for cell splitting of congested cells to improve the related KPIs.
In Abedin et al. (2021), the authors developed O-RAN control and
management layer intelligent functions (i.e., near-RT RIC and nonRT RIC) to solve the O-RAN slicing problem for the industrial IoT. In
particular, for O-RAN control, this study performs the radio connectivity
management in the near-RT RIC, where the stable IIoT and small base
stations (SBSs) associations distributedly using the matching game are
determined. Using the outcomes of the matching game, the IIoT slice
requests’ demand are measured to generate IIoT service-specific slice
templates at non-RT RIC while considering the slicing constraints at the
QoS management module in the near-RT RIC. Meanwhile, in Mollahasani
et al. (2021), the authors studied how to exploit the O-RAN architecture
to improve an RL-based resource block allocation model’s performance
in a dynamic network while dynamically relocating an NF at different
layers of O-RAN (either at DU or CU) to improve its performance.
4.3. Network intelligence in 6G networks
The vision of 6G networks is set to meeting the requirements
of ever-expanding multitude of service classes and their disparate
time-varying traffic profiles. This vision is leading towards the need
and ability to instantly orchestrate end-to-end physical resource and
virtual network functions (VNFs) across different network domains
through multi-tenancy transparent communication network infrastructure, which grows the management complexity of already complex network architectures beyond the grasp of human-in-the-loop approaches.
Therefore, the success of 6G networks will greatly depend on the
Network intelligence (NI), and its quality, to fully automate the network operation and management. Herein, AI models, deployed at
network controllers and network orchestrators will be cornerstone
in NI design in solving complex and dynamic problems of massive
and heterogeneous network traffic. Specifically, AI-driven NI will be
deployed in 6G networks for human-intervention-free automated decision making for adapting network resource and functions to the
use case-specific demands and requirements. In end-to-end NI-native
6G architecture, AI models needs to be tailored according to the
network functional needs at each specific network level. Despite the
multiple examples of NI-driven handling of network operation, they
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
17
S. Zeb et al.
are limited in receiving native integration support from the network
architecture. In Banchs et al. (2021), the challenges and directions
towards integration of NI-driven functionalities for network capacity
and forecasting 6G architecture are presented. The two key identified
challenges for incorporating NI in 6G networks are:
• End-to-end NI-native Architecture: The NextG network architecture
should facilitate hosting and integration of NI instances explicitly at
NF levels and their coordination across network domains. Meanwhile,
the current standardization trends towards updating the existing
network design must reflect that.
• Customized AI for NI: AI models should facilitate network automation and management, and thereby adapted (w.r.t. latency guarantees
training and computational complexity) for NI-specific design aspects
according to the needs of network functionalities.
4.3.1. NI role in 6G systems
To support diverse services, tenants, and slices, NI will be fundamental for the optimal operation of this softwarized, cloudified and
split network architecture and managing the multi-level network functions and associated resources. Considering the variety of network management tasks and the entailing functions, each orchestrator/controller
will need to run multiple NI instances. Meanwhile, an NI instance must
first swiftly detect or predict the new requests or their fluctuations.
Then, it should react by autonomously instantiating, relocating, or reconfiguring network resources/functions, such that (a) traffic demands
are met with desired QoS requirements, (b) reuse of infrastructure and
resources (across multiple tenants and resources) is maximized, and (c)
ultimately completely eliminating human intervention to achieve zerotouch network and service management vision (Benzaid and Taleb,
2020a). These aspects are all highly critical, and the success of 6G
systems will greatly depend on the quality and appropriate integration
of NI solutions in the complete network. The NI across network can
be divided at three scales based on the timescale of the associated
management and automation, as described below:
• NI at Orchestrators: The NI integrated at E2E and edge orchestrators
has a broader network scope to manage functions/resources and take
decisions, with an effect on large sets of RAN entities. Since, at
orchestrator level, the network statistics and their dynamics vary relatively slowly, automation and management functions are performed
at timescales of minutes to hours. Consequently, NI decisions must
endure large time windows.
• NI at non-RT RIC: As the non-RT controllers must handle reduced
time-criticality functionalities of a limited number of radio sites, the
associated NI will operate at a local scope, with decisions in the order
of tens of seconds.
• NI at near-RT RIC: the NI deployed within near-RT RIC will ensure fast-timescale functionalities (as expected within O-RAN (O-RAN
Alliance, 2023) or FOG-05 (Eclipse fog05, 2022) frameworks), such
as radio scheduling, interference management, which typically require data-driven decision-making at timescales of milliseconds or
even lower. The other proposal is to integrate NI within NFs themselves, e.g., to enable functionalities operating beyond-edge microdomain, for instance, realizing programmable radio environments
with localized, fast decision-making.
4.3.2. NI integration challenges
The current trends in NI for NextG network orchestration, promoted
by major standardization bodies, are based on the closed-loop AI (5G
Americas (White Paper), 2022); that is, the NI instances at the orchestrators or controllers work in closed-control loops. These loops abide
modern AI’s learning principles; recording the context of management
decisions, continuous monitoring for collecting observations on the
decision quality, and finally using feedback to improve future decisions.
The close-loop models allow NI to apprehend to learn over time to automate optimal decision making towards the expected targets. Currently,
the prevailing vision for closed-loop NI expects instances located at
orchestrators or controllers in the control plane that interact with NFs
deployed in the data plane (Banchs et al., 2021). This vision results into
two major limitations, as follows.
1. Strictly centralized closed-loop models hinder the effectiveness of network intelligence; there is a risk in data-to-decision communication
delay for critical management scenarios. To be more effective, many
network functionalities must operate at timescales that are not
compatible with the current lengthy data gathering procedures at
NFs, data processing at control plane, and final restitution of actions
to be executed in the data plane. As a results, the feedback loop
between the control and data planes hinders NI to continuous system
monitoring.
2. The interaction among NI instances at different levels is not promoted
in the current architectural trends; thus, the reciprocal mutual impact
of their individual actions cannot be captured (Banchs et al., 2021).
Therefore, to enable optimal NI operation at each level, cooperation
between NI instances is vital to allow for global optimality and convergence of the zero-touch network management process. Therefore,
to tackle these limitations, architectural design of 6G networks must
necessarily take into account the NI-native choices.
5. Computational intelligence for industry 5.0
Building upon the inherent insights of softwarized and intelligent
CI-NGWNs architecture features discussed in the previous sections
(c.f. Section 3 &4), this Section 5 focuses on the crucial role of
computational intelligence (CI) and cloud–fog–edge computing (CFE)
in shaping the Industry 5.0 vision. Modern technologies heavily rely
on CI techniques and CFE computing platforms to automate the process
dynamically and help achieve the desired efficiency. In this regard, we
review CI techniques and related works for different targeted domains
in Section 5.1, which is followed by Section 5.2 that focuses on related
works on CFE computing. Onwards Section 5.3 explore the integrated
capabilities of CI techniques and CFE computing for three identified
pillars of Industry 5.0 vision.
5.1. Computational intelligence (CI)
Along with CFE, computational intelligence is considered one of the key
enabling technologies for Industry 5.0. The CI includes a wide variety of
methods, including but not limited to neural fuzzy systems, soft computing techniques, evolutionary algorithms, reinforcement learning,
unsupervised learning, supervised learning, self-supervised learning,
federated learning, and more (c.f. Fig. 11). In this regard, Fig. 11
depicts the biological basis and mathematical basis in CI techniques
and enablers for CI computing infrastructure. With these technologies, CI can assist the service and infrastructure layers of multi-tenant
softwarized framework and network intelligence in NIBs architecture
of NGWNs. Therefore, the fifth iteration of the industrial revolution
must take advantage of the characteristics of CI to achieve sustainable,
efficient, and effective industrial processes. A brief description of the
identified CI techniques for CI technical layer of Fig. 11 is given below.
• Supervised Learning: Supervised learning is the most commonly used
learning method CI field (Sharma et al., 2021). It requires the labeled
data to learn the patterns or trends to perform various tasks, such as
prediction, forecasting, classification, detection, segmentation.
• Unsupervised Learning: Unsupervised learning methods identify and
analyzed patterns from acquired unlabeled data (Li et al., 2020),
which can then be used for various tasks, such as data clustering, and
segmentation.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
18
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 11. CI techniques and CFE infrastructures, theoretical basis and enablers for CI-NGWNs applications.
• Self-Supervised Learning: The self-supervised learning is a new paradigm and can be considered as an intermediate algorithm between
unsupervised and supervised learning. The self-supervised methods
assume that the data is not of the best quality in terms of labels (unlike supervised learning); thus, it starts with the training of
pseudo-labels associated with data and then can carry on to employ supervised or unsupervised learning for improving the desired
task (Liu et al., 2021d).
• Evolutionary Algorithms: Evolutionary algorithms encompass optimization and meta-heuristic algorithms to solve various tasks. These algorithms are appropriate when there is no assumption about the
optimized values to begin with. As the evolutionary algorithms are
computationally complex, they can either be used with hard constraints to lower the computational complexity or with prior approximations that are near to the optimal values (Zeb et al., 2022a). There
are various popular methods that can be categorized as evolutionary
algorithms, such as particle swarm optimization, cuckoo search, artificial bee colony, ant colony optimization, gray-wolf optimization,
Harris-hawk optimization, sailfish optimization, firefly optimization,
harmony search, and others.
• Neural Fuzzy Systems: Neural Fuzzy systems use fuzzy theory to represent the probabilistic values between true and false states in conjunction with neural networks (Ji et al., 2021). Neural Fuzzy theory has
been extensively applied over the years in the field of home appliance
control, power system control, and control systems.
• Reinforcement Learning: Reinforcement learning, also known as
learning-by-experience, trains an agent by taking actions with perceived inputs and interprets the environment to maximize cumulative
rewards (Zeb et al., 2022a). The method heavily relies on the notion
of exploration versus exploitation of the prior and acquired knowledge to achieve the desired task. It has gained a lot of traction in
robotics, autonomous driving, and resource optimization.
• Federated Learning: Federated learning is relatively new technique, but
is proposed to address privacy and security concerns while improving
the task at hand Khan et al. (2021). First proposed by Google, the FL
does not send the data to the server, unlike other learning algorithms.
FL requires only the trained model, which is collected by the number
of users, aggregated on the server, and then sent to the user for model
update.
• Soft Computing Techniques: The last in this discussion are the soft computing techniques that are quite analogous to numerical computation.
Soft computing combines the characteristics of the aforementioned
learning algorithms, such as supervised/unsupervised learning, fuzzy
logic, evolutionary techniques, and probabilistic reasoning, to approximate the solution rather than provide an optimized one (Soltanali
et al., 2021; Sharma et al., 2021). These techniques are imprecise, yet
can be effectively tolerant of uncertainty. For real-world applications
that can cater to higher risk for robust solutions at a reasonable cost,
the soft computing techniques are ideal and natural fit.
5.1.1. CI for holistic industry 5.0 framework
Existing studies suggest that without using computational intelligence techniques, Industry 5.0 could not be realized in an effective
way (Fraga-Lamas et al., 2021; Maddikunta, 2021). These studies
consider using CI for holistic Industry 5.0 framework or its particular aspects. Besides, some studies have emphasized the use of CI
techniques for solving sustainability and resiliency issues in Industry
5.0 (Fraga-Lamas et al., 2021; Ozdemir and Hekim, 2018; Du et al.,
2021a; Thakur and Sehgal, 2021) while considered the CI to achieve or
realize specific characteristics of Industry 5.0 such as human–machine
collaboration (Demir et al., 2019; Longo et al., 2020; Nahavandi, 2019),
pandemic situations (COVID-19) (Javaid et al., 2020), education (Rachmawati et al., 2021), medical and health (Haleem and Javaid, 2019),
robotics (Han et al., 2017), Blockchain Rupa et al. (2021), Digital
Society (Doyle-Kent and Kopacek, 2019; Martynov et al., 2019), Society
5.0 (Elim and Zhai, 2020), Energy (Carayannis et al., 2021; ElFar et al.,
2021; Ullah et al., 2022), UAVs (Jain et al., 2021), Mass Customization (ElFar et al., 2021), and Emotional Intelligence (Chin, 2021). A
summary of the applications targeted by the summarized studies using
CI in Industry 5.0 is shown in Fig. 12. Below, we review some of
the works carried out towards exploring the CI in targeted application
domains of Industry 5.0.
Industrial Automation and Robotics Han et al. (2017) emphasized
human–robot collaboration for increased productivity in industries.
The authors study the design of robots that can exhibit autonomous
intelligence and integration of human supervision. The authors proposed developing an intelligent swarm robotic system that can be
used as an intelligent automation system and for functions controlling
humanoid organs. To achieve the enabling tasks, the study extensively used CI techniques to control the robotic system with human
commands or autonomously. In Nahavandi (2019), authors emphasized the human–machine collaboration for Industry 5.0. The study
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
19
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 12. Distribution of the targeted application domains considered by the summarized
studies using CI techniques.
considered sensor data interoperability, digital twins, virtual training,
intelligent autonomous systems, and machine cognition to be the driving forces for human–machine collaboration. The study suggested that
CI techniques are analogous to threads that connect the aforementioned
driving forces. Similarly, Maddikunta (2021) suggested that CI is one
of the key enabling technologies for the realization of Industry 5.0
to bring sustainability and automation in applications such as smart
additive manufacturing, predictive maintenance, hypercustomization,
and cyber–physical cognitive systems. Furthermore, they also suggested
that the CI plays a key role in realizing cobots, which is a key characteristic of Industry 5.0. Similarly, Javaid and Haleem (Javaid and
Haleem, 2020) emphasized the use of CI for realizing Industry 5.0,
specifically in the manufacturing industry. The study listed seventeen
critical components needed to adopt Industry 5.0 in manufacturing.
Amongst them, cobots, emergent artificial intelligence, multiagent systems and technologies, complex adaptive systems, and virtual reality
heavily rely on the CI. Similarly, numerous enabling components of
holography, 4D printing, 5D printing, smart manufacturing, Internet of
Everything, and Big data are complimentary domains that can exploit
CI for various applications.
Healthcare. The authors in Haleem and Javaid (2019), Javaid et al.
(2020) proposed the use of Industry 5.0 for healthcare in the context
of the current pandemic (COVID-19), as well as in general. These studies explore various paradigms, issues, and challenges associated with
the realization of Industry 5.0 in the healthcare industry to facilitate
physicians, practitioners, and patients. Among all proposed enabling
technologies, both studies focus on the use of CI to make the smarter,
accurate, sustainable, and resilient healthcare system.
Digital Society. The studies Doyle-Kent and Kopacek (2019), Martynov
et al. (2019), and Elim and Zhai (2020) considered the aspect of
digitization and digital society in the industry 5.0 ecosystem. The
former two studies evaluated the technologies that are essential for the
digitization of Industry 5.0 components, while the work in Elim and
Zhai (2020) represented the description of Industry 5.0 as a complex
mathematical problem. The study suggested that giving it a formal
description would not only help the enterprises to transition from the
fourth to the fifth industrial revolution but also help in measuring the
cost Nevertheless, these studies highly emphasize on the use of CI as
an underlying technology to achieve the digitization process.
5.2. Cloud/edge-native computing network infrastructure
The availability of HCI computing infrastructure and communication resources arise at the core and edge of NIBs (c.f. Section 3),
i.e., cloud–fog–edge (CFE) computing network infrastructure can provide the necessary communication and computing environment for
enabling CI techniques for different Industry 5.0 applications. Additionally, it introduces a transformative approach to managing industrial
processes and services, leveraging the inherent strengths of both cloud
and edge computing for optimized performance. More details on CFE
computing are as follows.
5.2.1. CFE computing and three-level CFE-based IoT architecture
Recently in an Annual Automation Fair, Rockwell Automation
(world’s largest company for industrial automation and digital transformation) has also listed CFE architectures as one of the driving forces
for Industry 5.0.2 CFE computing infrastructure plays a critical role in
enabling the CFE architecture. In this regard, numerous critical enablers
for CFE computing are shown in Fig. 11. Most of the technical details
on enhanced computing features and softwarized functions at the
architecture-level have already been covered and discussed holistically
in previously Section 3 &4. For the sake of generality, we can assume
a three-level cloud–fog–edge-based IoT architecture for Industry 5.0.
The three-layered architecture consists of edge devices, edge/fog/mist
servers, and cloud servers.
• The first layer comprises edge devices or IoT sensors, including highend vehicles, smartphones, smartwatches, smart pendants, wearable
devices, and sensor nodes.
• The second layer consists of fog gateway, base stations, cloudlets,
road-side units, routers, edge servers, and proxy servers to form edge–
fog computing layer. This layer provides the essential computation,
communication, and storage capabilities for the nodes in the first
layer.
• The last is the cloud computing layer that consists of cloud server(s)
and datacenter(s), respectively.
In general, the main task of the IoT system is to collect data from
sensors and send the response to the IoT actuators. Integrating the
cloud in an IoT system acts as a liaison for managing the implicit
services and interacting with remote users and third-party services.
Since the cloud-based IoT systems are centralized, they suffer from
long response latency and bottlenecks (Du et al., 2021a). To overcome
the latency and bottlenecks issues, techniques such as mist, fog, and
edge computing were explored in Fraga-Lamas et al. (2021) for the IoT
ecosystem to offload some communication tasks to improve the latency
response of node requests. To improve response time, fog computing
gateways and cloudlets are added between IoT devices and the cloud.
Mist computing devices can perform complex tasks locally as well as
in collaboration with other IoT nodes, therefore, reducing the communication overhead associated with the cloud (Markakis et al., 2017).
Cloudlets use high-end PCs to perform computing-intensive services
and real-time rendering in the local network (Fraga-Lamas et al., 2021).
The fog computing gateways can provide QoS-aware, low-latency, and
physically distributed services (Markakis et al., 2017).
The usage of CFE computing devices in communication architectures helps to achieve greener and more sustainable solutions. To
achieve green communication and sustainability within the Industry 5.0
ecosystem, IoT, CFE computing in cloud-/edge-native network architecture, and AI are the key enabling technologies (Fraga-Lamas et al.,
2021). The amalgamation of IoT and CFE computing for sustainable
communication is referred to as Green IoT (G-IoT) system, which aims
to minimize the energy consumption of the communication system. As
Industry 5.0 is still in its infancy, some studies have been published
to cover a few or a single aspect of CFE architectures in the context
of Industry 5.0. For example, Fraga-Lamas et al. (2021) discussed the
sustainability issue in the context of a smart circular economy and
Industry 5.0. The paper focuses mainly on the reduction of carbon
footprint issues concerning recycling, operating, and manufacturing
2 http://www.koreaherald.com/common/newsprint.php?ud=
20211202000559
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
20
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 13. Taxonomy and applications of the reviewed studies that uses the combination of both computational intelligence and cloud–fog–edge network computing resources
concerning three components of Industry 5.0 vision.
processes. The study considers CFE as one of the enabling technologies
to achieve sustainability in the Industry 5.0 ecosystem. Furthermore,
the study considers edge nodes integrated with mist computing for
analyzing energy consumption and its effect on carbon footprint.
Edge Computing as Supportive Technology. Edge computing serves
as a crucial supportive technology for Industry 5.0 by enhancing response time and latency reduction. For example, Maddikunta (2021)
reviewed the enabling technologies for Industry 5.0 and considered
edge computing as one of the supportive technologies. The integration
of edge computing was discussed in the context of latency reduction rather than a sustainable solution. According to their review,
Industry 5.0 needs to be faster in response time to achieve industrial
needs, therefore, edge computing techniques are considered a necessary
building block. Similarly, Ozdemir and Hekim (2018) were one of
the earliest ones to discuss the implications and diversity of Industry
5.0. Although the study discusses mostly the technology policy and
adaptation, it also emphasizes on the use of edge devices to maintain
a symmetry in industrial automation, which is one of the reasons for
transition to Industry 5.0.
Industrial IoT at the Edge. The integration of IIoT and edge computing has proven beneficial for various industrial processes and applications in smart cyber–physical systems. In this regard, Thakur
and Sehgal (2021) proposed IIoT and edge-computing-based architecture that caters to several industrial processes and applications for
heterogeneous smart cyber–physical systems. The processes include
hydraulic, pneumatic, and electrical, while the application comprises
dynamic voltage and frequency scaling, and voltage frequency islands.
The authors emphasized that their edge-computing-based heterogeneous architectures are in compliance with Industry 5.0 standards as
it requires minimal human intervention. Similarly, Du et al. (2021a)
proposed using the industrial edge computing framework for fault
diagnosis in the context of Industry 5.0. The study showed that the
edge computing-based framework reduces the computation and communication bottleneck. Also, it reduces the latency and helps to shift
the industrial process paradigm from centralized to distributed.
5.3. Nexus of CI and CFE computing for industry 5.0 vision
In this subsection, we discuss the synergistic relationship between
CI techniques and CFE computing platform as they collectively contribute to the realization of Industry 5.0 vision. By harnessing the
adaptability and problem-solving capabilities of CI techniques in conjunction with the distributed, scalable, and low-latency characteristics
of CFE provided by the softwarized multi-tenant CI-NGWNs framework
(c.f. Fig. 6), it enable the actualization of the three core objectives of
Industry 5.0: (1) human-centric, (2) sustainability, and (3) resiliency. As
illustrated in Fig. 13, which presents a taxonomy and applications of the
reviewed studies that utilize the combination of CI and CFE resources
concerning the three components of Industry 5.0 vision, we aim to
do an in-depth review of related work and provide valuable insights
into how CI and CFE can work in tandem to drive advancements in
industrial applications and wireless network architectures, thus shaping
the future of the Industry 5.0 era. More details on each aspect are as
follows.
5.3.1. Human-centric aspects
As one of the driving forces for Industry 5.0 is mass customization
and personalization, it attracts human eccentricity into the mix that
prioritizes human interest and needs in the production process. Industry
5.0 is also considered to be a society-centric approach, suggesting that
the technology would adapt to the diversity and needs of workers. For
example, prioritizing the mental and physical well-being of workers
can be performed to preserve the fundamental rights of workers while
focusing on the digital privacy of acquired data. One of the ways of
well-being, relevancy, and human–machine collaboration can be achieved
is by using the combination of CFE computing and CI. The edge devices
can help in acquiring the data from human workers in a ubiquitous
way, while the CI can analyze the data and activate relevant services.
Furthermore, Edge AI (a combination of CI and CFE computing) can
also help to improve human–machine collaboration by understanding
action perception in a pervasive manner. Some studies have highlighted
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
21
S. Zeb et al.
the human-centricity issues based on other factors (e.g., reliable maintenance, control systems) in their studies (Right, Fig. 13) while others
focused on a particular scenario and proposed a way to realize it in
current industrial environment as discussed below.
• Emerging Technologies: Bhat and Alqahtani (2021) linked the
vision and key performance indicators of 6G with Industry 5.0 to
achieve hyper personalization, which heavily relies on both edge
computing and CI. According to the study, the use of Internet-ofEverything (IoE), extended reality, 4D imaging, brain–computer
interface (BCI), haptic communication, holography, and telepresence would heavily contribute to personalized systems and
automation. The importance of this study can be taken into account by recent developments in the aforementioned technologies
from Facebook (Meta).3
Some studies (Wang et al., 2021a; Shahzadi et al., 2021; Nayak
and Pargiri, 2020) have hypothesized that EdgeAI which drives 6G
communication systems would contribute significantly to Industry 5.0
in terms of personalization, human-centric services, and real-time
management systems. For instance, Wang et al. (2021a), proposed
an AI-powered 6G layered architecture that uses EdgeAI and
ensures the delivery of intelligent services to Industry 5.0. The
architecture is based on explainable AI (XAI) for understanding
the logic behind activation of differentiated services, and how
they are related to the end-users, which will be helpful for legal
auditors and service providers to customize their products and
equipment, accordingly. Shahzadi et al. (2021) proposed the use
of 6G services in manufacturers based on Industry 5.0 leverage
EdgeAI analytics, and 6G communication systems to increase
collaboration and cognitive communication between humans and
machines to provide personalized user experience and improved
service quality. Similarly, Nayak and Pargiri (2020) discussed
the transition of Industry 4.0 (Digitalization) to Industry 5.0
(Personalization) with Edge AI and 6G communication systems.
The study highlights several issues concerning data heterogeneity,
security, privacy, and mobility in the context of Industry 5.0. The
study highlighted that the convergence of Industry 5.0 and 6G
communication systems would result in an improved Industry 5.0
(Intelligentization) that could be drive a paradigm shift in the
technological industry.
• Enabling Technologies: Maddikunta (2021) highlighted the term
hyper customization essential to Industry 5.0. The study also suggests that CI and data from edge devices, such as, specific content,
service, or product details, are crucial to move towards the hyper
customization process. Furthermore, the study also highlights the
specific preferences of the user that can be incorporated in the
manufacturing process by utilizing user preference data from
edge devices and decision/analysis using CI. It reveals that the
workers are a crucial aspect for achieving personalization, as
the manufacturing process must transition to an agile supply
chain and a process that requires human intervention to customize the product accordingly. Similarly, the study Fraga-Lamas
et al. (2021) undertakes an industrial scenario where humans
and machines work in collaboration. It focuses on the safety of
human workers in a industrial environment by leveraging Edge AI
characteristics. For instance, continuous visual monitoring could
be performed to detect close proximity of robots with humans. If
the proximity condition is violated, an alarm could be generated
and the machine could be shut down in a remote manner for
protecting the human worker.
• Ethical and Value Oriented Industries: Nahavandi (2019) highlighted several aspects and issues concerning human-centricity in
Industry 5.0. For instance, the study highlights that new jobs and
3 https://www.wired.com/story/facebook-haptic-gloves-vr/
positions such as chief robotic office (CRO) could be created in
every industry as human–machine collaboration will have a high
significance in Industry 5.0 ecosystem. Furthermore, the study
also highlights the importance of virtual training to update the
skills of the workforce in a simulated environment or remotely
without affecting the real-time manufacturing process. The study
suggests that the role of Edge AI in developing such kind of
systems would be highly crucial. The study emphasized on machine cognition and sensing technologies to build a cobots-based
systems for improving the quality and accuracy of assistive tasks
in industrial environment.
5.3.2. Resiliency aspects
The importance of resilience was highlighted during the COVID-19
pandemic that challenged the economic resilience concerning industry perspective. In its reports, the European Commission (Maija et al., 2021;
Andrea et al., 2022) highly emphasized the resilience, social, economic,
and production stabilization in Industry 5.0. For example, the industrial
process recovery and manufacturing recovery issue has been touched
upon in an abstract manner in Maddikunta (2021), Fraga-Lamas et al.
(2021) while highlighting the use of CI and edge computing as its
key enablers. In this regard, Fig. 13 consolidates the studies covering
the resiliency in Industry 5.0. To shed light on resiliency aspects,
in Sindhwani et al. (2022), the authors considered the technology
enablers of Industry 5.0 and conducted an extensive evaluation and
ranking of the enablers via the Pythagorean fuzzy Delphi method. From
an energy perspective, the study ElFar et al. (2021) briefly discusses the
algae-based bio-fuel energy conversion and its management perspective
within the resilience vision of Industry 5.0 (sustainable cities and
communities) while considering the UN4SDG goals.
Security and Privacy concerns. Numerous studies in literature had
addressed the security and privacy concerns to enhance resilience
in Industry 5.0. For example, in Khowaja et al. (2021b), the study
highlighted the problem of data and model security when it comes
to NGWNs. The study highlighted several security concerns that are
dealt with when performing data acquisition and data analysis on edge
devices in an industrial environment. The study proposed a Private AIbased framework to address data and model security. Additionally, it
also proposes a data security mechanism for industrial environments
to secure the data flow. While the aforementioned study of Khowaja
et al. (2021b) proposed data and model security but the performance
evaluation is done only on the data modality, whereas the study
in Khowaja et al. (2022) dealt with the model security aspect. Although
the study focuses mainly on IoMT data, the authors suggest that the
model security framework can be applied to the Industry 5.0 environment, as model security is one of the emerging issues and can affect
industries heavily when humans and edge devices are hyperconnected.
The study proposed a proximal gradient based learning network that
could help to cope with model inversion attacks. In another study, the
authors proposed a collect-reduce-aggregate-collect-aggregate-update
(CRACAU) method that uses edge computing and Byzantine machine
learning algorithm to meet industrial automation requirements (Du
et al., 2021a). The study highlighted that fault tolerance is one of the
issues; however, due to the employment of heterogeneous devices, the
security aspect becomes crucial and can affect the overall production.
In this regard, they proposed the CRACAU framework to improve
automation processes and enhance resiliency and privacy through a
Byzantine-tolerant algorithm. Similarly, Rupa et al. (2021) emphasized
on the use of blockchain networks for data protection in medical
services. The study employed remix Ethereum blockchain to protect and
manage medical certificates on edge computing devices.
4 https://www.undp.org/sustainable-development-goals
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
22
S. Zeb et al.
5.3.3. Sustainability aspects
Existing studies have focused highly on using Edge AI, i.e., a fusion of
CI and CFE computing to achieve the required level of sustainability. This
integration enables real-time data processing, decision-making, and resource optimization, ultimately contributing to the sustainable and efficient operation of industrial systems. For instance, the study Carayannis
et al. (2021) emphasizes the use of CI for the automation process as
well as to explore the possible combination for the fusion of energy
sources. On the other hand, the study ElFar et al. (2021) utilized CI
techniques in conjunction with the prototype of the electro-optical
systems bioreactor to reduce carbon emissions for manufacturers in
Industry 5.0. Below is a consolidation of some studies focusing mainly
on sustainability using Edge AI in Industry 5.0. We have divided these
studies into a few categories, such as enabling technologies, emerging technologies, robotics, manufacturing, and generalized studies (as
illustrated in Fig. 13).
• Enabling Technologies: Fraga-Lamas et al. (2021) proposed the use of
Edge AI and green IoT systems to address issues of carbon footprint.
The study proposed hypothetical architecture based on Edge AI and
green IoT and performs evaluation in terms of energy efficiency to
show that such a fusion can be helpful in reducing carbon emissions.
The evaluated scenario is considered in the context of Industry 5.0
and it was suggested that the use of CI and edge computing can be
helpful in mitigating sustainability issues. Maddikunta (2021) also
emphasized sustainability in Industry 5.0 and highlighted the use of
CFE computing and the CI technique to reduce the carbon footprints
of manufacturing industries.
• Emerging Technologies: Although some studies have not directly proposed sustainability in Industry 5.0 using Edge AI, they have indirectly addressed the use cases of techniques that use both CI and edge
computing. For instance, Nayak and Pargiri (2020) proposed a hypothetical architecture for 6G communication that is based primarily
on computational intelligence and edge computing techniques. 6G is
essentially known for a larger footprint and sustainable communication, therefore, some of the use cases highlight its correspondence
with Industry 5.0, assuming that 6G could carry on its sustainable
traits to the manufacturing domain as well. Similarly, Shahzadi et al.
(2021) proposed a collaborative cognitive communication system
that uses CI and CFE computing as its core to enable intelligent
services. Furthermore, the main aspect of the system was to leverage
contextual information to activate a particular service. The study
shows that one of the use cases of their proposed system is sustainable
energy for Industry 5.0.
• Robotics: In Demir et al. (2019), Demir et al. specified that the
main purpose of Industry 5.0 is to achieve sustainability and pursue
the bioeconomy through the means of renewable resources, bionics,
robotics, and CI. The study suggests that the CI is the key to enabling
the co-work between humans and robots as well to as develop a
sustainable working ecosystem for Industry 5.0.
• Manufacturing: The authors in Draghici and Ivascu (2022) explored
different aspects of Industry 5.0 for manufacturing systems that include green manufacturing, smart manufacturing, intelligent monitoring, process automation, warehouse ergonomics, product development, and economic impact. Most of the sections in Draghici and
Ivascu (2022) focused on the feasibility and impact of Industry 5.0-
based manufacturing systems on the sustainability. Meanwhile, some
sections also emphasized on using CI and edge computing to move
towards green computation and circular economy that could help in
reducing the carbon emissions
Farsi et al. (2021) evaluated Industry 5.0 indicators for their feasibility in reliable centered maintenance. They suggested that a high
correlation between maintenance and operation phases could achieve
sustainability for high-value equipment from the industry 5.0 perspective. The study uses fuzzy logic and edge equipment to measure the impact of reliable, centered maintenance on sustainability.
Furthermore, the authors also suggest recommendations to improve
sustainability in terms of the identified indicators in the study.
6. Potential enabling services for industry 5.0
This section delves into a comprehensive exploration of potential
enabling services that can be integrated into the multi-tenant softwarized service framework (as discussed in Section 3) to address the
challenges of Industry 5.0 vision.
TSN-enabled Hybrid NIBs Architecture. By leveraging advanced
technologies and integrating multiple service functions, the multitenant softwarized framework (c.f. Section 3) over CFE-enabled architecture aims to provide versatile and unified solutions to meet the
growing demands of Industry 5.0. These enabling services encompass
various areas such as communication, computation, automation, and data
management, working together to achieve an intelligent, interconnected,
and efficient industrial ecosystem that characterizes Industry 5.0. Hence,
the seamless fusion of TSN-enabled hybrid NIBs and multi-tenant
softwarized frameworks has the capacity to offer scalable, agile, and
adaptable customized services, catering to a wide range of industrial
requirements. For instance, Fig. 14 illustrates the TSN-enabled hybrid
NIB infrastructure, which merges the CI-NGWNs infrastructure with the
backhaul hyperconverged industrial network. This integration ensures
the delivery of reliable and secure communication and computation
services to inter/intra-networked machine cells situated on the actual
manufacturing and production floor, specifically within matrix production environments (Sun et al., 2021; ACIA, 2021; Prados-Garzon
et al., 2021). In addition to these advantages, there are several other
notable features that contribute to the overall system performance and
efficiency, which include:
1. Seamless Cloud Integration: It can provide seamless integration between both public cloud (e.g., B5G/6G, third-party vendors) and private cloud (on-premise) in hybrid NIBs. More enterprises are moving
towards the options of both public and private clouds according to
the business ecosystem (Mahmood et al., 2021).
2. Holistic Softwarized Communications: The integration of TSN standards, a promising enabler and convergence technology standardized by 3GPP for FoFs, allow hybrid NIBs to provide deterministic
and/or isochronous softwarized communications for industrial automation and control applications, meeting critical requirements
such as time synchronization, bounded latency, ultra-reliability, and
dedicated resource allocations (ACIA, 2021).
3. Adaptability and Scalability: TSN-enabled hybrid NIBs with multitenant softwarized frameworks can adapt to the evolving requirements of Industry 5.0, offering a scalable architecture that accommodates the growing demands for automation, communication, and
computation in the industrial sector (Ashjaei et al., 2021).
4. Enhanced Security: The integration of TSN-enabled hybrid NIBs with
multi-tenant softwarized frameworks can facilitate advanced security measures, ensuring the protection of critical industrial data
and communication channels against cyber threats and vulnerabilities (Prados-Garzon et al., 2021).
Moreover, there is potential for other essential softwarized services
to be organized and implemented to facilitate critical applications
intelligently. For example, services like CaaS, IaaS, and AI-as-a-Service
can be deployed within the control plane of CI-NGWNs (as depicted
in Fig. 14). These services enable intelligent network management and
control of the entire TSN-enabled NIBs architecture without human intervention, leading to increased efficiency, reduced response times, and
improved decision-making. Hence, the automated management of the
TSN-enabled NIBs allows for real-time adaptation to changing network
conditions, optimizing resource allocation, and ensuring continuous
high-quality communication and computation services for Industry 5.0
applications (Mahmood et al., 2021). In addition to these services, this
section further explores various potential enabling services specifically
tailored for Industry 5.0. The following subsections discuss these services in greater detail, including (1) Navigation/Tracking-as-a-Service
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
23
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 14. Softwarized communication of physical twins and deployed digital twins over a zero-touch TSN-enabled hybrid NIBs architecture of CI-NGWNs.
(NTaaS), Section 6.1, (2) Everything-as-a-Service (XaaS), Section 6.2,
(3) Network Function-as-a-Service (NFaaS), Section 6.3, (4) AI-as-aService (AIaaS), Section 6.4, and (5) Connected Digital Twin Services
and Metaverse, Section 6.5. Each subsection highlights the unique
benefits and applications of these services in the context of Industry
5.0 and the multi-tenant softwarized service framework.
6.1. Navigation/Tracking-as-a-Service (NTaaS)
Navigation/Tracking-as-a-Service (NTaaS), in conjunction with
cloud-based infrastructure, provides on-demand localization services to
various industries such as retail, manufacturing, supply chain, transportation, healthcare, and logistics (Research, June 2021; Farahsari
et al., 2022). These services encompass navigational tracking in machine cells, real-time location information maintenance, and factory
asset management for industrial cobots, AGVs, isochronous factory
operations, environmental sensing, and numerous other industrial applications (c.f. Fig. 14, Physical Manufacturing Floor). Furthermore,
the increasing adoption of ICT-based digital infrastructure throughout
the factory ecosystem has led to a surge in the utilization of NTaaS
to enhance productivity, revenue growth, and financial efficiency,
ultimately fulfilling the sustainability objectives of Industry 5.0 vision.
The critical components of NTaaS systems include Kouhini et al.
(2021), Koonen et al. (2021), Conceição et al. (2021), (1) appropriate
localization techniques such as Time-of-Arrival (ToA), Received-SignalStrength-Intensity (RSSI), etc., (2) localization system integration involving optical and wireless systems, and (3) optimization and performance enhancement methods, which consist of tracking algorithms,
Kalman filters, neural networks, and more. These elements work in
tandem to deliver efficient and reliable navigation and tracking services
tailored to the specific needs of Industry 5.0 applications.
Fig. 15. Illustration and classification of various localization systems and enabling
technologies based on the scale (scenarios and applications) and range resolution
(accuracy).
6.1.1. Enabling localization technologies
Various enabling technologies, such as optical/light sensor technology and wireless technologies, are employed for localization and
ranging purposes (Liu et al., 2007).
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
24
S. Zeb et al.
• Optical Sensor Technology: LIDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) is an
optical sensor technology that measures and senses the environment
and distance range based on laser reflections (Jiang et al., 2021c).
LIDAR is commonly used in AGV applications (e.g., manufacturing
warehouses, and cell-based matrix productions) due to its compactness, accuracy, and greater reliability compared to wireless-based
localization technologies. However, LIDAR has a high cost, and its
ranging performance can be significantly affected by atmospheric
conditions such as rain, snow, and fog, which limits its use in outdoor
scenarios (Liu et al., 2021a).
• Wireless Localization Technologies: A variety of wireless localization
technologies are available for different scenarios and applications
(c.f. Fig. 15). GPS-based localization is unsuitable for indoor scenarios since GPS signals are severely attenuated due to the rich multipath
scatterer profile of the indoor factory environment (Zeb et al., 2020a).
Alternative indoor positioning solutions based on WiFi, RFID, ZigBee,
LoRaWAN, and Bluetooth have been developed over time and provide
accurate positioning services in indoor factory scenarios (Mahmood
et al., 2022b; Anjum et al., 2020).
1. Ultra-Wideband (UWB) Localization: UWB-based localization, particularly with large bandwidths of 500 MHz and 1 GHz in the
3.1–10.6 GHz band, offers more accurate localization and ranging
performance compared to other wireless technologies (Zeb et al.,
2020a).
2. mmWave/THz-based Localization: Recent developments in the use
of mmWave and THz bands with massive MIMO and beamforming
technologies for high data rate communications in B5G and 6G
have increased the importance of mmWave/THz-based localization to provide integrated communication and ranging (ICAR)
services (Zeb et al., 2022b).
The selection of an appropriate localization technology for user-defined
operations and FoFs applications generally hinges on the required performance metrics, such as accuracy, precision, complexity, scalability,
robustness, and cost. The advancement of optical sensor technologies like LIDAR and wireless localization technologies such as UWB
and mmWave/THz-based solutions offer a wide range of options for
addressing different localization requirements. As Industry 5.0 continues to evolve, integrating and optimizing these enabling localization
technologies can play a critical role in ensuring efficient and reliable
navigation and tracking services for various industrial applications.
6.1.2. Localization and ranging techniques/algorithms
Traditional wireless localization and ranging techniques rely on
the measurements of received signal properties (Obeidat et al., 2021).
These techniques can be categorized as follows:
• RSSI-based localization schemes that utilize received signal strength
information.
• AoA/AoD-based localization schemes that employ received signal angular information, i.e., angle-of-arrival (AoA) and angle-of-departure
(AoD).
• ToA-based localization schemes that use received signal time-of-flight
(ToF) information.
ToA/TDoA-based localization algorithms generally performed better
than the RSSI- and AoA/AoD-based algorithms in indoor factory scenarios since their performance is more affected due to thick-wall penetration losses and human blockages, machines and factory assets,
and angular scatterers structures (Zeb et al., 2022b). Moreover, both
the time and angle-based methods can be complemented by other
measurements, such as carrier-phase (CP) measurements, to achieve
cm-level positioning accuracy (Nikonowicz et al., 2022). However,
multipath structure indeed induces erroneous errors in positioning
accuracy due to the absence of direct-path (DP) in line-of-sight (LOS)
conditions. Hybrid algorithms—combining conventional localization
Fig. 16. Various servitization frameworks that can be adopted in TSN-enabled hybrid
NIBs architecture.
techniques, e.g., RSSI-ToA, performs better than the standalone algorithms (Conceição et al., 2021). Nevertheless, it increases the ranging
and localization algorithm complexity.
For URLLC and mMTC services in mission-critical industrial applications, timing synchronization among the industrial assets (wireless and
wired) at the physical layer is very important (Mahmood et al., 2019).
At the 5G RAN level, 5G gNBs wirelessly disseminate the absolute reference time and physical propagation delay information for adjusting
the timing clocks at the UE level (Zeb et al., 2020b). This increases the
criticality of accurate positioning of industrial assets in a rich multipath
indoor environment. Kalman filters and AI-enhanced localization algorithms are also developed over time to perform joint positioning and
time synchronization and better UE navigational tracking in a realistic
environment (Koivisto et al., 2018). For M2M and D2D communication
scenarios, a cooperative localization approach is adopted in the worst
conditions (e.g., geographic positioning fails) where multiple wirelessly
connected industrial sensors and assets communicate and collaborate to
improve the accuracy of position estimates (Chukhno et al., 2021).
6.2. Everything-as-a-Service (XaaS)
The paradigm of softwarized XaaS (also called anything-as-a-service)
combines traditional on-premises, software-as-a-service (SaaS), platform-as-a-service (PaaS), and infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS) models
based on the required hierarchy of control and management over
computational and communication resources. As illustrated in Fig. 16,
local enterprises and businesses have total control over their resources
in the traditional on-premise model. However, maintaining the local
network infrastructure with the scale and expansion of the enterprise
over time becomes infeasible due to extra resource consumption and
new emerging technologies that can bring enhanced features and value
to the system. Hence, depending upon the enterprise requirements
of control over computational and communication resources in the
network, the cloud/edge services and resources of XaaS paradigm can
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
25
S. Zeb et al.
be provisioned by CI-NGWNs of Fig. 16, i.e., IaaS, PaaS and SaaS. The
XaaS paradigms has led to the massive shift in leveraging subscriptionbased business models closely integrated with the ‘‘servitization’’ in
emerging enterprises, i.e., nexus of softwarized products with the ondemand service models in a single package (Andrikopoulos and Lago,
2021; Gill and Buyya, 2018; Cao et al., 2021). Hence depending upon
the type of XaaS servitization model and subscription, the CI-enabled
NGWN can provide a wide range of service advantages, e.g.,
1. Communication and computation services to the numerous humancentric robotic industrial processes
2. Financial savings, and improved productivity for small enterprises
3. High efficiency in terms of hybrid cloud–edge management, i.e., service request automation, cost management and resource optimization, secure identity and compliance during the product lifecycle,
governance in package and deliverance procedure
4. System backup and cybersecurity without exorbitant costs
5. Agile, scalable, and growth-oriented enterprise with integrated
evolving technologies and softwares.
Similarly, the emerging trend in the softwarization of networks
is paving the way for new hybrid XaaS paradigms (Liu et al., 2019;
Cinque et al., 2020), such as integration of disaster recovery and unified communication-as-a-service, zero-touch network monitoring services, container-as-a-service, health-care-as-a-service, etc., This can be
beneficial for the new vision provided for core elements in Industry 5.0.
6.3. Network Function-as-a-Service (NFaaS)
The integration of NFV-SDN technologies and enabling networking
techniques, such as network programmability, virtualization/containerization, and the emerging AI-native SBA paradigm within the TSNenabled hybrid NIB architecture facilitates the use of zero-touch network functionalities. These functionalities include service-aware communications, network management and control, link-aware softwarized
routings, and visual services (Benzaid and Taleb, 2020b; Bunyakitanon
et al., 2020). To achieve these network service functionalities, the
control plane of NGWN utilizes the on-demand XaaS services and
collects the network state information and network flow information
from the underlying core of hybrid NIBs (as illustrated in Fig. 14,
Top). Then, the control plane trains the AI models/algorithms in run
time to intelligently manage the softwarized network (i.e.,multi-tenant
TSN-enabled hybrid NIB architecture) using network control signals.
Additionally, the combined enabling functions of the CI and infrastructure layers (c.f. Fig. 6) form the building blocks for providing
Network Function-as-a-Service (NFaaS) solutions to support the servicebased provisioning architecture in Industry 5.0 scenarios. NFaaS can be
further categorized as follows:
• NFV Infrastructure-as-a-Service (NFVIaaS) offers virtualized network
infrastructure resources, enabling flexible and scalable network services.
• Virtual Network Function-as-a-Service (VNFaaS) provides virtualized
network functions that can be deployed on-demand, improving network agility and adaptability.
• Virtual Network-as-a-Service (VNaaS) delivers complete virtual networks that can be customized to meet specific requirements, enabling
rapid deployment and streamlined management.
These NFaaS examples emphasize the potential of a flexible and intelligent network management approach within the context of CI-NGWNs
and Industry 5.0, catering to the evolving demands of modern industrial
scenarios.
Slice-as-a-Service (SlaaS). In addition to providing essential network
functionality, NFaaS also serves as the foundation for network slicing in the hybrid NIB architecture. This capability allows network
vendors/operators to customize their infrastructure and allocate portions of network resources as slices for various tenants (Bonati et al.,
2020; Sun et al., 2020). These tenants might include hybrid eMBBURLLC-mMTC traffic, e-health services, private enterprise networks,
and connected vehicles, each with distinct requirements and service
levels. As a result, network slicing ushers in new business models, fostering long-term agreements between network operators and a diverse
range of tenants (Mahmood et al., 2021). By providing sustainable
Slice-as-a-Service (SlaaS) solutions, operators can satisfy the diverse,
on-demand requirements and network traffic characteristics inherent
to CI-NGWNs and Industry 5.0 scenarios. Moreover, SlaaS enables
network operators to dynamically allocate resources, optimize network
efficiency, and better manage the diverse needs of different applications, industries, and users in a flexible, cost-effective manner (Jiang
et al., 2021b). This adaptability is crucial for the successful realization
of Industry 5.0, as it ensures the necessary agility and scalability to
accommodate future technological advancements and emerging use
cases.
6.4. AI-as-a-Service (AIaaS)
Earlier, numerous enterprises were not considering adopting AI due
to several factors (Zeb et al., 2021; Casati et al., 2019), (1) the high cost
of massive hardware/machines (infrastructure), (2) a limited supply of
technical programmers and experts to operate the available infrastructure, and (3) a lack of sufficient data. However, the exponential growth
in hybrid cloud services and the integration of AI within TSN-enabled
hybrid NIB infrastructure of Fig. 14 have facilitated the widespread
adoption of AI in Industry 5.0, as they enable access to vast data
collection, storage, and computation services. AI-as-a-Service (AIaaS)
provides remote AI tools, empowering emerging enterprises to implement and scale AI techniques in industrial contexts (Li et al., 2021).
Furthermore, AIaaS delivers various on-demand AI-native functions
(ACF) to various industrial processes (c.f. Section 3), offering numerous
advantages, such as:
• Cost flexibility and reduced investment risk through limiting investment
risks and cost flexibility in CI-NGWNs deployments for Industry 5.0
• Less dependency on data analytics and ML expertise through decreasing
dependency on expertise in data analytics and ML, allowing enterprises to focus on their core business in Industry 5.0 environments
• Enhanced decision-making and adaptability using provided insights
through the information extracted from critical data, resulting in improved transparency and maneuverability for future strategic actions
in digital enterprises to increase productivity in Industry 5.0
To enable a real-time AIaaS architecture within the context of CINGWNs and Industry 5.0, there are generally three essential components, as illustrated in Fig. 17 and explained below:
6.4.1. AI infrastructure
AI infrastructure forms the backbone structure to implement and
train multiple AI-native models and functions (c.f. Section 3.1.2). Data
storage and computations form the critical pillar of AI infrastructure.
Data. AI data from multiple heterogeneous data sources has the utmost importance in the training of AI models/frameworks at the AFL
layer of Fig. 6 since the functional performance of orchestrated AInative services relies on the quality of trained AI models. These data
are fed as input to the AI models, which can come from numerous
types of databases, i.e., (1) relational databases management systems
(RDBMS) that offer data storage functions possessing security, accuracy, integrity, and consistency (Luo et al., 2018), (2) stored raw data
in data lakes (Zhang and Ives, 2020), and (3) unstructured large binary
objects and stored annotation in NoSQL databases (Sicari et al., 2022).
Similarly, real-time data processing and streaming approaches, such as
Apache Spark and Kafka, include a scalable ML library that works in
parallel with databases to store raw data acquired (Zeb et al., 2021).
Computations. Advanced AI techniques, such as Deep RL, and Swarm
AI, needs high computational power to train on data and converge
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
26
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 17. I-as-a-Service (AIaaS) components.
towards optimal solutions (Zeb et al., 2022a). As a part of an extension
to the XaaS paradigm (c.f. Fig. 16), numerous cloud, telecom, and
private vendors in AIaaS setup, based on a pay-as-you-go IaaS model,
can offer a combination of GPU-CPU-based VMs and containers to
provide high-power computing power in softwarized networking tasks,
such as zero-touch self-automated AI tasks, perform serial/parallel
processing in batch and streaming analytic, serverless computations.
Together AI computations form a compute-as-a-service (CaaS) in hybrid
NIBs (c.f. Fig. 14), which can easily be availed on-demand and scaled
by enterprises since maintaining and owning a dedicated infrastructure
(on-premises) can be cost expensive for a young factory ecosystem.
Under the Industry 5.0 vision, AIaaS allows the space for investing
capital on other goals of human sustainability (Fraga-Lamas et al.,
2021), e.g., health, human–robot collaboration, and digital skills among
workers.
6.4.2. AI tools
AI tools help the enterprise developers team to develop and access the various on-demand AI services and other associated services
(i.e., IaaS, CaaS, NFVaaS), which are entirely in sync with data and
compute platforms.
Wizards & IDE. The wizards (software) together with the integrated
development environment (IDEs) and browser-based notebooks enable
real-time back/front-end development in a multi-tenant softwarized
environment and provide ease by reducing complexity in training AI
frameworks for an enterprise management team (Salvaris et al., 2018).
Such AI tools facilitate smooth DevOps processes in smart industrial
applications.
Data Engineering Tools. The quality of AI data determines the performance of any trained AI model (Gröger, 2021). Hence, the cleansing and pre-processing of collected raw data are essential for which
data preparation tools have the utmost importance as advanced data
tools help extract-transform-load (ETL) jobs, sophisticated data automation, increase the data value, perform feature engineering, and
fuse specific critical data, i.e., data fusion (Fountaine et al., 2019).
The extracted data are then fed into the ML pipelines for model
training, provided by third-party orchestrated and deployed applications, e.g., Kubeflow. Kubeflow supports wizards, IDEs, and deployable and scalable ML/DL workflows over the softwarized microservice
architecture, easily integrated with the CaaS model (Zeb et al., 2021).
AI Libraries. In the data science environment, the configuration and
setting up of ML and DL libraries, such as TensorFlow, Apache MXNet,
Torch, Keras, and Scikit-learn becoming quite complicated, especially
with the emerging updates and patches over time (Chen and Liu,
2021). Numerous ready-to-go VMs and container templates are set
and configured with necessary ML/DL libraries with GPU-supported AI
computations, which can be provided to train and implement complex
neural networks.
6.4.3. AI service APIs and types
Numerous cloud vendors provide different types of standalone customer service APIs that can be readily deployed since they do not
require dedicated custom-designed AI models as benefits are extracted
from the underlying AI infrastructure. Some of the emerging AI service
types are given below.
Chatbots & Digital Assistance. Chatbots and digital/virtual assistance
in integration with collaborative robots (cobots) can perform tasks
automatically and intelligently in collaboration with human workers (Strazdas et al., 2020). They generally use natural language processing (NLP) and perceptual image processing algorithms on voice, text,
and image data to learn from human beings and imitate the language
and human behavior pattern to provide answers and assistance (Androutsopoulou et al., 2019). Enterprises can leverage and integrate
AI-based bots and assistance services over the whole factory ecosystem to fulfill the vision of Industry 5.0 by bridging the gap between
humans and robots towards the digital revolution (Adam et al., 2021).
Moreover, developers can use these types of AI services in orchestrated
industrial xApps to assist in monitoring and control applications.
Cognitive Computing APIs. Cognitive computing is a technology that
imitates human thought processes, personality, and sentiments, which
help in real-time analysis of the environment and making the bestpossible appropriate decision (Gudivada et al., 2019). The concept of
chatbots and digital assistants is part of cognitive computing products.
Various services use cognitive computing APIs as representational state
transfer (REST) endpoints—a way for services to communicate with
each other (Sud, 2020). Without developing the application code from
scratch, the REST endpoints are accessed by enterprise developers
and integrated into the custom industrial application/services they are
building (Yin et al., 2021). Some examples of cognitive computing APIs
are (1) NLP, (2) speech recognition, (3) image recognition, (4) pattern recognition, (4) knowledge extraction, (5) searching, (5) emotion
detection.
Fully Managed AI Frameworks as a Services. Various ML and AI
frameworks (e.g., Deep DL, neural networks, etc.) can be provided ondemand to enterprise developers that automatically learn and build
on the incoming data and evolve with time (John et al., 2020). For
example, at the CI-enabled NGWNs control plane, various AI models
are provided as disjoint services that take the underlying network’s
state information to learn, build, and select an appropriate control
policy to provide zero-touch network functions. Similarly, enterprise
developers can utilize various intelligent functions using various AI
model templates and drag-and-drop tools to assist with customized and
fully automated AI-based applications.
Custom Computing. With the rise of different industrial applications
and scenarios having diverse communication and computation requirements, various cloud vendors are moving towards providing custom
APIs that serve the purpose of specialized custom services (Al-Aghbari
and Elrabaa, 2019). This strategy results in reducing the overhead of
selecting the suitable algorithm and networked computation resources
that suit the on-demand QoS and QoE performance.
Cost-effective Sustainable and Green Computing Design. Costeffective green computing or environment-friendly computing design
are considered essential for a sustainable future (Tuli et al., 2022). The
environment-friendly design introduces novel solutions to protect the
environment and achieve the goal of net-zero carbon emission. The
aims of green computing are (Stergiou et al., 2018), (1) introduction of
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
27
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 18. Illustration of autonomous digital twin with deep learning (DTaaS
Implementation).
management and policies to reduce the energy consumption and carbon
footprint of the enabling ICT technologies to perform computations
while reducing the costs, (2) promote energy-efficient and eco-friendly
networking products (hardware and software), (3) reduce the power
consumption of machines, and (4) use minimum computation and
communication resources in all types of M2M communications. Using
AI models in DevOps for the factory softwarized environment can
provide green-computing-enabled cost-effective services to meet various SDG targets in Industry 5.0 applications using green computing
methodologies (Vinuesa et al., 2020).
Affective Computing. According to the author, Rosalind Picard, of ‘‘Affective computing’’ (Picard, 2000), the computers must be provided the
capability to have recognition, understanding, and tenancy of emotions and
expression, in case we want computers to possess high intelligence and
interact naturally with us. The recent advancements in AI algorithms
(cognitive computing, conversational AI, emotional intelligence) and
robotics (i.e., cobots for zero-defect manufacturing) and convergence
of multidisciplinary fields (e.g., engineering, psychology, education,
cognitive science, sociology) have brought forth the new demanding
vertical applications in human–computer interactions and affective
computing (Wang et al., 2022b). These new vertical applications are
human health, computer-assisted AR-VR-XR technologies, entertainment, factories-of-the-future, etc. Similarly, the integration of affective
mediation technologies and the assistive tools using AR-VR-XR into the
FoFs ecosystem can significantly help assist disabled workers during
their daily experience.
6.5. Connected digital twin services and metaverse
The world has eventually reached a point where almost every
technology is deeply embedded in our lives, leading to the blurriness
among lines between business (factory production, big enterprise) and
personal (factory workforce, employees) (Zeb et al., 2022a).
6.5.1. Digital twin-as-a-Service (DTaaS)
In this regard, the emerging industrial digital twins bridge the
physical and virtual space of factory assets and form a digital replica
of the factory through IIoT and CPS-enabled cobots in nexus with CINGWNs as a hyperconnectivity medium that can optimize and interact
with the physical environment autonomously (Schluse et al., 2018;
Mortlock et al., 2022; Minerva et al., 2020). Similarly, the symbiotic
role of industrial DTs along with cognitive AI-based sensing paradigms,
AR-VR-XR, and blockchain, accelerates towards realizing true digital
transformation that can perform a wide range of on-demand functions
and provide services, e.g., DT services for automated health, predictive
maintenance, virtual insights. Especially, the factory workforce such
as disabled persons with blind or visually impaired disabilities needs
to have the proper care in terms of stress management and trauma
management, which forms an essential condition for the all-inclusive
digital and sustainable future under Industry 5.0 vision.
Moreover, DT technology can be utilized as standalone services,
forming a DT-as-a-service (DTaaS) to provide numerous digital services (Aheleroff et al., 2021), such as visualization and insights, status
monitoring, process optimization, automated control, fault prediction,
remote control maintenance. Many leading software giants provide the
cloud-based APIs for standalone softwarized DT services to spinning out
large-scale digital twin for associated and connected physical assets,
e.g., Microsoft Azure (Azure Digital Twins, (Microsoft, 2022)), Amazon
AWS (AWS IoT TwinMaker, (AWS, 2022)) and Google Cloud (Supply
Chain Twin and Pulse, (Cloud, 2022)), Generally, the created digital
twins are hosted on their respective clouds. However, depending on
the enterprise and customer requirements, private enterprise cloud can
be configured with softwarized DT APIs to ensure the privacy and
security perspective by keeping the DT data confined to local enterprise
premises. Many leading industries are opting for incorporating DT solutions in their factory environment to enable machine failure analysis,
defective product monitoring, virtual simulation and others, e.g., CATIA (Dassault Systèmes) for assembly process monitoring, American
electric power (AEP) using PSS-ODMS from Siemens to transmission
network modeling and analysis, and many others (c.f. Zeb et al. (2022a,
Table. 3)).
Likewise, DT capabilities can enable true mass customization and
personalization in matrix productions to achieve sustainable goals of
zero-defect manufacturing. Note that depending upon the type of DT
application and required capabilities, enablers for DT implementation
inside unified framework focus on various data types, AI models,
service types and enabling technologies (Jiang et al., 2021a). For
example, the two phases, i.e., DT training and implementation, of
autonomous DT creation together with the deep learning method has
been illustrated in Fig. 18 which can be used for the DT application
for inference, control and prediction mechanism. Hence, the utilization
of AIaaS (AI analytics functions, data processing, and others) and
XaaS (computation infrastructure services, softwarized communication
through dedicated networked links) resources provided by CI-NGWNs
NIBs can build the unified DTaaS model atop of physical systems data
and cyber-metaverse data (both historical and real-time).
6.5.2. Metaverse
Recently, the term ‘‘metaverse’’—digital ‘‘big bang’’ of digital-native
cyberspace, has been introduced to promote and streamline the digitizing of each physical reality (Park and Kim, 2022), e.g., devices,
people, processes, buildings, vehicles. The essence of metaverse lies
in the vision of shared digital-native realms of cyberspace, connected
by the gigantic, immersive, unified, persistent, and sustainable Internet at its core, forming the mesh web of virtual worlds or digital
twins which enables true digital transformation (Wang et al., 2022a;
Ning et al., 2021). The true implementations of metaverse may seem
futuristic at the moment, especially concerning its integration in the
intelligent factory ecosystem. However, various emerging and enabling
technologies are poised to catalyze metaverse formation. Hence, the
numerous enabling technologies and the essential roles that they play
in the development of the metaverse are depicted and classified in
left-hand side of Fig. 19.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
28
S. Zeb et al.
Fig. 19. Linking the physical world (i.e., factories, devices, workers) to its counterpart digital twins, and shifting to the metaverse: (Left) the metaverse enabling technologies
(i.e., blockchain, CV, distributed networks, pervasive computing, and ubiquitous interfaces); and (Right) the metaverse ecosystem features (i.e., avatars, content creation, data
interoperability, security/privacy, trust, and others).
3R’s of Digital Twins and Metaverse. The interplay of working
roles, relationships, and requirements (3R’s) between the digital twin
and digital-native virtual world determines the actual realization and
implementation of the metaverse vision (Lee et al., 2021). Fig. 19
shows the three stages for metaverse development, i.e., (1) digital
twin implementation of physical space, (2) creation of mesh-networked
digital-native virtual worlds, and (3) dual nexus of both digital twins
and the digital-native virtual world towards the metaverse creation.
As a starting point, the digital twin digitizes and creates the virtual
image of physical environments, providing the capability to project
any physical world changes upon its virtual counterpart. For different environments and physical spaces/processes that encompass surroundings, digital twin technology creates many unique and distinct
digital-native virtual worlds, which initially suffer from, (1) limited
inter-connectivity among themselves and with physical worlds, and
(2) information silos, i.e., communication between unrelated virtual
images is difficult/impossible. Humans, intelligent agents, or devices
can interact and work on different virtual creations as different digital
avatars within the build-up of digital-native images. The emerging
trends towards the adoption of various enabling technologies and increased sharing/connection of many virtual worlds within a massive
digital landscape have led to the convergence of the digitized real
world and created meshed virtual world (Cheng et al., 2022b). With
this convergence, the final stage of the interconnected reality of the
physical and virtual world arises where the hyperconnectivity barrier
has been reduced, and simultaneous co-existence of both physical–
virtual entities entails much like surreality. It leads to the perpetually
connected and 3D cyber-reality as the metaverse. Therefore, with this
in mind, the essential components of the metaverse ecosystem, as well
as the significance of those components, have been outlined in the
right-hand side of Fig. 19.
7. Open standards, frameworks, project demos, groups
To the best of our knowledge, most of the working related to
Industry 5.0 guidelines, standards, and frameworks have been carried
out by European Union (EU).
7.1. EU publications
So far, the EU has published over 4 articles explicitly to advance
the operations and realization of Industry 5.0. The first was the result
from a workshop with Europe’s Technology leaders where a discussion
with funding agencies and technology, and research organizations was
carried out (Muller, 2020). Most of the focus was shifted towards the
identification of enabling technologies that could realized the concept
of Industry 5.0 along with the challenges. The publication considered
individualized human–machine-interaction, bio-inspired technologies
and smart materials, digital twins, emerging communication techniques
for data transmission, data storage and analysis, AI, and technologies that can achieve autonomy, renewability, and energy efficiency.
Furthermore, the challenges such as scalability, economic dimension,
interdisciplinarity, governmental and political dimension, and social
dimensions were also undertaken, accordingly.
The second publication in the series complemented Industry 4.0
paradigm and provided a pathway for its transition to fifth industrial iteration and first industrial evolution. Apparently, the focus was to make
a transition from shareholder to stakeholder value for making industries
resilient, human-centric, and sustainable (Maija et al., 2021). The
publication discussed in detail the benefits for industries and workers to
adapt Industry 5.0 guidelines. For instance, the guidelines for skilling,
re-skilling, up-skilling, inclusive and safe work environment, and role
of industry worker were defined. Similarly, to motivate industries,
some benefits including increased resilience, resource efficiency for
competitiveness and sustainability, and retaining as well as attracting
talents were elaborated.
The most recent one considers the perspective of industries as well
as recent challenges including the pandemic, biodiversity collapse, and
climate change. The guidelines in this recent report mainly focus on the
transformation rather than transition (Andrea et al., 2022). The report
consists of three segments, i.e., vision, governance, and action. The
vision for Industry 5.0 was discussed to achieve Europe’s 2030 goals
by focusing on responsible ecosystem and value chain, regenerative
circular economy design, adaptive and self-sustaining industries, decentralization to achieve sustainability and resilience, respecting planetary
boundaries by limiting digitalization, and regulatory frameworks. The
governance focuses on horizontal and vertical coherence with international standards and government levels, corporate governance 5.0, and
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
29
S. Zeb et al.
Table 6
Ongoing projects that are closely related to Industry 5.0.
Project title Project sub-title Project length Project website
BEYOND 4.0 Technological Inequality — Understanding the relation between
recent technological innovations and social inequalities
Jan 2019–Dec 2022 https://beyond4-0.eu/
EMPOWER European platforM to PromOte Wellbeing and hEalth in the
woRkplace
Jan 2020–Dec 2023 https://empower-project.eu/
HR-Recycler Hybrid Human–Robot RECYcling plant for electriCal and eLEctRonic
equipment
Dec 2018–Nov 2022 https://www.hr-recycler.eu/
H-WORK Multilevel Interventions to Promote Mental Health in SMEs and
Public Workplaces
Jan 2020–Jun 2023 https://h-work.eu/
KYKLOS 4.0 An Advanced Circular and Agile Manufacturing Ecosystem based on
rapid reconfigurable manufacturing process and individualized
consumer preferences
Jan 2020–Dec 2023 https://kyklos40project.eu/
MindBot Mental Health promotion of cobot workers in Industry 4.0 Jan 2020–Dec 2022 http://www.mindbot.eu/
ROSSINI Robot enhanced Sensing, Intelligence and actuation to improve job
quality in manufacturing
Oct 2018–Mar 2022 https://www.rossini-project.com/
SPIRE-SAIS Skills Alliance for Industrial Symbiosis (SAIS) — A cross-sectoral
Blueprint for a Sustainable Process Industry (SPIRE)
Jan 2020–Dec 2023 https://www.spire2030.eu/sais
role of government for Industry 5.0 transformation. Lastly, an action
plan was proposed for what needs to be achieved and who will strive
to achieve it. The main course of action plan was to define the role of
industries, economic orientation and approaches to improve industry
performance, new design for supply chains, value chains, and business
models, digital transformation while respecting planetary boundaries,
policy making, and approaches and capabilities to innovation and
research. Together these EU publications define most of the standards
and provide guidelines for the transition and transformation of Industry
5.0.
7.2. EU infographs on industry 5.0
Next, the EU published an infographic that can be characterized
by going beyond profit based services and goods production. The infographic emphasized more on societal contribution from the perspective
of industries and suggests to place the health and well-being of the
worker first (for Research and Innovation, 2021). The key elements of
the infographic was to highlight the digitilization concerning Industry
4.0, its transition towards Industry 5.0, highlighting its importance
in terms of reduced cost (resource efficiency), empowered workers
(remaining in control), competitive industry (attracting talent), adaptation (training for evolving skills), competitive edge (new markets),
and safety and well-being of the workers. It also highlights three
core funding strategies through which Industry 5.0 can be uplifted,
i.e. Beyond 4.0, HuMan Manufacturing, and KYKLOS 4.0. Beyond 4.0
mainly concerns the technological impact on welfare, business models,
and jobs. HuMan Manufacturing focuses on the automation, factory
workers, and their collaboration for increased safety, satisfaction, performance, quality, harmony, and productivity, respectively. KYKLOS
4.0 concerns about the circular manufacturing by focusing on AI-based
methods, augmented reality, life-cycle assessment, product life-cycle
management, and cyber–physical systems.
7.3. Projects and demos
Below, we highlight some of the completed and ongoing projects
that either explicitly worked/working on Industry 5.0 or closely related
to Industry 5.0 guidelines.
7.3.1. Incobotics
One of the recent projects that was completed concerning Industry 5.0 was ‘‘Incobotics’’ (2019–2021) that was funded by Erasmus+
programme. The funding united four EU partners, i.e. Spain, Greece,
Italy, and France for the development of didactic materials that could
be used to design collaborative robots (CoBots). The main objective
of this project were to raise awareness concerning the evolution of
Industry, enhance pool of skilled workers, and increase collaboration
between educational centers and Industry. The modules designed by
Incobotics are currently undergoing tests from the pilot groups in Italy,
France, and Spain. Once the final products are reviewed and tested,
they will be made freely available for downloading from their project
website (incobots, June 2021).
7.3.2. Industry 5.0: Inclusive design methodologies for digital manufacturing
A project ‘‘Industry 5.0: Inclusive design methodologies for digital manufacturing ’’ (Sep 2021–Feb 2025) is aligned with the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council’s (EPSRC) project ‘‘Made Smarter
Innovation: Center for People Led-Digitalization’’ is a collaboration between Nottingham, Bath, and Loughborough universities to overcome
the digital skills gap, lack of senior management, employee resistance,
and support for human capability in Industry 5.0. The project aims
to achieve a sustainable digital technology adoption while keeping an
emphasis on the well-being of a worker at the center of production
process.5
7.3.3. AI REGIO
In Europe, digital innovation hubs (DIHs) are being created to
support small medium enterprises (SMEs) for their smooth transition
to Industry 5.0. The project ‘‘AI REGIO’’ was funded by EU to address
business, technology, and policy barriers in making AI-focused DIHs
a reality. In this regard, the project ‘‘Regions and DIH alliance for
AI-driven digital transformation of European Manufacturing SMEs’’ was
funded (October 2020–September 2023) by Horizon 2020 (H2020)
with the co-ordination of Politecnico Di Milano, Italy. This project
aims to address three major concerns that kind of create hurdles in
implementing digital pathways between AI-driven DIHs and Manufacturing SMEs, i.e. European Union vs Regional Gap (policy driven
concern), Innovation collaboration platform vs Digital Manufacturing
Gap (Technology driven concern), and Industry 4.0 vs Industry 5.0 gap
(Business driven concern).6
The gap between EU and regional SMEs is about the scale at which
AI innovations are applied and integrated. Furthermore, this gap also
addresses the issue of accessibility to global marketplaces. A policy
needs to be devised to provide equal opportunities to the SMEs in
order to scale up the innovation as well as competition. Currently,
5 https://www.lboro.ac.uk/study/postgraduate/research-degrees/phdopportunities/industry-5-inclusive-design/
6 https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/952003
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
30
S. Zeb et al.
the DIHs and digital manufacturing platforms (DMPs) fuel the digital
European industry and digital single market concerning SMEs. So far,
the related innovation, communities, and initiatives are working in an
independent way; therefore, platform-related challenges and technology adoption measures need to be incorporated not only to increase
the Socio-Business impact but also to bridge the gap between DIH
and DMP. The business driven gap mainly concerns ICT innovation
for manufacturing SMEs (I4MS) phase III platforms that pilot Industry
4.0 implementations through IoT, Motion and Analytics Data. It has
been suggested in this project that I4MS does not properly addresses
the synergy between AI revolution (autonomous systems) and Industry
5.0 (human-centricity) that creates the gap between Industry 4.0 and
Industry 5.0. This projects aims to solve the aforementioned three
concerns, accordingly.
7.3.4. Collaborative consortium on industry 5.0
A kind of collaborative consortium has recently been developed
among the EU universities to collectively work on Industry 5.0, specifically with the focus on combining human craftsmanship and creativity
with productivity, speed, and consistency of Robots.7 The consortium
includes Henry Royce Institute, The Thomas Ashton Institute, The
Tyndall Centre, The Manchester Institute of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, The Global Development Institute, The Manchester
Urban Institute, and The Productivity Institute. The main idea of this
consortium is to integrate human strength and AI for enabling mass personalization, improving products and productivity, deep understanding
of customers, value-added creativity, and problem solving. Some of the
other projects that are indirectly related to Industry 5.0 are mentioned
in Table 6.
8. Lessons learned, research challenges and future directions
In this section, we delve into the practical application of the Industry 5.0 vision and the emerging CI-NGWNs. In this regard, Section 8.1
covers the lessons learned, providing various important observations
and recommendations. Meanwhile, Section 8.2 discusses the future
research directions, highlighting open challenges and problems that
require further exploration
8.1. Lessons learned, observations, and key insights
In this subsection, we thoroughly examine the lessons we have
learned and the key insights we have gained from our survey. This
analysis will take us through each subsection, providing a clear and
detailed account of our findings.
8.1.1. New constructs of industry 5.0 and CI-NGWNs
The key practical lessons and recommendations derived from the
systematic review of Sections 1 and 2 can be summarized as follows:
1. Defining Industry 5.0 Vision: A key lesson learned from the ongoing discourse around Industry 5.0 is that a concrete and universallyadopted definition has yet to be established, as the concept continues
to evolve (c.f. 1.1). Notable trends suggest that the vision for Industry
5.0 will focus on human–robot collaboration in the workplace. This
perspective is also supported by EU commission documents that emphasize human-centric, sustainable, and resilient goals for Industry 5.0. The
review reveals that integrating critical technological enablers and digital systems to create people-centric and people-empowered ecosystems
is vital for achieving mass personalization and mass customizationbased scalable manufacturing and production. These insights highlight
the importance of fostering a more comprehensive understanding of
Industry 5.0 and its potential impact on various ecosystems, such as
7 https://www.digitalfutures.manchester.ac.uk/themes/societalchallenges/industry-5-0/
digital society, government, political scenarios, as well as economic and
environmental perspectives.
2. CI-NGWNs: The integration of computational intelligence as an
enabling technology with NGWNs (6G), forming CI-NGWNs, has garnered considerable interest from academia and researchers (c.f. Section 1). Our systematic review reveals several valuable insights related
to how CI-NGWNs can support the realization of the Industry 5.0 vision,
including:
• Leveraging inherent capabilities of computational intelligence technologies (e.g., swarm AI, evolutionary AI, DRL algorithms, fuzzy
systems) to provide diverse, intelligent functions throughout the core
network.
• Utilizing softwarized service provisioning and orchestration to enable
flexible and efficient resource management.
• Implementing AI-native service architecture to ensure diverse QoS
and QoE requirements are met across various industry applications.
• Adopting zero-touch network management and operations to enhance
network efficiency and reduce operational costs.
• Promoting private, intelligent, and open RAN architecture to enable
seamless connectivity and interoperability.
These lessons learned emphasize the potential of CI-NGWNs in facilitating the widespread implementation of the Industry 5.0 vision and offer
guidance for future developments in this area.
3. Key Insights from Industry 5.0 Technological Enablers: Industry
5.0 vision seeks to bridge the physical and cyber world, allowing
seamless integration between human intelligence and cobots working
together (c.f. Fig. 4). In this regard, our review in Section 2.1 identified
six key technological enablers and systems that play critical roles in
facilitating this integration and meeting the necessary requirements.
Key insights in each category are as follows,
• Human–machine interaction technologies and tools, such as CCPSS systems, AMR, augmented reality for visualization insights, and cognitive services, enable effective communication and cooperation in
manufacturing and production processes.
• Virtual simulation and digital twins technologies, e.g., IIoT-based CPS
systems, industrial process optimization, holograms, and digital 3D
modeling, enable the creation of virtual simulations and digital twins
for improved decision-making and process optimization.
• AI-native smart systems, such as secure, safe, energy-efficient, and
person-centric AI solutions, contribute to the overall intelligence and
adaptability of Industry 5.0 ecosystems.
• Data infrastructure, sharing, and analytics, e.g., edge computing and
micro clouds, communication interfaces, scalability and autonomy
over multi-level IT infrastructure, facilitate efficient data processing
and decision-making.
• Bio-inspired technologies, such as embedded bio-sensor networks and
body area networks enable the integration of biological systems
within Industry 5.0 environments.
• Energy-efficiency paradigms, i.e., integration of renewable energy sources and energy-autonomous systems based on energy harvesting
mechanisms, promote sustainable and eco-friendly operations.
These key insights offer a valuable perspective on the essential technological enablers that can contribute to the successful realization of
each element of Industry 5.0 vision and emphasize the need for a
diverse range of technologies to support human-centric and intelligent
industrial ecosystems.
4. Network-in-Box Architecture: The implementation of NIB architecture in CI-NGWNs facilitates an interoperable paradigm of intelligent
network softwarization, which is essential for meeting the critical
technical requirements of Industry 5.0 vision. From our review in
Section 2.2, we have gained the following insights:
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
31
S. Zeb et al.
• Design objectives for CI-NGWNs: The NIB architecture supports AInative SBA embedded throughout the entire network, providing reconfigurable integrated solutions and network resources tailored for
Industry 5.0.
• Functional features and softwarized service support: NIBs in CI-NGWNs
offer numerous functional features using SDN/NFV-enabled networked HCIs, enhancing the overall performance and flexibility of the
system.
• CI-native features distribution: The enhanced functions and features
(as illustrated in Fig. 5) are spread across the functional layers
of CI-NGWNs, including the intelligent application layer, intelligent
network control layer, analytic layer, and sensing layer.
• Catering to the Industry 5.0 technological enablers: We have learned that
the NIB architecture, combined with CI technology in NGWNs, can
efficiently address the critical requirements of the six technological
enablers discussed previously.
These lessons learned emphasize the importance of NIB architecture
in achieving the Industry 5.0 vision, highlighting its role in providing
adaptable, efficient, and intelligent network solutions.
8.1.2. Open and intelligent 6G network architectures
The following key lessons and recommendations are derived from
the systematic review of Section 4.
1. Self-organizing networks (SON) and O-RAN Integration: From
our analysis in Section 4, we have learned that combining selforganizing networks (SON) and O-RAN architectures can yield significant benefits for network management and performance. Key insights
include:
• Shared infrastructure: By utilizing the same infrastructure nodes and
monitoring databases, SON and O-RAN can streamline operations,
reduce redundancy, and promote efficient resource allocation.
• Cross-operations: The integration enables seamless collaboration and
coordination between SON and O-RAN, which can lead to improved
network performance and adaptability in response to changing conditions and requirements.
• Synergistic data analytics: The combination of Management Data Analytic Service (MDAS) with Non-RT RIC enhances network analytics
and decision-making capabilities, allowing for more intelligent and
proactive network management.
• Enhanced orchestration: The O-RAN orchestrator offers valuable services to support SON operations, including resource management,
coordination, and optimization, which can lead to better overall
network performance and user experience.
• Interoperability and standardization: The integration of SON and ORAN promotes the adoption of standardized interfaces and protocols,
fostering an open and flexible ecosystem that encourages innovation
and collaboration among vendors and stakeholders.
Furthermore, it is essential to support and promote the integration
of SON and O-RAN within the industry, as O-RAN communities are
already working on implementing such integration to unlock the full
potential of these synergies and maximize the long-term benefits.
2. MEC, Network Slicing, and O-RAN Integration: The integration
of MEC, Network Slicing (NS), and O-RAN offers valuable insights and
benefits for improving the performance of CI-NGWNs in the context of
Industry 5.0. Key lessons learned from this integration include:
• Enhanced Synergy: Combining MEC hosts with near-RT RIC hosts
in the O-RAN architecture allows for better integration of thirdparty vendors, enabling improved synergy and collaboration among
different network entities.
• Integrated Data Management: By incorporating MEC databases with ORAN databases, critical information such as UE locations, deployed
cell performance, and radio network information service (RNIS) can
be effectively managed and utilized to optimize network performance.
• Flexible Orchestration: Utilizing a mobile edge application orchestrator
(MEAO) allows for the orchestration of diverse xApps, including
SON functions and softwarized enterprise services. This flexibility
enables the efficient management of resources and services across the
integrated network.
• Slice-Specific XApps: With NS support, xApps can be included in NR
slice templates, which can be easily orchestrated by O-RAN and/or
MEC orchestrators on separate and secure partitions of O-RAN and/or
MEC databases. This ensures that network resources are allocated and
managed effectively based on the specific requirements of each slice.
• Improved Network Performance: The integration of MEC, NS, and ORAN leads to enhanced network performance in CI-NGWNs by leveraging the combined strengths of these technologies, ultimately supporting the diverse and demanding requirements of Industry 5.0
applications.
By learning from these insights, the development and implementation of CI-NGWNs can be better informed and optimized to meet the
evolving needs of Industry 5.0.
8.1.3. Computational intelligence for industry 5.0
In this subsection, we outline the key practical lessons and recommendations after in detail review of Section 5.
1. Diverse use of Computational Intelligence: With such diversified characteristics of computational intelligence techniques, issues
concerning resiliency, sustainability, and personalization ought to be
handled in Industry 5.0. For instance, variants of some supervised learning and federated learning can be widely used for developing resilient
systems in Industry 5.0. Similarly, methods that are less computationally complex, such as self-supervised learning or soft computing
techniques, can be used to achieve sustainability, while many intelligence techniques can be employed for achieving mass personalization
as well.
2. CI for Industrial Security: The critical success of Industry 5.0
depends on the usage of CFE network infrastructure models and computational intelligence. However, these CFE models are quite vulnerable
to security and privacy attacks. Studies presented in Section 5 are
now moving toward the implementation or adoption of computational
intelligence techniques that not only provide smart services but also
preserve the privacy and security of users’ data specifically in the
Industry 5.0 setting. In this regard, the use of Federated learning and
soft computing techniques has proven to be quite effective so far. As
human workforce and industries have a high stake in Industry 5.0, it is
important to deal with such security and privacy threats in an efficient
and effective manner.
3. CI for Emerging Applications: Since the advent of Industry 5.0,
the use cases of CI usage have been mostly limited to manufacturing,
supply chain, and human–robot collaboration. In recent years and
with the popularity of the fifth industrial revolution and its vision,
more applications are emerging, and the use cases are increasing. For
instance, researchers have proposed using computational intelligence
paradigms in industrial automation, zero-defect matrix productions,
data privacy and security, Society 5.0, and alternative energy sources.
Similarly, researchers have also started exploring the use cases of
Industry 5.0 in healthcare, emotional intelligence, and education. It is
assumed that the increase in digital assets and technologies will pave
the way for more applications that can be associated with Industry 5.0
to improve value creation and circular economy. The report from the
European Commission on Industry 5.0 proposes new business models
for companies for re-hashing and redesigning from a digital transition
point of view, i.e., increased digital hyperconnectivity between workers
and intelligent cobots, mental well-being. The report also suggests
that workers should be involved in each of the transition phases,
accordingly. A digital education action plan has also been initiated by
the commission to further expedite the training systems and accessible
education that is fit for human–machine collaboration. However, such
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
32
S. Zeb et al.
realization of human-eccentricity requires substantial reforms concerning health-protection systems, taxation systems, welfare, and social
policies. In this regard, companies and industries are responsible to
help the workers to remain protected and relevant during the transition
phase.
8.1.4. Softwarized service provisioning and potential applications
In this subsection, we outline the lessons learned, research challenges, and research directions after a detailed review of Sections 3 and
6.
From the systematic review, we derive the following key lessons and
recommendations:
1. Multi-tenant Softwarized Service Provisioning: The survey study
presented in Section 3 has revealed the importance of softwarized components, i.e., embedded throughout the hardware- and cyber- world,
in realizing the essential features of Industry 5.0, such as zero-defect
manufacturing and mass-customization in matrix productions. Based on
this understanding, we have gained the following insights:
• Softwarized CI-NGWNs-based framework: A multi-tenant softwarized
service provisioning framework, as illustrated in Fig. 6, provides
essential and on-demand softwarized services orchestration across
various functional layers to support Industry 5.0 applications.
• Functional layers: The framework comprises multiple layers, including
the service layer, computational intelligence layer, and infrastructure
layer, working together to enable a wide range of critical softwarized
services. The role of each functional layer are, (1) the service layer
providing multi-tenancy support and service mesh-enabled composite service blocks to orchestrate customized services for deployed
multi-tenant industrial apps, (2) the computational intelligence layer
providing critical functions of AFL and DTFL, and (3) infrastructure
layer providing functions of HCI resources, industrial access networks, autonomy and control over computing infrastructure and DTI
functions.
• Role of softwarized components: Functions like ACF and DT play an
integral role in enabling fully self-automated control in production
manufacturing and assembly, contributing to the goals of Industry
5.0.
• Best practices and principles: The CI-enabled softwarized industrial
framework incorporates best practices and principles of SOA, microservices, and serverless architecture (c.f. Fig. 7 and Table 4) to
support diverse services such as XaaS, AIaaS, DTaaS, and NFaaS
(discussed in Section 6).
These lessons learned highlight the significance of multi-tenant softwarized service provisioning in achieving the Industry 5.0 vision and
demonstrate the value of leveraging softwarized components and CINGWNs to create adaptable, efficient, and intelligent industrial ecosystems.
2. Softwarized Communication and Industrial DevOps: The detailed
survey analysis in Section 6 has shown the potential of multi-tenant service provision architecture in orchestrating and deploying softwarized
XaaS paradigms over NIBs architecture in CI-NGWNs. We have gained
the following insights:
• Hybrid NIBs architecture: Fig. 14 illustrates a hybrid NIBs architecture
that provides enhanced services for critical applications. Key aspects
include,
1. Intelligent control planes using CaaS, IaaS, AIaaS, SlaaS, and NFVaaS for zero-touch networks.
2. Customized DTaaS to enable and connect machine/cell physical
twins and virtual twins over various placement choices, such as
cloud, edge, and private databases.
3. Hybrid cloud architectures to connect public and private clouds.
4. Time-sensitive networking to meet stringent time synchronization
requirements for cobots operations in cells.
5. NTaaS to provide critical localization and ranging services at
manufacturing floors.
• Bi-directional softwarized communication: The hybrid NIBs architecture enables real-time, reliable, and control communication between
physical twins and DT throughout the entire CI-NGWNs.
• Enhanced DevOps strategies and Softwarized architecture choices: The
integration of XaaS principles creates an infrastructure for implementing advanced DevOps strategies that meet enterprise requirements.
In this regard, Table 4 demonstrates that various softwarized architectures offer unique functional elements and significance in adopting suitable architectures for necessary DevOps, enabling strategies
in cloud-native environments, and incurring specific drawbacks or
limitations depending on the chosen frameworks.
The insights gained from these lessons emphasize the importance of
softwarized communication and industrial DevOps in realizing the
Industry 5.0 vision, showcasing how multi-tenant service provision
architecture and hybrid NIBs architecture can support a wide range of
critical applications and facilitate effective DevOps strategies.
4. Industrial Assets Positioning and Localization Services: Our exploration in Section 6.1 has underscored the importance of localization
and ranging techniques with centimeter-level accuracy, particularly
for mission-critical and location-aware Industry 5.0 applications like
AMRs, AGVs, and product and human tracking. From this section, we
have learned the following:
• Localization techniques: Various localization techniques have been reported in the literature, such as ToA, RSSI, AOA/AoD, cooperative localization, and hybrid algorithms (e.g., RSSI-ToA-based frameworks).
These techniques help meet the diverse requirements of Industry 5.0
applications.
• Various enabling technologies: Numerous light-based and wirelessbased technologies are available for localization purposes, including
LIDAR, GPS, WiFi, RFID, ZigBee, LoRaWAN, UWB, and mmWave/
THz. Each technology offers different performance metric-based solutions, such as cost, scalability, accuracy-precision, and implementation complexity.
• Performance-based classification: Fig. 15 illustrates the classification of
various enabling technologies and techniques based on their rangeresolution performance in different scenarios. It demonstrates that
mmWave-THz-based localization is ideal for providing ICAR services
over CI-NGWNs infrastructure.
The understanding derived from these lessons underlines the significance of understanding and selecting appropriate localization services
and technologies for Industry 5.0 applications. Achieving accurate
and reliable localization is vital for enabling efficient human–machine
interactions and supporting mission-critical processes in the evolving
industrial landscape.
4. Industrial DT and Metaverse: Our survey analysis in Section 6.5.1
has shed light on the significance of DTaaS as a building block for
various Industry 5.0 applications, such as predictive maintenance and
zero-defect manufacturing. We have learned the following:
• Bridging virtual and physical spaces: DTaaS connects the virtual image of industrial assets with their physical counterparts, effectively
enhancing hyperconnectivity and integrating human intelligence through augmented reality technologies.
• CI-NGWNs architecture for DT implementation: The CI-NGWNs architecture can utilize DT implementation at the core network, enabling dynamic reconfiguration of communication and computation resources.
The autonomous DT creation for any required application can be
realized through DTaaS infrastructure, as illustrated in Fig. 18.
• The emergence of metaverse: The mesh-connection and super-convergence of DT virtual images in cyberspace can pave the way for the
metaverse, a futuristic technology that digitizes every physical reality,
including humans, industrial assets, devices, vehicles, and buildings,
forming a web of interconnected virtual worlds.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
33
S. Zeb et al.
• Metaverse enabling technology and features: In Section 6.5.2, we have
identified three process steps from initial DT implementation to the final metaverse realization. Fig. 19 illustrates the necessary metaverseenabling technology and the resultant features of the metaverse
ecosystem.
The knowledge acquired through these lessons highlights the importance of industrial DT and the metaverse in achieving the Industry 5.0
vision. The evolution and transition towards metaverse-based digitized
industrial concepts will facilitate the successful fusion of physical and
virtual spaces and help realize the true potential of human–machine
interaction.
8.2. Research challenges and potential future directions
In this subsection, based on the lessons learned and key insights
discussed in the previous subsection, we now extend our discussion
to focus on the key research challenges that arise from the nexus of
both new constructs of Industry 5.0 and softwarized CI-NGWNs for a
truly interconnected and intelligent industrial future. This intersection
presents a unique set of complexities and opportunities that demand
further exploration, resulting into potential paths for future research
and development in this rapidly evolving field.
8.2.1. Task/Goal-based Network-in-Box Architecture
The concept of ‘‘Task/Goal-based Network-in-Box Architecture’’ represents a paradigm shift in the design and implementation of network
systems (Leivadeas and Falkner, 2023). This innovative approach prioritizes tasks or goals, tailoring the network architecture to meet specific
requirements. Based on the critical systematic review and potential uses
of NIB architecture in CI-NGWNs for supporting Industry 5.0 vision,
we identified and categorized the relevant goal-based potential critical
challenges into four groups as,
1. Hyper-intelligent network challenges: These challenges focus on incorporating CI into the core network and improving network intelligence for Industry 5.0 (Duan et al., 2020; Zeb et al., 2023). For
example, some of the hyper-intelligent network challenges tailored
to Industry 5.0 needs include,
• development of standardized and high-quality network datasets
with distinguished features (Alkhateeb et al., 2023), e.g., channel
modeling, RAN technologies, device densities, suitable for new
Industry 5.0 applications,
• increased visibility of the underlying network operations since
almost all proposed AI solutions are implemented in a black-box
manner, which may hinder trust and adoption in meeting the goals
of the resilient Industry 5.0 (Chatterjee and NS, 2023),
• addressing hybrid public–private network challenges in providing
centralized and distributed AI-based solutions at the network edge
to meet the diverse needs of Industry 5.0 use cases (Faisal et al.,
2023).
2. Coordinated and harmonized network challenges: These challenges
can be found in the co-existence of hyper-intelligent core network
with other standalone and backward compatible heterogeneous networks (Roy et al., 2021), e.g., 5G/B5G, terrestrial and non-terrestrial
networks, visible light communication. The coordinated and harmonized networks challenges and future directions for Industry 5.0
include,
• holistic approach towards designing frameworks that initiate the
convergence between cyber, physical, biological, and social space
through wirelessly connected biosensors and CCPSS systems using
nano-networks, cell-free MIMO, autonomous D2D, above 100 GHz
THz and optical spectrum, tailored to Industry 5.0 requirements
(Saadati and Barenji, 2022),
• global-level optimization schemes in coordinated networks to utilize available communication and computation resources at different networks efficiently and collaboratively, catering to the
dynamic needs of Industry 5.0 (Shi et al., 2023),
• establishing trustworthy cooperation and protocols between the
coordinated networks for seamless allocation and operation of
AI-native functions in Industry 5.0 scenarios (Shi et al., 2023).
3. Sustainable network challenges arises in achieving the goals of green
computing-enabled energy-efficient networks (Asad Ullah et al.,
2023; Tataria et al., 2021; Jameel et al., 2020b). Potential challenges
in sustainable network goals for Industry 5.0 include (1) energyaware routing and resource management algorithms for ultra-dense
wireless sensors networks in industrial environments, (2) globallevel network sustainability through integrating renewable energy
systems and varying levels of processing power in a computing
infrastructure to support Industry 5.0 applications, and (3) adaptive
data modulation schemes to accommodate the diverse requirements
of Industry 5.0 use cases.
4. Cyber security challenges in the wake of AI inclusion for Industry 5.0
requires the design of novel AI-based security architecture to provide
basic security and privacy requirements in future networks (Chergui
et al., 2021), e.g., confidentiality, location privacy, integrity, identity privacy, availability, and authenticity, data privacy, and other
meta-data privacy, while considering the specific security concerns
and requirements of Industry 5.0 applications.
Addressing these research challenges and investigating future research
directions in accordance with diverse FoFs requirements can ensure
the successful integration of NIB architecture within CI-NGWNs, leading to the development of the dynamic, hyper-connected, and seamless merger of heterogeneous industrial ecosystems that epitomize the
principles of Industry 5.0 vision.
8.2.2. Optimal CI-NGWNs and functional KPIs
The potential of CI-NGWNs to enable Industry 5.0 vision depends
on overcoming several challenges that stem from the need to deliver
an optimal mobile experience, ensure extreme network coverage, and
provide mission-critical low-latency communications (Ji et al., 2021).
Key areas of focus for future research in the context of Industry 5.0
include:
1. Network Coverage and Infrastructure: Investigating the deployment of
UAV-Satellite-based terrestrial networks to enhance network coverage and provide communication and computation services in areas
with limited infrastructure (Ranjha et al., 2021).
2. Accurate Positioning and Synchronization: Developing methods for
precise ranging and positioning over the NGWNs infrastructure at
mmWave bands to achieve nanosecond-level accuracy in ultra-dense
wireless networks for timing synchronization procedures (Zeb et al.,
2022b).
3. Integration of Computing and Storage Services: Enabling seamless integration between cloud/edge networks and wireless access networks
through the use of critical enabling technologies such as mmWaveTHz bands, mMIMO technologies, advanced antenna arrays, NOMA,
and RIS metasurfaces (Ji et al., 2021; Rubab et al., 2022; Basharat
et al., 2021).
4. Human-Centric Performance Metrics: Introducing new performance
metrics like Quality-of-Physical-Experience (QoPE) that combine the
required QoS and QoE with human-centric perception and intelligence in new vertical applications, such as AR-VR-XR in augmented
reality technologies and holographic communication (Hu et al.,
2020).
By tackling these research challenges and exploring future research
directions, the effective integration of CI-NGWNs in Industry 5.0 can be
achieved, ultimately fostering the development of adaptive, intelligent,
and human-centric industrial ecosystems.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
34
S. Zeb et al.
8.2.3. Network intelligence-enhanced open 6G optimization
This subsection reflects upon the imminent challenges in 6G architecture design and optimization, inclusive of network intelligence (NI).
The integration of SON and O-RAN offers numerous benefits, but there
are still several research challenges and future directions to explore in
the context of Industry 5.0 (Bonati et al., 2021a). Some of these include:
1. E2E NI-native Architecture with Customized AI: The NextG architecture will require hosting/integrating NI instances explicitly at NF
levels and their coordination across the entire network (i.e., macrodomains). Meanwhile, AI models should facilitate network automation and management, and thereby adapt (w.r.t. latency guarantees
training and computational complexity) for NI-specific design aspects. Besides, the other two main challenges are Banchs et al.
(2021): AI feedback loop between the control and data planes not
allowing the NI to monitor the system in a continuous manner, and
the lack of interaction among NI instances at different levels in the
current architectural trends.
2. Network Functionality and Optimization: One key challenge is determining the optimal functionalities and parameters for each network
function within the integrated SON and O-RAN architecture (Polese
et al., 2022). This requires developing novel techniques to dynamically optimize and manage network functions, ensuring their
alignment with the requirements of Industry 5.0 applications.
3. Distribution of Network Intelligence: As Industry 5.0 demands more
intelligent and adaptive networks, it is essential to investigate the
best strategies for distributing network intelligence in an integrated
SON and O-RAN environment (Banchs et al., 2021). This includes exploring new approaches to edge computing and AI-driven decisionmaking, ensuring timely and efficient network adaptation in response to changing industrial demands.
4. Data-Driven Control Loop Solutions: The integration of SON and ORAN relies heavily on data-driven control loop solutions. Future
research should focus on optimizing these solutions to ensure high
performance, low latency, and efficient resource utilization (Abedin et al., 2021). This could involve investigating advanced machine learning and AI techniques to improve the responsiveness and
accuracy of control loop mechanisms.
5. RAN Data Access Overhead: Another challenge lies in minimizing the
RAN data access overhead for network intelligence (NI) in an integrated SON and O-RAN architecture. Future research should explore
methods for reducing data access overhead while maintaining the required level of network intelligence, potentially leveraging advanced
data compression, caching, and pre-processing techniques (O-RAN
Alliance, 2023).
8.2.4. Unified multi-tenant softwarized service management
Unified service management in multi-tenant cloud/edge-native NIBs
environments is essential for Industry 5.0, as it demands novel mechanisms and performance guarantees (e.g., agility and flexibility) for
designing, instantiating, deploying, running, and optimizing composite
services within softwarized HCI (Bonati et al., 2020; Duan et al., 2020).
In this context, the research directions tailored for Industry 5.0 are:
1. Holistic management of heterogeneous functions: Integrating network,
compute, and storage resources from different tech-domains into
a single infrastructure layer, and managing them holistically to
accommodate the diverse service requirements of Industry 5.0 applications (Mollahasani et al., 2021).
2. Function/Service design and system scalability for Industry 5.0: Addressing the challenges of increased communication overheads among
finer-grained service components in microservices architecture and
ensuring system scalability to meet the evolving needs of industrial
ecosystems (Faisal et al., 2023).
3. Modeling unified abstraction for resources and services: Designing and
standardizing a set of models for unified abstractions of resources
and services across domains to overcome heterogeneity challenges
in the convergence of Industry 5.0 enabling technologies embedded
throughout NIBs of CI-NGWNs (Duan et al., 2020).
4. Leveraging new technologies for customized service management: Utilizing advanced tools and platforms such as KubeEdge, Kubernetes,
and OpenShift for automating software management, scaling, and
deployment in the context of Industry 5.0 (Zeb et al., 2021). These
open-source container-based orchestration systems can facilitate the
creation and management of flexible, responsive, and efficient industrial ecosystems.
8.2.5. On-demand industrial DevOps and deployments
The complexity in NIBs architecture of CI-NGWNs is expected to
grow unprecedentedly due to the wide range of softwarized heterogeneous service requirements of diverse Industry 5.0 applications, such as
cloud/edge functions often demanding lower latency, higher throughput, and greater reliability than the VNFs (Chowdhury et al., 2019; Bunyakitanon et al., 2020). Therefore, addressing the following research
challenges tailored to Industry 5.0 becomes critical:
1. Heterogeneity, scalability, flexibility, and performance: Developing comprehensive solutions to tackle these aspects in softwarized NIBs
architecture of CI-NGWNs for Industry 5.0, considering the resource
limitations, inefficient deployed service application execution, communication protocols for data sharing, control signaling, and resource allocations between heterogeneous coordinated networks,
as well as service mobility and connectivity (Benzaid and Taleb,
2020b).
2. Context-aware and adaptive solutions: Developing context-aware and
adaptive solutions that can dynamically adjust to changing industrial requirements and conditions, such as fluctuations in demand,
network congestion, or equipment failures (Minerva et al., 2020).
This will enhance the resilience and flexibility of softwarized communication and industrial DevOps in Industry 5.0 environments.
3. DevOps strategies for third-party service types: Adapting the DevOps
strategies for enterprise softwarized solutions to accommodate different third-party service types. For instance, in third-party AIaaS solutions, the enterprise management and service development teams
lack access to the underlying AI process(only the inputs and outputs
of the system), which changes the design guidelines of enabling
software-oriented service architecture principles, affecting privacy
and increasing security risks (Al-Doghman et al., 2022).
8.2.6. Dynamic industrial environments and localization
In the rapidly evolving landscape of industry, understanding the
dynamic nature of industrial environments and their impact on localization (assets tracking) is crucial. This subsection delves into the complexities of these environments, exploring how changes in technology,
market demands, and regulatory frameworks influence localization
strategies, and what type of research challenges and future trends in
indoor positioning systems can significantly contribute to the NTaaS
paradigm:
1. Exploring AI-based localization for dynamic environments: In Industry 5.0, localization systems must adapt to rapidly changing and
dynamic environments. Traditional localization algorithms might
struggle to provide accurate positioning in such scenarios. AI-based
localization techniques, such as deep learning and reinforcement
learning, can potentially offer better adaptability and accuracy
(3GPP TR 23.700-91, 2020). However, these techniques face challenges such as the need for continuous learning and adaptation,
model interpretability, and real-time processing. Addressing these
challenges requires the development of efficient AI-based localization models that can learn and adapt to dynamic environments,
provide real-time decision-making, and offer better interpretability
for effective monitoring and control.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
35
S. Zeb et al.
2. Overcoming harsh multipath conditions: Indoor positioning and ranging coverage in mmWave and THz bands suffer from harsh multipath
conditions due to severe NLOS blockages, such as human and machine blockages, and scattering conditions, such as metallic surfaces
and energy absorption. Additionally, ToA-based ranging and positioning accuracy degrades in indoor factory (InF) environments (Zeb
et al., 2020b). To address these challenges, RIS metasurfaces combined with mMIMO technology operating at mmWave-THz bands
can be employed to enhance ICAR services (Zeb et al., 2022b).
This approach can aid localization algorithms through intelligent
reconfiguration of InF environments, extend ranging coverage by
avoiding NLOS areas, and reconfigure mMIMO channel gain matrix to increase sparsity for the provision of high-capacity wireless
connectivity.
3. Exploiting Smart Beamforming: Integrating smart beamforming at
mmWave bands can significantly improve the performance of RSSIbased localization algorithms (Sun et al., 2022). The development
of innovative asset tracking solutions in Matrix Productions leveraging this enabling technology will contribute to better positioning
accuracy in dynamic industrial environments within FoFs use cases.
4. Developing Hybrid localization algorithms: New hybrid localization
algorithms are needed for ultra-dense wireless sensors that offer low
complexity, high precision, and high accuracy. Fusion-based localization algorithms that infer estimated locations using the fusion of
location information obtained from multiple wireless technologies
(WiFi, Bluetooth, LoRaWAN) employing different wireless localization techniques (time, angle, and power) can be explored (Farahsari
et al., 2022; AlZubi et al., 2021). One promising direction is multisensor fusion-based algorithms for AGVs and AMR applications,
which combine wireless technologies with other technologies such
as optical (LIDAR), inertial, or ultrasonic (Xu et al., 2021b).
8.2.7. Networks of industrial digital twin and metaverse
As Industry 5.0 emphasizes the synergy between humans and machines, industrial DT and metaverse technologies are crucial for enabling seamless interaction and collaboration (Ji et al., 2021). Addressing the following research challenges is vital for their successful
integration:
1. Real-time communication and resource allocation: Developing solutions
to enable real-time communication and dynamic resource allocation
in industrial DT and metaverse applications, focusing on network
latency, bandwidth, throughput, and jitter. It can ensure a smooth
user experience and reliable operation in Industry 5.0 settings (Lee
et al., 2021).
2. Adaptive solutions for mobile industrial assets: Designing adaptive
solutions for managing complexities arising from mobile industrial
assets, such as AMRs and AGVs, in remote operations through
industrial DT. This involves maintaining seamless communication
and control over CI-NGWNs even with changing network conditions
and topologies (Wang et al., 2022c).
3. Holistic security and privacy frameworks: Establishing holistic security
and privacy frameworks to protect sensitive information and data in
multi-vendor environments, considering the involvement of multiple
vendors, third parties, and service providers in CI-NGWNs offering
MEC services. It can address the risks of adversaries accessing,
stealing, or tampering with edge DTs (Cheng et al., 2022b).
4. AI-driven security and privacy solutions: Developing AI-driven security
and privacy solutions for industrial DT and metaverse-based applications with a focus on automating security and privacy preferences
and protecting virtual copies of physical assets from adversarial
attacks (Zeb et al., 2022a).
8.2.8. Evolving industry 5.0 vision and new dimensions
As we delve into the realm of Industry 5.0, it is clear that there
are numerous research challenges and potential future directions to
explore. This section will discuss the complexities and uncertainties
that researchers face in this dynamic field.
1. Unraveling the Challenges and Future Directions of Industry
5.0. While the development of the Industry 5.0 vision has recently
gained momentum, attracting attention from both researchers and
industries, several challenges remain to be addressed. These include
the realization of comprehensive human–robot collaboration and the
recognition of other significant human-society influences on Industry
5.0 vision that are difficult to quantify and measure (Research and
Innovation, Jan 2022). Key areas of focus for future research could
include,
1. Social challenges, e.g., digitally skilled labor shortages, unemployment, corporate social responsibilities, customer value, and sociocentricity in technical training to learn complex ecosystem of technologies
2. Government and political challenges, e.g., compliances with countryspecific laws, adaptation with the speed of technological changes,
protectionism, and digital system-oriented innovation policies
3. Economic challenges, e.g., new business models, circular economy,
productivity challenges, significant investments, and public–private
partnerships
4. Interdisciplinary approach towards nexus of various research disciplines to address interrelations and cause–effects relations in system complexities, e.g., engineering and technology, mathematics,
computer sciences, life and humanities, environmental and social
sciences.
By addressing these challenges and fostering future research directions,
the development of Industry 5.0 vision can progress towards a more
comprehensive, adaptable, and impactful model for industries and
societies alike.
2. Challenges and Opportunities in Industry 5.0 Technological
Enablers. The core idea of Industry 5.0 technological enablers for is
to introduce and integrate the lost human-centric dimension (i.e., human values and needs) of the previous revolution (incobots, June
2021). In this regard, numerous complex systems and technologies are
categorized and discussed in this paper. However, technologies and
systems assisting the human–machine collaboration to generate products and services, e.g., human–machine interfaces, integrating humanintelligence using person-centric AI, AMRs, and cognitive CPSS systems,
are still in the early development stage with critical research challenges
still to be addressed (Fraga-Lamas et al., 2021). Similarly, the requirements and challenges differ with the Industry 5.0 scenario. For example, to ensure trust in the cloud/edge-based matrix production system,
the critical private data exchange between humans (designer, collaborators) and machines at the factory physical floor for monitoring and
control needs to be secured and not visible to any third-party system
for potential cyber-attacks. Therefore, a blockchain and digital ledger
transaction (DLT) in conjunction with federated learning-enabled computing can provide a robust framework for Industry 5.0 (Rupa et al.,
2021), enabling faster cognitive edge data processing for stringent time
applications and secrecy-preserving data transaction.
Simultaneously, the ethical and societal issues with implementing
AI needs to be addressed for seamless human–cobots collaboration
since it negatively impacts due to the notion of job displacements and
humans replacements with AI-based cobots systems, while Industry 5.0
is poised to create more employment opportunities (Muller, 2020).
Moreover, data privacy in cobots needs to be preserved while doing the
cognitive analysis in predictive maintenance applications with human
collaboration. One of the essential requirements is regulatory compliance
in the co-production environment, where several issues relevant to
technical policies and proper regulations may arise (Xu et al., 2021a),
e.g., (1) distinguishing between cognitive cobots and several other
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
36
S. Zeb et al.
machines, i.e., drones, AMRs and (2) the inculcation use of critical AI
in nexus with other complex digital systems, and (3) better predictions
and control over more sophisticated mass-personalization goals.
3. Exploring CI with Technological Frontiers. The use of computational intelligence has been exploited for a variety of industrial
and manufacturing use cases, but only a limited amount of attention
has been diverted toward education, healthcare, and next-generation
network domains. Each of the aforementioned domain has its own
corresponding challenges, for instance, personalization and resilience
is the key to academic industry, acquisition of sensor data and its
privacy are essential for health care data, and affordability is one of
the keystones for Industry 5.0’s integration with next generation networks (Khowaja et al., 2021b,a). Therefore, there is a need to must push
the envelope to explore or extend the research in the aforementioned
areas.
4. Mental Well-being and Affective Computing with CI: Industry
5.0 is said to be an association with human workers while making
the production process automated and user-friendly. However, existing
studies have shown that working with machines causes emotional
imbalance and stress (Khowaja et al., 2020; Setiawan et al., 2020).
Considering that the fifth industrial revolution has a dedicated workplan with machines, the monitoring of mental well-being and stress
levels is an issue. Computational intelligence techniques can play a
vital role in monitoring and diagnosing stress or depressing state in a
timely manner for avoiding health issues. Currently, to the best of our
knowledge, this issue has not been explored in the context of Industry
5.0.
5. Seamless Integration of CI with Digital Spaces: With the current
rise in digital technologies such as virtual medicine, digital twins,
and Metaverse, the concept of Industry 5.0 can be leveraged to make
manufacturing and industrial spaces more sustainable, resilient, and
human-centric.8 However, in order to provide seamless integration,
computational intelligence is of vital importance. For instance, digital
avatars can be designed and simulated via digital twins to see how
productive and sustainable the designed industry would be with certain
characteristics. This will allow investors to not only foresee and plan
budget issues but also to identify the potential opportunities that could
be exploited to generate more revenue.9
9. Conclusion
In this state-of-the-art survey paper, we have undertaken a comprehensive exploration of the Industry 5.0 vision and its associated goals
and requirements for emerging applications. Our primary focus has
been on the integration of Computational Intelligence (CI) with softwarized NGWNs utilizing the Network-in-Box (NIB) architecture as a
critical technological enabler. This integration addresses the fundamental communication, computation, and enabling service requirements of
Industry 5.0.
Throughout the paper, we have defined the Industry 5.0 vision,
emphasizing its core principles of human-centricity, sustainability, and
resilience. We have meticulously examined the technological enablers
and specific requirements necessary for the full realization of Industry
5.0. Furthermore, we have delineated the design objectives and the vision of softwarized CI-native NGWNs, with the NIB architecture serving
as a pivotal element in satisfying the critical demands of Industry 5.0.
We have identified and discussed the pivotal features and technologies
inherent to CI-native NGWNs, including multi-tenant softwarized service provisioning for self-organizing industrial automation networks,
open RAN architecture, computational intelligence algorithms and their
8 https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/industry-metaverse-next-big-thingribeiro-cybersecurity-msc-mba?trk=articles-directory
9 https://medium.com/@theo/digital-twins-iot-and-the-metaverseb4efbfc01112
integrations, and hybrid TSN-enabled NIB architecture that enables
numerous potential enabling on-demand services types, e.g., NTaaS,
AIaaS, DTaaS and NFaaS. Additionally, we have explored the range
of technologies and services within the NIB architecture that CI-native
NGWNs can leverage to manifest the Industry 5.0 vision.
To conclude, we have summarized our research findings, offering
valuable lessons learned and insights, recommendations, and future
research directions for Industry 5.0. Both Industry 5.0 and softwarized
CI-NGWNs are relatively new constructs and cover a broad spectrum
of new concepts and features. For example, the Industry 5.0 vision
is not just the next logical technological evolution to previous Industry 4.0. Besides the technological dimension, the expected output
features/goals in Industry 5.0 include the ecology, economic, policy,
and sociological dimensions, with each dimension encompassing a
wide range of roles and requirements. A key challenge lies in fostering increased human–machine interactions to provide human-centric
solutions within Industry 5.0. This necessitates scalable and flexible
CI technology within the softwarized NIB architecture of NGWNs to
facilitate hybrid and unified service deployments. We anticipate that CInative NGWNs will address the identified research challenges encompassing O-RAN orchestration and deployments, user and machine experiences, hyper-intelligent network deployment, network coordination,
sustainability, and cybersecurity.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Knowledge Foundation Sweden
(KKS) under Research Profile NIIT.
References
3GPP TR 23.700-91, 2020. Study on enablers for network automation for the 5G System
(5GS); Phase 2 (Release 17).
5G Americas (White Paper), 2022. 5G edge automation and intelligence. Available:
https://www.5gamericas.org/5g-edge-automation-and-intelligence/. (Accessed 18
April 2022).
Abdel-Basset, M., Abdle-Fatah, L., Sangaiah, A.K., 2019. An improved Lévy based whale
optimization algorithm for bandwidth-efficient virtual machine placement in cloud
computing environment. Cluster Comput. 22 (4), 8319–8334.
Abedin, S.F., Mahmood, A., Tran, N.H., Han, Z., Gidlund, M., 2021. Elastic O-RAN
slicing for industrial monitoring and control: A distributed matching game and
deep reinforcement learning approach.
Abid, S.A., et al., 2021. Biosensors as a future diagnostic approach for COVID-19. Life
Sci. 273, 119117.
Aceto, G., Persico, V., Pescapé, A., 2019. A survey on information and communication
technologies for industry 4.0: State-of-the-art, taxonomies, perspectives, and challenges. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 21 (4), 3467–3501. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
COMST.2019.2938259.
ACIA, G., 2021. Integration of 5G with Time-Sensitive Networking for Industrial
Communications. URL . (Accessed 28 March 2022).
Adam, M., Wessel, M., Benlian, A., 2021. AI-based chatbots in customer service and
their effects on user compliance. Electron. Markets 31 (2), 427–445.
Aheleroff, S., Xu, X., Zhong, R.Y., Lu, Y., 2021. Digital twin as a service (DTaas) in
industry 4.0: An architecture reference model. Adv. Eng. Inform. 47, 101225.
Ahmad, R.W., et al., 2015. A survey on virtual machine migration and server
consolidation frameworks for cloud data centers. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 52, 11–25.
Ahmed, I., Jeon, G., Piccialli, F., 2022. From artificial intelligence to explainable
artificial intelligence in industry 4.0: A survey on what, how, and where. IEEE
Trans. Ind. Inform. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2022.3146552.
Al-Aghbari, A.A., Elrabaa, M.E., 2019. Cloud-based FPGA custom computing machines
for streaming applications. IEEE Access 7, 38009–38019.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
37
S. Zeb et al.
Al-Doghman, F., et al., 2022. AI-enabled secure microservices in edge computing:
Opportunities and challenges. IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TSC.2022.3155447.
Alam, I., Sharif, K., et al., 2020. A survey of network virtualization techniques for
internet of things using SDN and NFV. ACM Comput. Surv. 53 (2), 1–40.
Alkhateeb, A., et al., 2023. DeepSense 6G: A large-scale real-world multi-modal sensing
and communication dataset. IEEE Commun. Mag. 61 (9), 122–128. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/MCOM.006.2200730.
Alwis, C.D., et al., 2021. Survey on 6G frontiers: Trends, applications, requirements,
technologies and future research. IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc. 2, 836–886. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/OJCOMS.2021.3071496.
AlZubi, A.A., Alarifi, A., et al., 2021. Multi-sensor information fusion for internet of
things assisted automated guided vehicles in smart city. Sustainable Cities Soc. 64,
102539.
Andrea, R., Sylvia, S.S., et al., 2022. A transformative vision for europe : governing
systemic transformations towards a sustainable industry. Publ. Office Eur. Union
1–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.2777/17322.
Andrikopoulos, V., Lago, P., 2021. Software sustainability in the age of everything as
a service. In: Next-Gen Digital Services. a Retrospective and Roadmap for Service
Computing of the Future. Springer, pp. 35–47.
Androutsopoulou, A., et al., 2019. Transforming the communication between citizens
and government through AI-guided chatbots. Gov. Inf. Q. 36 (2), 358–367.
Anjum, M., et al., 2020. RSSI fingerprinting-based localization using machine learning
in LoRa networks. IEEE Internet Things Mag. 3 (4), 53–59. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/IOTM.0001.2000019.
Asad Ullah, S., et al., 2023. Opportunistic CR-NOMA transmissions for zero-energy
devices: A DRL-driven optimization strategy. IEEE Wirel. Commun. Lett. 12 (5),
893–897. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LWC.2023.3247962.
Ashjaei, M., Bello, L.L., et al., 2021. Time-sensitive networking in automotive embedded
systems: State of the art and research opportunities. J. Syst. Archit. 117, 102137.
Atmojo, U.D., et al., 2020. A service-oriented programming approach for dynamic
distributed manufacturing systems. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 16 (1), 151–160.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2019.2919153.
AWS, A., 2022. AWS IoT twinmaker: Optimize operations by easily creating digital
twins of real-world systems. URL www.aws.amazon.com/iot-twinmaker/. (Accessed
5 October 2022).
Bachiega, N.G., Souza, P.S., Bruschi, S.M., De Souza, S.D.R., 2018. Container-based
performance evaluation: A survey and challenges. In: 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Cloud Engineering. (IC2E), IEEE, pp. 398–403.
Banchs, A., Fiore, M., Garcia-Saavedra, A., Gramaglia, M., 2021. Network intelligence
in 6G: Challenges and opportunities. In: Proceedings of the 16th ACM Workshop
on Mobility in the Evolving Internet Architecture. Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, ISBN: 9781450387064, pp. 7–12. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1145/3477091.3482761.
Barakabitze, A.A., Ahmad, A., Mijumbi, R., Hines, A., 2020. 5G network slicing using
SDN and NFV: A survey of taxonomy, architectures and future challenges. Comput.
Netw. 167, 106984.
Basharat, S., Hassan, S.A., Pervaiz, H., Mahmood, A., Ding, Z., Gidlund, M., 2021.
Reconfigurable intelligent surfaces: Potentials, applications, and challenges for 6G
wireless networks. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 28 (6), 184–191. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/MWC.011.2100016.
Benzaid, C., Taleb, T., 2020a. AI-driven zero touch network and service management in
5G and beyond: Challenges and research directions. IEEE Netw. 34 (2), 186–194.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.001.1900252.
Benzaid, C., Taleb, T., 2020b. AI-driven zero touch network and service management in
5G and beyond: Challenges and research directions. IEEE Netw. 34 (2), 186–194.
Bhat, J.R., Alqahtani, S.A., 2021. 6G ecosystem: Current status and future perspective.
IEEE Access 9, 43134–43167. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3054833.
Bonati, L., D’Oro, S., Bertizzolo, L., Demirors, E., Guan, Z., Basagni, S., Melodia, T.,
2020. CellOS: Zero-touch softwarized open cellular networks. Comput. Netw. 180,
107380.
Bonati, L., D’Oro, S., Polese, M., Basagni, S., Melodia, T., 2021a. Intelligence and
learning in O-RAN for data-driven NextG cellular networks. IEEE Commun. Mag.
59 (10), 21–27. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.101.2001120.
Bonati, L., et al., 2021b. Intelligence and learning in O-RAN for data-driven nextg
cellular journal=IEEE Commun. Mag., networks. 59 (10), 21–27. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/MCOM.101.2001120.
Borghesi, A., Burrello, A., Bartolini, A., 2021. ExaMon-x: A predictive maintenance
framework for automatic monitoring in industrial IoT systems. IEEE Internet Things
J. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.3125885.
Bunyakitanon, M., et al., 2020. End-to-end performance-based autonomous VNF placement with adopted reinforcement learning. IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw. 6
(2), 534–547.
Calvo, R.A., D’Mello, S., 2010. Affect detection: An interdisciplinary review of models,
methods, and their applications. IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 1 (1), 18–37. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/T-AFFC.2010.1.
Cao, K., Wei, T., et al., 2021. Exploring reliable edge-cloud computing for service
latency optimization in sustainable cyber-physical systems. Softw. - Pract. Exp. 51
(11), 2225–2237.
Cao, Y., et al., 2020. Multi-tenant provisioning for quantum key distribution networks
with heuristics and reinforcement learning: A comparative study. IEEE Trans. Netw.
Serv. Manag. 17 (2), 946–957. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2020.2964003.
Carayannis, E.G., Draper, J., Bhaneja, B., 2021. Towards fusion energy in the industry
5.0 and society 5.0 context: Call for a global commission for urgent action on fusion
energy. J. Knowl. Econ. 12 (4), 1891–1904. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13132-
020-00695-5.
Casati, F., et al., 2019. Operating enterprise AI as a service. In: International Conference
on Service-Oriented Computing. Springer, pp. 331–344.
Chatterjee, S., NS, S., 2023. Impact of AI regulation and governance on online personal
data sharing: from sociolegal, technology and policy perspective. J. Sci. Technol.
Policy Manag. 14 (1), 157–180.
Chaudhary, R., et al., 2018. Optimized big data management across multi-cloud data
centers: Software-defined-network-based analysis. IEEE Commun. Mag. 56 (2),
118–126. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2018.1700211.
Chen, C.-H., Liu, C.-T., 2021. A 3.5-tier container-based edge computing architecture.
Comput. Electr. Eng. 93, 107227.
Chen, K.-C., et al., 2020. Wireless networked multirobot systems in smart factories.
Proc. IEEE 109 (4), 468–494.
Cheng, L., Guo, R., et al., 2022a. Evaluation methods and measures for causal
learning algorithms. IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAI.
2022.3150264.
Cheng, R., Wu, N., Chen, S., Han, B., 2022b. Will metaverse be nextg internet? Vision,
hype, and reality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12894.
Chergui, H., et al., 2021. Zero-touch AI-driven distributed management for energyefficient 6G massive network slicing. IEEE Netw. 35 (6), 43–49. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/MNET.111.2100322.
Chin, S.T.S., 2021. Influence of emotional intelligence on the workforce for industry 5.0.
J. Hum. Resour. Manag.s Res. 2021, 1–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.5171/2021.882278.
Choi, J.-y., Cho, M., Kim, J.-S., 2021. Employing vertical elasticity for efficient big data
processing in container-based cloud environments. Appl. Sci. 11 (13), 6200.
Chowdhury, S.R., et al., 2019. Re-architecting NFV ecosystem with microservices: State
of the art and research challenges. IEEE Netw. 33 (3), 168–176. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/MNET.2019.1800082.
Chukhno, N., et al., 2021. D2D-based cooperative positioning paradigm for future
wireless systems: A survey. IEEE Sens. J..
Cicconetti, C., et al., 2020. Toward distributed computing environments with serverless
solutions in edge systems. IEEE Commun. Mag. 58 (3), 40–46. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/MCOM.001.1900498.
Cinque, E., et al., 2020. V2X communication technologies and service requirements for
connected and autonomous driving. In: International Conference of Electrical and
Electronic Technologies for Automotive. (AEIT AUTOMOTIVE), IEEE, pp. 1–6.
Cloud, G., 2022. Supply Chain twin and pulse: Build a digital representation of
your supply chain with end-to-end visibility, alert-driven event management,
analytics, and collaboration across teams. URL www.cloud.google.com/solutions/
supply-chain-twin#section-2. (Accessed 5 October 2022).
Conceição, F., et al., 2021. Empowering industry 4.0 and autonomous drone scouting
use cases through 5G-DIVE solution. In: Joint European Conference on Networks
and Communications & 6G Summit. (EuCNC/6G Summit), IEEE, pp. 265–270.
Cornet, B., et al., 2022. An overview of Wireless Body Area networks for mobile
health applications. IEEE Netw. 36 (1), 76–82. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.
103.2000761.
Dash, S.P., et al., 2022. A cybertwin-based 6G cooperative IoE communication network:
Secrecy outage analysis. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.
2021.3140125.
Demir, K.A., Döven, G., Sezen, B., 2019. Industry 5.0 and human-robot co-working.
Procedia Comput. Sci. 158, 688–695. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2019.09.
104.
Di Francesco, P., et al., 2019. Architecting with microservices: A systematic mapping
study. J. Syst. Softw. 150, 77–97.
Ding, C., Zhou, A., et al., 2020. A cloud-edge collaboration framework for cognitive service. IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TCC.2020.
2997008.
Doyle-Kent, M., Kopacek, P., 2019. Industry 5.0: Is the manufacturing industry on the
cusp of a new revolution? In: International Conference on Production Research. pp.
432–441. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-31343-2_38.
Draghici, A., Ivascu, L., 2022. Sustainability and Innovation in Manufacturing
Enterprises. Springer Singapore.
Du, A., Shen, Y., Zhang, Q., Tseng, L., Aloqaily, M., 2021a. CRACAU: Byzantine machine
learning meets industrial edge computing in industry 5.0. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform.
Early Access, 1–11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3097072.
Du, A., Shen, Y., et al., 2021b. CRACAU: Byzantine machine learning meets industrial
edge computing in industry 5.0. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TII.2021.3097072.
Duan, L., Da Xu, L., 2021. Data analytics in industry 4.0: A survey. Inf. Syst. Front.
1–17.
Duan, Q., Wang, S., Ansari, N., 2020. Convergence of networking and cloud/edge
computing: Status, challenges, and opportunities. IEEE Netw. 34 (6), 148–155.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.011.2000089.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
38
S. Zeb et al.
Duan, Q., et al., 2012. A survey on service-oriented network virtualization toward
convergence of networking and cloud computing. IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag.
9 (4), 373–392. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2012.113012.120310.
van Eck, N.J., et al., 2006. Visualizing the computational intelligence field [application
notes]. IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag. 1 (4), 6–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCI.2006.
329702.
Eclipse fog05, 2022. The end-to-end compute, storage and networking virtualisation
solution. Available: https://fog05.io/. (Accessed 18 April 2022).
Eismann, S., et al., 2021. The state of serverless applications: Collection, characterization, and community consensus. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TSE.2021.3113940.
ElFar, O.A., Chang, C.-K., Leong, H.Y., Peter, A.P., Chew, K.W., Show, P.L., 2021.
Prospects of industry 5.0 in algae: Customization of production and new advance
technology for clean bioenergy generation. Energy Convers. Manage.: X 10, 100048.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecmx.2020.100048.
Elim, H., Zhai, G., 2020. Control system of multitasking interactions between society
5.0 and industry 5.0: A conceptual introduction & its applications. J. Phys.: Conf.
Ser. 1463 (1), 012035. http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1463/1/012035.
Elkhatib, Y., et al., 2017. On using micro-clouds to deliver the fog. IEEE Internet
Comput. 21 (2), 8–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MIC.2017.35.
Faisal, T., et al., 2023. How to design autonomous service level agreements for 6G. IEEE
Commun. Mag. 61 (3), 80–85. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.001.2200131.
Farahsari, P.S., et al., 2022. A survey on indoor positioning systems for IoT-based
applications. IEEE Internet Things J. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2022.
3149048.
Farsi, M., Mishra, R.K., Erkoyuncu, J.A., 2021. Industry 5.0 for sustainable reliability centered maintenance. In: 10th International Conference on Through-Life
Engineering Service. pp. 1–6, SSRN 3944533.
for Research, D.-G., Innovation, E.C., 2021. Industry 5.0: Human-centric, sustainable
and resilient. Eur. Union Publ. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.2777/073781.
Fountaine, T., McCarthy, B., Saleh, T., 2019. Building the AI-powered organization.
Harv. Bus. Rev. 97 (4), 62–73.
Fraga-Lamas, P., Lopes, S.I., Fernandez-Carames, T.M., 2021. Green IoT and edge AI
as key technological enablers for a sustainable transition towards a smart circular
economy: An industry 5.0 use case. Sensors 21 (17), 1–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.
3390/s21175745.
Ganjavi, N., Fazlollahtabar, H., 2021. Integrated sustainable production value measurement model based on lean and six sigma in industry 4.0 context. IEEE Trans. Eng.
Manage. 1–14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2021.3078169.
Garcia-Saavedra, A., Costa-Pérez, X., 2021. O-RAN: Disrupting the virtualized RAN
ecosystem. IEEE Commun. Standards Mag. 5 (4), 96–103. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/MCOMSTD.101.2000014.
Ghosh, A., et al., 2022. SEGA: Secured edge gateway microservices architecture for
iIoT-based machine monitoring. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 18 (3), 1949–1956.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3102158.
Gill, S.S., Buyya, R., 2018. A taxonomy and future directions for sustainable cloud
computing: 360 degree view. ACM Comput. Surv. 51 (5), 1–33.
Gröger, C., 2021. There is no AI without data. Commun. ACM 64 (11), 98–108.
Gudivada, V.N., et al., 2019. Cognitive computing systems: Their potential and the
future. Computer 52 (5), 13–18. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MC.2019.2904940.
Haleem, A., Javaid, M., 2019. Industry 5.0 and its applications in orthopaedics. J. Clin.
Orthop. Trauma 10 (4), 807–808. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcot.2018.12.010.
Han, J., Wu, S., Zhang, X., 2017. Artificial intelligence and industry 5.0. Artif. Intell.
Robotics Res. 6 (4), 135–140. http://dx.doi.org/10.12677/AIRR.2017.64015.
Hashima, S., et al., 2022. On softwarization of intelligence in 6G networks for ultrafast optimal policy selection: Challenges and opportunities. IEEE Netw. 1–9. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.103.2100587.
Hazra, A., et al., 2021. Collaborative AI-enabled intelligent partial service provisioning
in green industrial fog networks. IEEE Internet Things J. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/JIOT.2021.3110910.
He, H., et al., 2021. The challenges and opportunities of human-centred AI for
trustworthy robots and autonomous systems. IEEE Trans. Cogn. Dev. Syst. 1.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TCDS.2021.3132282.
Hong, P., Xue, K., Li, D., et al., 2018. Resource aware routing for service function
chains in SDN and NFV-enabled network. IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput..
Hu, F., Deng, Y., Saad, W., Bennis, M., Aghvami, A.H., 2020. Cellular-connected wireless
virtual reality: Requirements, challenges, and solutions. IEEE Commun. Mag. 58 (5),
105–111.
Huang, Y., Liu, S., et al., 2021. True-data testbed for 5G/B5G intelligent network. Intell.
Converged Netw. 2 (2), 133–149. http://dx.doi.org/10.23919/ICN.2021.0002.
Ibarra-Junquera, V., et al., 2021. Component-based microservices for flexible and
scalable automation of industrial bioprocesses. IEEE Access 9, 58192–58207. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3072040.
(IDC), I.D.C., Sep 2021. Investment in artificial intelligence solutions will accelerate as
businesses seek insights, efficiency, and innovation. URL www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?
containerId=prUS48191221. (Accessed 22 March 2022).
incobots, June 2021. INCOBOTS: Ready for Industry 5.0. URL . (Accessed 30 March
2022).
Jain, D.K., Li, Y., Er, M.J., Xin, Q., Gupta, D., Shankar, K., 2021. Enabling unmanned
aerial vehicle Borne secure communication with classification framework for
industry 5.0. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. Early Access, 1–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TII.2021.3125732.
Jameel, F., et al., 2020a. NOMA-enabled backscatter communications: Toward batteryfree IoT networks. IEEE Internet Things Mag. 3 (4), 95–101. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/IOTM.0001.2000055.
Jameel, F., et al., 2020b. NOMA-enabled backscatter communications: Toward batteryfree IoT networks. IEEE Internet Things Mag. 3 (4), 95–101. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/IOTM.0001.2000055.
Janai, J., Güney, F., Behl, A., Geiger, A., et al., 2020. Computer vision for autonomous
vehicles: Problems, datasets and state of the art. Found Trends® Comput Graph Vis
12 (1–3), 1–308.
Javaid, M., Haleem, A., 2020. Critical components of industry 5.0 towards a successful
adoption in the field of manufacturing. J. Ind. Integr. Manag. 5 (3), 327–348.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S2424862220500141.
Javaid, M., Haleem, A., Singh, R.P., Haq, M.I.U., Raina, A., Suman, R., 2020. Industry
5.0: Potential applications in COVID-19. J. Ind. Integr. Manag. 5 (4), 507–530.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S2424862220500220.
Ji, B., et al., 2021. A survey of computational intelligence for 6G: Key technologies,
applications and trends. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 17 (10), 7145–7154. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3052531.
Jiang, J.-R., 2018. An improved cyber-physical systems architecture for industry 4.0
smart factories. Adv. Mech. Eng. 10 (6), 1687814018784192.
Jiang, Z., Guo, Y., Wang, Z., 2021a. Digital twin to improve the virtual-real integration
of industrial IoT. J. Ind. Inf. Integr. 22, 100196.
Jiang, W., Han, B., et al., 2021b. The road towards 6G: A comprehensive survey.
IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc. 2, 334–366. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/OJCOMS.2021.
3057679.
Jiang, W., et al., 2021c. A seamless train positioning system using a lidar-aided hybrid
integration methodology. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 70 (7), 6371–6384.
Jin, Q., et al., 2019. Guest editorial: Special issue on human-centric cyber social
computing. IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst. 6 (5), 1038–1041. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/TCSS.2019.2941333.
John, M.M., Holmström Olsson, H., Bosch, J., 2020. Architecting AI deployment: A
systematic review of state-of-the-art and state-of-practice literature. In: International
Conference on Software Business. Springer, pp. 14–29.
Kao, L.-C., Liao, W., 2021. 5G intelligent A+: A pioneer multi-access edge computing
solution for 5G private networks. IEEE Commun. Stand. Mag. 5 (1), 78–84. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOMSTD.001.2000036.
Kappes, G., Hatzieleftheriou, A., Anastasiadis, S.V., 2019. Multitenant access control
for cloud-aware distributed filesystems. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.
16 (6), 1070–1085. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2017.2715839.
Khan, L.U., Saad, W., Han, Z., Hossain, E., Hong, C.S., 2021. Federated learning for
internet of things: Recent advances, taxonomy, and open challenges. IEEE Commun.
Surv. Tutor..
Khowaja, S.A., Dev, K., Khuwaja, P., Bellavista, P., 2021a. Toward energy efficient
distributed federated learning for 6g networks. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 28 (6), 34–40.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MWC.012.2100153.
Khowaja, S.A., Dev, K., Qureshi, N.M.F., Khuwaja, P., Foschini, L., 2021b. Towards
industrial private AI: A two-tier framework for data and model security. pp. 1–9,
arXiv, https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.12806.
Khowaja, S.A., Lee, I.H., Dev, K., Jarwar, M.A., Qureshi, N.M.F., 2022. Get your foes
fooled: Proximal gradient split learning for defense against model inversion attacks
on IoMT data. pp. 1–9, arXiv, https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.04569.
Khowaja, S.A., Prabono, A.G., Setiawan, F., Yahya, B.N., Lee, S.-L., 2020. Toward soft
real-time stress detection using wrist-worn devices for human workspaces. Soft
Comput. 25 (4), 2793–2820. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00500-020-05338-0.
Kim, H., Ben-Othman, J., 2020. Toward integrated virtual emotion system with AI
applicability for secure CPS-enabled smart cities: AI-based research challenges and
security issues. IEEE Netw. 34 (3), 30–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.011.
1900299.
Koivisto, M., Talvitie, J., Costa, M., Leppänen, K., Valkama, M., 2018. Joint cmwavebased multiuser positioning and network synchronization in dense 5G networks. In:
2018 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference. (WCNC), IEEE,
pp. 1–6.
Koonen, T., et al., 2021. Beam-steered optical wireless communication for industry 4.0.
IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 27 (6), 1–10.
Kouhini, S.M., et al., 2021. Lifi positioning for industry 4.0. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum
Electron. 27 (6), 1–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSTQE.2021.3095364.
Kyusakov, R., et al., 2013. Integration of wireless sensor and actuator nodes with IT
infrastructure using service-oriented architecture. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 9 (1),
43–51. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2012.2198655.
Lee, L.-H., et al., 2021. All one needs to know about metaverse: A complete survey on
technological singularity, virtual ecosystem, and research agenda. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.05352.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
39
S. Zeb et al.
Leivadeas, A., Falkner, M., 2021. VNF placement problem: A multi-tenant intentbased networking approach. In: 24th Conference on Innovation in Clouds, Internet
and Networks and Workshops. (ICIN), pp. 143–150. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ICIN51074.2021.9385553.
Leivadeas, A., Falkner, M., 2023. A survey on intent-based networking. IEEE Commun.
Surv. Tutor. 25 (1), 625–655. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2022.3215919.
Leng, J., Wang, D., Shen, W., Li, X., Liu, Q., Chen, X., 2021. Digital twins-based
smart manufacturing system design in industry 4.0: A review. J. Manuf. Syst. 60,
119–137.
Letaief, K.B., et al., 2022. Edge artificial intelligence for 6G: Vision, enabling technologies, and applications. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 40 (1), 5–36. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/JSAC.2021.3126076.
Li, S., Deng, W., 2020. Deep facial expression recognition: A survey. IEEE Trans. Affect.
Comput. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2020.2981446.
Li, N., Shepperd, M., Guo, Y., 2020. A systematic review of unsupervised learning
techniques for software defect prediction. Inf. Softw. Technol. 122, 106287.
Li, M., et al., 2021. A systematic review of AI technology-based service encounters:
Implications for hospitality and tourism operations. Int. J. Hosp. Manag. 95,
102930.
Liang, Y., et al., 2018. Deep learning based inference of private information using
embedded sensors in smart devices. IEEE Netw. 32 (4), 8–14. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/MNET.2018.1700349.
Liu, Y., Piao, Y., Zhang, L., 2021a. Research on the positioning of AGV based on lidar.
J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 1920 (1), 012087.
Liu, S., Wang, Z., et al., 2021b. Human-centric relation segmentation: Dataset and
solution. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TPAMI.2021.3075846.
Liu, X., Xu, C., Yu, H., Zeng, P., 2021c. Deep reinforcement learning-based multichannel access for industrial wireless networks with dynamic multi-user priority.
IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3139349.
Liu, M., Yang, J., Gui, G., 2019. DSF-NOMA: UAV-assisted emergency communication
technology in a heterogeneous internet of things. IEEE Internet Things J. 6 (3),
5508–5519.
Liu, X., Zhang, F., et al., 2021d. Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive.
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng..
Liu, H., et al., 2007. Survey of wireless indoor positioning techniques and systems.
IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Part C (Appl. Rev.) 37 (6), 1067–1080. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSMCC.2007.905750.
Liu, X., et al., 2021e. Integrated cooperative spectrum sensing and access control for
cognitive industrial internet of things. IEEE Internet Things J. 1. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/JIOT.2021.3137408.
Lo, S.K., et al., 2022. Towards trustworthy AI: Blockchain-based architecture design for
accountability and fairness of federated learning systems. IEEE Internet Things J.
1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2022.3144450.
Longo, F., Padovano, A., Umbrello, S., 2020. Value-oriented and ethical technology engineering in industry 5.0: A human-centric perspective for the design of the factory
of the future. Appl. Sci. 10 (12), 4182. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/app10124182.
Lu, W., et al., 2020. AI-assisted knowledge-defined network orchestration for energyefficient data center networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 58 (1), 86–92. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/MCOM.001.1800157.
Luo, S., et al., 2018. Scalable linear algebra on a relational database system. IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 31 (7), 1224–1238.
Lv, Z., Guo, J., Lv, H., 2022. Safety poka yoke in zero-defect manufacturing based
on digital twins. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.
3139897.
Lv, Z., Song, H., Basanta-Val, P., Steed, A., Jo, M., 2017. Next-generation big data
analytics: State of the art, challenges, and future research topics. IEEE Trans. Ind.
Inform. 13 (4), 1891–1899. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2017.2650204.
Ma, J., Liu, J., et al., 2021. Multitask learning for visual question answering. IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 1–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3105284.
Ma, S., et al., 2020. Hierarchical optimization for green product line design. IEEE Trans.
Eng. Manage. 1–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2020.2978012.
Maddikunta, P.K.R.o., 2021. Industry 5.0: A survey on enabling technologies and
potential applications. J. Ind. Inf. Integr. 1–19. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.
2021.100257, in press.
Maddikunta, P.K.R., et al., 2021. Industry 5.0: A survey on enabling technologies and
potential applications. J. Ind. Inf. Integr. 100257.
Mahmood, A., Abedin, S.F., Sauter, T., Gidlund, M., Landernas, K., 2022a. Factory 5G:
A review of industry-centric features and deployment options. IEEE Ind. Electron.
Mag. 2–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MIE.2022.3149209.
Mahmood, A., Ashraf, M.I., et al., 2019. Time synchronization in 5G wireless edge:
Requirements and solutions for critical-MTC. IEEE Commun. Mag. 57 (12), 45–51.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.001.1900379.
Mahmood, A., Beltramelli, L., et al., 2022b. Industrial IoT in 5G-and-beyond networks:
Vision, architecture, and design trends. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 18 (6), 4122–4137.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3115697.
Mahmood, N.H., et al., 2021. Machine type communications: Key drivers and enablers
towards the 6G era. EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Networking 2021 (1), 1–25.
Maija, B., Lars, D.N., Athanasios, P., 2021. Towards a sustainable, human-centric and
resilient European industry. Publ. Office Eur. Union 1–48. http://dx.doi.org/10.
2777/308407.
Markakis, E., et al., 2017. EXEGESIS: Extreme edge resource harvesting for a virtualized
fog environment. IEEE Commun. Mag. 55 (7), 173–179. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
MCOM.2017.1600730.
Marques, B., Silva, S.S., et al., 2021. A conceptual model and taxonomy for collaborative
augmented reality. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graphics 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TVCG.2021.3101545.
Martynov, V.V., Shavaleeva, D.N., Zaytseva, A.A., 2019. Information technology as the
basis for transformation into a digital society and industry 5.0. In: International
Conference ‘‘Quality Management, Transport and Information Security, Information
Technologies’’. pp. 539–543. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ITQMIS.2019.8928305.
Megargel, A., Shankararaman, V., Walker, D.K., 2020. Migrating from monoliths to
cloud-based microservices: A banking industry example. In: Software Engineering
in the Era of Cloud Computing. Springer, pp. 85–108.
Mendoza-Pitti, L., et al., 2021. Towards a service-oriented architecture for the energy
efficiency of buildings: A systematic review. IEEE Access 9, 26119–26137. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3057543.
Microsoft, 2022. Azure digital twins: Use IoT spatial intelligence to create models
of physical environments. URL www.azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/digitaltwins/#overview. (Accessed 5 October 2022).
Minerva, R., Lee, G.M., Crespi, N., 2020. Digital twin in the IoT context: A survey
on technical features, scenarios, and architectural models. Proc. IEEE 108 (10),
1785–1824. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2020.2998530.
Mohamed, A., Najafabadi, M.K., Wah, Y.B., Zaman, E.A.K., Maskat, R., 2020. The state
of the art and taxonomy of big data analytics: view from new big data framework.
Artif. Intell. Rev. 53 (2), 989–1037.
Mollahasani, S., Erol-Kantarci, M., Wilson, R., 2021. Dynamic CU-DU selection for
resource allocation in O-RAN using actor-critic learning. In: IEEE GLOBECOM. pp.
1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/GLOBECOM46510.2021.9685837.
Mortlock, T., et al., 2022. Graph learning for cognitive digital twins in manufacturing
systems. IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top. Comput. 10 (1), 34–45. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TETC.2021.3132251.
Muller, J., 2020. Enabling technologies for industry 5.0: Results of a workshop with
europe’s technology leaders. Eur. Union Publ. 1–19. http://dx.doi.org/10.2777/
082634.
Nahavandi, S., 2019. Industry 5.0 - A human centric solution. Sustainability 11 (16),
4371. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/su11164371.
Nations, U., July 2017. Work of the Statistical Commission pertaining to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. URL . (Accessed 16 March 2022).
Nayak, S., Pargiri, R., 2020. 6G communication: Envisioning the key issues and
challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04024.
Niknam, S., Roy, A., Dhillon, H.S., Singh, S., Banerji, R., Reed, J.H., Saxena, N.,
Yoon, S., 2020. Intelligent O-RAN for beyond 5G and 6G wireless networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.08374.
Nikonowicz, J., Mahmood, A., Ashraf, M.I., Björnson, E., Gidlund, M., 2022. Indoor positioning trends in 5G-advanced: Challenges and solution towards centimeter-level
accuracy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.01183.
Ning, H., et al., 2021. A survey on metaverse: The state-of-the-art, technologies,
applications, and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09673.
Niyato, D., Kim, D.I., Maso, M., Han, Z., 2017. Wireless powered communication
networks: Research directions and technological approaches. IEEE Wirel. Commun.
24 (6), 88–97. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MWC.2017.1600116.
O-RAN Alliance, 2023. Operator defined open and intelligent radio access networks.
Available: https://www.o-ran.org/. (Accessed 01 November 2023).
Obeidat, H., et al., 2021. A review of indoor localization techniques and wireless
technologies. Wirel. Pers. Commun. 119 (1), 289–327.
Ozdemir, V., Hekim, N., 2018. Birth of industry 5.0: Making sense of big data with
artificial intelligence, "the internet of things" and next-generation technology policy.
OMICS: J. Interact. Biol. 22 (1), 65–76. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/omi.2017.0194.
Park, S.-M., Kim, Y.-G., 2022. A metaverse: Taxonomy, components, applications, and
open challenges. IEEE Access.
Pelle, I., et al., 2021. Operating latency sensitive applications on public serverless edge
cloud platforms. IEEE Internet Things J. 8 (10), 7954–7972. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/JIOT.2020.3042428.
Peng, G., Wang, H., Dong, J., Zhang, H., 2018. Knowledge-based resource allocation
for collaborative simulation development in a multi-tenant cloud computing environment. IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput. 11 (2), 306–317. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TSC.2016.2518161.
Picard, R.W., 2000. Affective Computing. MIT Press.
Polese, M., Bonati, L., D’Oro, S., Basagni, S., Melodia, T., 2022. Understanding ORAN: Architecture, interfaces, algorithms, security, and research challenges. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2202.01032.
Ponnimbaduge Perera, T.D., et al., 2018. Simultaneous wireless information and power
transfer (SWIPT): Recent advances and future challenges. IEEE Commun. Surv.
Tutor. 20 (1), 264–302. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2017.2783901.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
40
S. Zeb et al.
Potrč, S., et al., 2021. Sustainable renewable energy supply networks optimization–the
gradual transition to a renewable energy system within the European union by
2050. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 146, 111186.
Powell, D., et al., 2022. Advancing zero defect manufacturing: A state-of-the-art
perspective and future research directions. Comput. Ind. 136, 103596.
Prados-Garzon, J., et al., 2021. Asynchronous time-sensitive networking for industrial
networks. In: Joint European Conference on Networks and Communications & 6G
Summit (EuCNC/6G Summit). IEEE, pp. 130–135.
Proia, S., et al., 2021. Control techniques for safe, ergonomic, and efficient human-robot
collaboration in the digital industry: A survey. IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng. 1–22.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2021.3131011.
Rachmawati, I., Multisari, W., Triyono, T., Simon, I.M., Costa, A.d., 2021. Prevalence
of academic resilience of social science students in facing the industry 5.0 era. Int.
J. Eval. Res. Educ. 10 (2), 676–683. http://dx.doi.org/10.11591/ijere.v10i2.21175.
Ramanathan, S., et al., 2021. Live migration of virtual machine and container
based mobile core network components: A comprehensive study. IEEE Access 9,
105082–105100. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3099370.
Ranjha, A., et al., 2021. Facilitating URLLC in UAV-assisted relay systems with multiplemobile robots for 6G networks: A prospective of agriculture 4.0. IEEE Trans. Ind.
Inform. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3131608.
Ray, P.P., Kumar, N., Guizani, M., 2021. A vision on 6G-enabled NIB: Requirements,
technologies, deployments, and prospects. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 28 (4), 120–127.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MWC.001.2000384.
Research, A.M., June 2021. Tracking-as-a-Service Market by Component (Software and
Service) Insights: 2030. URL . (Accessed 28 March 2022).
Research, Innovation, 2020. Enabling Technologies for Industry 5.0. URL . (Accessed
20 March 2022).
Research, Innovation, 2021. Industry 5.0. URL . (Accessed 20 March 2022).
Research, Innovation, Jan 2022. Industry 5.0, a transformative vision for Europe. URL
. (Accessed 20 March 2022).
Rosa, R.L., et al., 2021. An energy-autonomous wireless sensor with simultaneous
energy harvesting and ambient light sensing. IEEE Sens. J. 21 (12), 13744–13752.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2021.3068134.
Roy, C., et al., 2021. Micro-safe: Microservices- and deep learning-based safety-as-aservice architecture for 6G-enabled intelligent transportation system. IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst. 1–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2021.3110725.
Rubab, N., Zeb, S., et al., 2022. Interference mitigation in RIS-assisted 6G systems for
indoor industrial IoT networks. In: 2022 IEEE 12th Sensor Array and Multichannel Signal Processing Workshop. (SAM), pp. 211–215. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
SAM53842.2022.9827809.
Rupa, C., et al., 2021. Industry 5.0: Ethereum blockchain technology based dapp smart
contract. Math. Biosci. Eng. 18 (5), 7010–7027. http://dx.doi.org/10.3934/mbe.
2021349.
Saadati, Z., Barenji, R.V., 2022. Toward industry 5.0: cognitive cyber-physical system.
In: Industry 4.0: Technologies, Applications, and Challenges. Springer, pp. 257–268.
Salvaris, M., Dean, D., Tok, W.H., 2018. Microsoft AI platform. In: Deep Learning with
Azure. Springer, pp. 79–98.
Schein, K.E., Rauschnabel, P.A., 2021. Augmented reality in manufacturing: Exploring
workers’ perceptions of barriers. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage. 1–14. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/TEM.2021.3093833.
Schluse, M., Priggemeyer, M., Atorf, L., Rossmann, J., 2018. Experimentable digital twins—Streamlining simulation-based systems engineering for industry 4.0.
IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 14 (4), 1722–1731. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2018.
2804917.
Setiawan, F., Prabono, A.G., Khowaja, S.A., Kim, W., Park, K., Yahya, B.N., Lee, S.-L.,
Hong, J.P., 2020. Fine-grained emotion recognition: Fusion of physiological signals
and facial expressions on spontaneous emotion corpus. Int. J. Ad Hoc Ubiquitous
Comput. 35 (3), 162–178. http://dx.doi.org/10.1504/IJAHUC.2020.110824.
Shahzadi, S., Iqbal, M., Chaudhry, N.R., 2021. 6G vision: Toward future collaborative
cognitive communication (3C) systems. IEEE Commun. Stand. Mag. 5 (2), 60–67.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOMSTD.001.2000044.
Shao, S., et al., 2021. Data trusted sharing delivery: A blockchain assisted softwaredefined content delivery network. IEEE Internet Things J. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/JIOT.2021.3124091.
Sharma, M., Sehrawat, R., Luthra, S., Daim, T., Bakry, D., 2022. Moving towards
industry 5.0 in the pharmaceutical manufacturing sector: Challenges and solutions
for Germany. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage..
Sharma, S., Singh, G., Sharma, M., 2021. A comprehensive review and analysis of
supervised-learning and soft computing techniques for stress diagnosis in humans.
Comput. Biol. Med. 134, 104450.
Shi, Y., Lian, L., Shi, Y., Wang, Z., Zhou, Y., Fu, L., Bai, L., Zhang, J., Zhang, W.,
2023. Machine learning for large-scale optimization in 6G wireless networks. IEEE
Commun. Surv. Tutor. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2023.3300664.
Sicari, S., Rizzardi, A., Coen-Porisini, A., 2022. Security & privacy issues and challenges
in noSQL databases. Comput. Netw. 108828.
Sindhwani, R., Afridi, S., Kumar, A., Banaitis, A., Luthra, S., Singh, P.L., 2022. Can
industry 5.0 revolutionize the wave of resilience and social value creation? A
multi-criteria framework to analyze enablers. Technol. Soc. Early access, 101887.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2022.101887.
Soltanali, H., Rohani, A., et al., 2021. A comparative study of statistical and soft
computing techniques for reliability prediction of automotive manufacturing. Appl.
Soft Comput. 98, 106738.
Song, H., Chauvel, F., Nguyen, P.H., 2020. Using microservices to customize
multi-tenant software-as-a-service. In: Microservices. Springer, pp. 299–331.
Stergiou, C., Psannis, K.E., Gupta, B.B., Ishibashi, Y., 2018. Security, privacy &
efficiency of sustainable cloud computing for big data & IoT. Sustain. Comput.:
Inform. Syst. 19, 174–184.
Strazdas, D., et al., 2020. Robots and wizards: An investigation into natural human–
robot interaction. IEEE Access 8, 207635–207642. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2020.3037724.
Sud, K., 2020. Understanding REST APIs. In: Practical Hapi. Springer, pp. 1–11.
Sun, Y., Peng, M., et al., 2021. Harmonizing artificial intelligence with radio access
networks: Advances, case study, and open issues. IEEE Netw. 35 (4), 144–151.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.011.2000656.
Sun, Y., Qin, S., Feng, G., Zhang, L., Imran, M.A., 2020. Service provisioning framework
for RAN slicing: User admissibility, slice association and bandwidth allocation. IEEE
Trans. Mob. Comput. 20 (12), 3409–3422.
Sun, J., et al., 2022. Robust beamforming for localization-aided millimeter wave
communication systems. IEEE Wirel. Commun. Lett. 11 (6), 1278–1282. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/LWC.2022.3164153.
Systems, K.R., Jan 2021. Matrix production: an example for Industrie 4.0. URL .
(Accessed 10 March 2022).
Tange, K., et al., 2020. A systematic survey of industrial internet of things security:
Requirements and fog computing opportunities. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 22 (4),
2489–2520. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2020.3011208.
Tataria, H., et al., 2021. 6G wireless systems: Vision, requirements, challenges, insights,
and opportunities. Proc. IEEE 109 (7), 1166–1199. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
JPROC.2021.3061701.
Thakur, P., Sehgal, V.K., 2021. Emerging architecture for heterogeneous smart cyberphysical systems for industry 5.0. Comput. Ind. Eng. 162, 107750. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.cie.2021.107750.
Tsang, Y., Wu, C., et al., 2021. Unlocking the power of big data analytics in new
product development: An intelligent product design framework in the furniture
industry. J. Manuf. Syst..
Tuli, S., et al., 2022. HUNTER: AI based holistic resource management for sustainable
cloud computing. J. Syst. Softw. 184, 111124.
Tzanakaki, A., et al., 2013. Virtualization of heterogeneous wireless-optical network
and it infrastructures in support of cloud and mobile cloud services. IEEE Commun.
Mag. 51 (8), 155–161. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2013.6576354.
Ullah, S.A., et al., 2022. Deep RL-assisted energy harvesting in CR-NOMA communications for NextG IoT networks. In: 2022 IEEE Globecom Workshops. (GC Wkshps),
pp. 74–79. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/GCWkshps56602.2022.10008522.
Vakaruk, S., et al., 2021. Forecasting automated guided vehicle malfunctioning with
deep learning in a 5G-based industry 4.0 scenario. IEEE Commun. Mag. 59 (11),
102–108. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.221.2001079.
Villamizar, M., et al., 2015. Evaluating the monolithic and the microservice architecture
pattern to deploy web applications in the cloud. In: 2015 10th Computing Colombian Conference. (10CCC), pp. 583–590. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ColumbianCC.
2015.7333476.
Vinuesa, R., et al., 2020. The role of artificial intelligence in achieving the sustainable
development goals. Nature Commun. 11 (1), 1–10.
Vitturi, S., Zunino, C., Sauter, T., 2019. Industrial communication systems and their
future challenges: Next-generation ethernet, IIoT, and 5G. Proc. IEEE 107 (6),
944–961. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2019.2913443.
Wang, Y., Forbes, R., Elzur, U., Strassner, J., et al., 2020a. From design to practice:
ETSI ENI reference architecture and instantiation for network management and
orchestration using artificial intelligence. IEEE Commun. Std. Mag. 4 (3), 38–45.
Wang, Y., Kinsner, W., Zhang, D., 2009. Contemporary cybernetics and its facets of
cognitive informatics and computational intelligence. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern.
B 39 (4), 823–833. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSMCB.2009.2013721.
Wang, F.-Y., Qin, R., Wang, X., Hu, B., 2022a. MetaSocieties in metaverse: MetaEconomics and MetaManagement for MetaEnterprises and MetaCities. IEEE Trans.
Comput. Soc. Syst. 9 (1), 2–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TCSS.2022.3145165.
Wang, S., Qureshi, M.A., Miralles-Pechuan, L., Huynh-The, T., Gadekally, T.R., Liyanage, M., 2021a. Explainable AI for B5G/6G: technical aspects, use cases, and
research challenges. pp. 1–44, arXiv, https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.04698.
Wang, Y., Song, W., et al., 2022b. A systematic review on affective computing: Emotion
models, databases, and recent advances. Inf. Fusion.
Wang, D., Yang, K., Xin, J., 2021b. A computational developmental model of perceptual
learning for mobile robot. IEEE Trans. Cogn. Dev. Syst. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TCDS.2021.3128179.
Wang, P., et al., 2019a. Data fusion in cyber-physical-social systems: State-of-the-art
and perspectives. Inf. Fusion 51, 42–57.
Wang, X., et al., 2019b. A tensor-based big-data-driven routing recommendation
approach for heterogeneous networks. IEEE Netw. 33 (1), 64–69. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/MNET.2018.1800192.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
41
S. Zeb et al.
Wang, Y., et al., 2020b. Smart additive manufacturing: Current artificial intelligenceenabled methods and future perspectives. Sci. China Technol. Sci. 63 (9),
1600–1611.
Wang, Q., et al., 2021c. Digital twin for human-robot interactive welding and welder
behavior analysis. IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sin. 8 (2), 334–343. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/JAS.2020.1003518.
Wang, Z., et al., 2022c. Mobility digital twin: Concept, architecture, case study, and
future challenges. IEEE Internet Things J. 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2022.
3156028.
Wollschlaeger, M., Sauter, T., Jasperneite, J., 2017. The future of industrial communication: Automation networks in the era of the internet of things and Industry 4.0. IEEE
Ind. Electron. Mag. 11 (1), 17–27. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MIE.2017.2649104.
Xiloyannis, M., et al., 2021. Soft robotic suits: State of the art, core technologies, and
open challenges. IEEE Trans. Robot. 1–20. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2021.
3084466.
Xu, X., Lu, Y., Vogel-Heuser, B., Wang, L., 2021a. Industry 4.0 and industry
5.0—Inception, conception and perception. J. Manuf. Syst. 61, 530–535.
Xu, J., Yang, G., Sun, Y., Picek, S., 2021b. A multi-sensor information fusion
method based on factor graph for integrated navigation system. IEEE Access 9,
12044–12054.
Xu, F., et al., 2021c. <Formula><tex>𝜆𝐷𝑁𝑁</tex></formula>: Achieving predictable
distributed DNN training with serverless architectures. IEEE Trans. Comput. 1.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TC.2021.3054656.
Yang, B., et al., 2018. Cost-efficient NFV-enabled mobile edge-cloud for low latency
mobile applications. IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. 15 (1), 475–488. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2018.2790081.
Yetış, H., et al., 2020. Optimization of mass customization process using quantuminspired evolutionary algorithm in industry 4.0. In: IEEE International Symposium
on Systems Engineering. pp. 1–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISSE49799.2020.
9272247.
Yin, Y., Huang, Q., Gao, H., Xu, Y., 2021. Personalized APIs recommendation with
cognitive knowledge mining for industrial systems. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 17
(9), 6153–6161. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2020.3039500.
Zaidi, S.A.R., Shakir, M.Z., et al., 2020. Guest editorial: Design and analysis of
communication interfaces for industry 4.0. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 38 (5),
797–802. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSAC.2020.2983815.
Zeb, S., Mahmood, A., et al., 2022a. Industrial digital twins at the nexus of nextg
wireless networks and computational intelligence: A survey. J. Netw. Comput. Appl.
103309.
Zeb, S., Rathore, M.A., Hassan, S.A., Raza, S., Dev, K., Fortino, G., 2023. Toward
AI-enabled nextg networks with edge intelligence-assisted microservice orchestration. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 30 (3), 148–156. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MWC.015.
2200461.
Zeb, S., Rathore, M.A., et al., 2021. Edge intelligence in softwarized 6G: Deep learningenabled network traffic predictions. In: 2021 IEEE Globecom Workshops. pp. 1–6.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/GCWkshps52748.2021.9682131.
Zeb, S., et al., 2020a. Impact of indoor multipath channels on timing advance for URLLC
in industrial IoT. In: IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops.
(ICC Workshops), pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICCWorkshops49005.2020.
9145066.
Zeb, S., et al., 2020b. On TOA-based ranging over mmwave 5G for indoor industrial
IoT networks. In: IEEE Globecom Workshops. (GC Wkshps, pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/GCWkshps50303.2020.9367555.
Zeb, S., et al., 2022b. Analysis of beyond 5G integrated communication and ranging
services under indoor 3D mmwave stochastic channels. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 1.
Zhang, Y., Ives, Z.G., 2020. Finding related tables in data lakes for interactive
data science. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD International Conference on
Management of Data. pp. 1951–1966.
Zhang, K., et al., 2022. A coordinated multi-energy trading framework for strategic
hydrogen provider in electricity and hydrogen markets. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 1.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2022.3154611.
Zhou, X., et al., 2022. 2D federated learning for personalized human activity recognition
in cyber-physical-social systems. IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng. 1. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/TNSE.2022.3144699.
Shah Zeb received the B.E. degree in Electrical Engineering
(EE) from the University of Engineering and Technology,
Peshawar, Pakistan, in 2016. He received the M.S. degree in Electrical Engineering from National University of
Sciences and Technology (NUST), Pakistan, in 2019. He
is currently pursuing Ph.D. degree in EE at NUST, Pakistan, where he works as a Research Associate with the
Information Processing and Transmission (IPT) Lab, School
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (SEECS),
NUST, Pakistan. His research interests include emergingenablers for Beyond-5G/6G wireless networks and industrial
communication.
Aamir Mahmood received the B.E. degree in electrical
engineering from the National University of Sciences and
Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan, in 2002, and the M.Sc.
and D.Sc. degrees in communications engineering from the
Aalto University School of Electrical Engineering, Espoo,
Finland, in 2008 and 2014, respectively. He worked as
a Research Intern with Nokia Research Center, Helsinki,
Finland, in 2014, a Visiting Researcher with Aalto University
from 2015 to 2016, and a Postdoctoral Researcher with
Mid Sweden University, Sundsvall, Sweden, from 2016 to
2018, where he has been an Assistant Professor with the
Department of Information Systems and Technology, since
2019. His research interests include Industrial IoT, 5GTSN integration, AI/ML for radio network optimization and
management, RF interference and coexistence management,
network time synchronization, and wireless positioning.
Sunder Ali Khowaja received the Ph.D. degree in Industrial
Information Systems Engineering from Hankuk University of
Foreign Studies, South Korea. He is currently an Assistant
Professor at Department of Telecommunication Engineering,
University of Sindh, Pakistan. He is also a regular reviewer
of notable journals including IEEE Transactions, IET, Elsevier, and Springer Journals. He has also served as a TPC
member for workshops in A* conferences such as Globecom
and Mobicom. His research interests include Data Analytics
& Machine Learning for Computer Vision applications.
Kapal Dev is currently serving as Assistant Lecturer at Munster Technological University (MTU), Ireland and formerly
he was senior researcher at same University. Previously,
he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with the CONNECT
Centre, Trinity College Dublin (TCD). He is founding chair
of IEEE ComSoc special interested group titled as Industrial
Communication Networks. He is serving as Associate Editor
in NATURE, Scientific Reports, Springer WINE, HCIS, IET
Quantum Communication, IET Networks, Area Editor in
Elsevier PHYCOM. He performed duties as Guest Editor (GE)
in IEEE Network, IEEE TII, IEEE TNSE, IEEE TGCN, IEEE
STDCOMM. He has published over 40 research papers majorly in top IEEE Transactions, Magazines and Conferences.
His research interests include Wireless Communication
Networks, Blockchain and Artificial Intelligence.
Syed Ali Hassan received the B.E. degree in electrical
engineering from the National University of Sciences &
Technology (NUST), Islamabad, Pakistan, in 2004, the M.S.
degree in mathematics from Georgia Tech in 2011, and the
M.S. degree in electrical engineering from the University of
Stuttgart, Germany, in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, USA, in 2011. His research interests include signal
processing for communications with a focus on cooperative
communications for wireless networks, stochastic modeling,
estimation and detection theory, and smart grid communications. He is currently working as an Associate Professor with
the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
(SEECS), NUST, where he is the Director of the Information
Processing and Transmission (IPT) Lab, which focuses on
various aspects of theoretical communications. He was a
Visiting Professor with Georgia Tech in Fall 2017. He also
held industry positions with Cisco Systems Inc., CA, USA,
and with Center for Advanced Research in Engineering,
Islamabad.
Mikael Gidlund received the Licentiate of Engineering
degree in radio communication systems from the KTH Royal
Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, in 2004, and
the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Mid Sweden
University, Sundsvall, Sweden, in 2005. From 2008 to 2015,
he was a Senior Principal Scientist and a Global Research
Area Coordinator of Wireless Technologies with ABB Corporate Research, Västerås, Sweden. From 2007 to 2008, he
was a Project Manager and a Senior Specialist with Nera
Networks AS, Bergen, Norway. From 2006 to 2007, he was
a Research Engineer and a Project Manager with Acreo AB,
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 223 (2024) 103796
42
S. Zeb et al.
Hudiksvall, Sweden. Since 2015, he has been a Professor of
Computer Engineering at Mid Sweden University. He holds
more than 20 patents (granted and pending applications) in
the area of wireless communication. His current research
interests include wireless communication and networks,
wireless sensor networks, access protocols, and security. Dr.
Gidlund is an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS.
Paulo Bellavista received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees
in computer science engineering from the University of
Bologna, Italy. He is currently a Full Professor of distributed
and mobile systems with the University of Bologna. His
research interests include from pervasive wireless computing
to online big data processing under quality constraints and
from edge cloud computing to middleware for industry 4.0
applications. He serves on several editorial boards, including IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS
(Associate EiC), ACM CSUR, JNCA (Elsevier), and PMC
(Elsevier). He is the Scientific Coordinator of the H2020
BigData Project IoTwins.