Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Acta Astronautica
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/actaastro
Towards disruptions in Earth observation? New Earth Observation systems
and markets evolution: Possible scenarios and impacts☆
Gil Denisa,⁎
, Alain Claveriea
, Xavier Pascob
, Jean-Pierre Darnisc
, Benoît de Maupeoua
,
Murielle Lafayed
, Eric Morela
a Airbus Defence and Space, 31 rue des cosmonautes, 31402 Toulouse, France
b Fondation pour la Recherche Stratégique, 4 bis rue des pâtures, 75016 Paris, France
c Istituto Affari Internazionali,Internazionali, Via Angelo Brunetti, 9, 00186 Roma, Italy d Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales, 18 avenue Edouard Belin, 31401 Toulouse, France
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Earth Observation
New space
Very high resolution
Revisit
GEOINT
Constellations
Services
Business models
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the trends in Earth observation (EO) and the possible impacts on markets of the new
initiatives, launched either by existing providers of EO data or by new players, privately funded. After a
presentation of the existing models, the paper discusses the new approaches, addressing both commercial and
institutional markets. New concepts for the very high resolution markets, in Europe and in the US, are the main
focus of this analysis. Two complementary perspectives are summarised: on the one hand, the type of system
and its operational performance and, on the other, the related business models, concepts of operation and
ownership schemes.
Until now, Earth observation systems for the most critical institutional needs are mainly dedicated assets
owned and operated by governments or public organisations, often at national level. Even in the case of dual use
missions, the governmental and commercial operations are in general fully segregated for the very high
resolution satellites.
Recent evolutions could affect this paradigm. Firstly, the increased performance of commercial satellites has
a high degree of convergence with defence needs: 25–30 cm resolution is now the benchmark or at least a very
short term target for commercial missions. The second evolution is the development of hybrid procurement
schemes, combining proprietary missions and data buy framework contracts, partly triggered by the budgetary
constraints of public customers, some failures in the execution of large spy satellites contracts and by the
willingness to foster the competitiveness of industry on the export market.
New space is another trend, which is more disruptive. This trend begun in the Silicon Valley and spread
worldwide, arousing our expectations, sometimes excessively. This new model involves not only start-ups but
also big web actors with substantial investment capacity. Both aim to transforming space into a commodity,
taking benefit from the convergence between Information technology and EO. Beside the massive constellations
for broadband Internet access, some initiatives have been launched for Earth observation markets, targeting
high resolution and high revisit. Last but not least, more and more countries, the newcomers, invest in their own
EO capacity, confirming the soft power dimension of space but also opening new opportunities for international
or regional cooperation.
As many unpredictable events may occur, even in a short time frame, the last part of the paper has a
prospective dimension. Based on market trends and industrial stakes, it discusses the realism and likelihood of
possible scenarios and identifies their impacts on the EO landscape and the main stakeholders involved, in
particular in Europe:
– The governmental and institutional actors, using Earth observation data for their operational missions, with
an evolving balance between sovereign assets and external services.
– The commercial operators of very high resolution satellites, with the new market opportunities and the
possible emergence of worldwide champions.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2017.04.034
Received 16 December 2016; Accepted 26 April 2017
☆ Special thanks to Fabienne Grazzini, Nathalie Pisot, Marie-Christine Delucq, Rob Postma, Laura-Kate Wilson, Magalie Vaissière (ESA), David Hello (Terranis), Lionel Kerrelo
(GEO4i). ⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: gil.denis@airbus.com (G. Denis), alain.claverie@airbus.com (A. Claverie), x.pasco@frstrategie.org (X. Pasco), jp.darnis@iai.it (J.-P. Darnis),
benoit.demaupeou@airbus.com (B. de Maupeou), murielle.lafaye@cnes.fr (M. Lafaye), eric.morel@airbus.com (E. Morel).
Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
Available online 04 May 2017
0094-5765/ © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of IAA. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).
MARK
– The satellite manufacturers and their competitiveness.
– The role of nations and space agencies, including the non-dependence or national sovereignty and
international cooperation dimensions.
Based on the comparison of three “radical” scenarios, the conclusion shows that there are opportunities for
service providers and satellite manufacturers. Even without clear answer to the future industrial, technical and
political structure of EO systems, relevant indicators to be monitored during the next three-five years are
identified. The last section focuses on Europe and the role of institutions in order to support European
champions and small and medium companies in the new worldwide competition.
1. Objectives and structure of the paper
1.1. Overview
This paper reviews the new initiatives and new trends in Earth
observation (EO). Addressing both commercial and institutional
applications of optical satellites, new systems and concepts for the
very high resolution markets are the main focus of this analysis.
Earth observation systems for the most critical institutional needs,
including the defence intelligence, are mainly dedicated assets
owned and operated by governments or public organisations.
Recent evolutions, such as the high degree of convergence between
the defence needs and the commercial capacities (30-cm resolution
is the new benchmark), challenge this paradigm. Three categories of
stakeholders are involved: the established commercial operators, the
so-called new space actors, aiming at transforming space as a
commodity, and nations with new ambitions in space, as instrument
of sovereignty and soft power.
While many papers address the conditions likely to attract private
investment and venture capital by imitating the Silicon Valley spirit,
our analysis focuses on the market and industrial dimension of Earth
Observation imagery and related services. Both for large and small
companies, investors or shareholders will support new initiatives if
there is a good growth potential. Three “radical” scenarios, with very
distinct growth options are analysed. Driving factors are identified as
well as the consequences (threats and opportunities) on the stakeholders. One of the key issues addressed is to assess if the current
champions can be disrupted by the new players. Some recommendations are also proposed.
Nomenclature
BA business Angel
BASIC broad Area Satellite Imagery Collection
B2B business to business
B2C business to consumer
B2G business to government
CAGR compound annual growth rate
CE90 circular Error at 90% confidence
CIBORG commercial Initiative to Buy Operationally Responsive
GEOINT
CMG control moment gyroscope
CNES centre National d′Etudes Spatiales
COTS commercial-off-the-shelf
CRADA cooperative R&D Agreement
CVC corporate Venture Capital
DAP direct Access Partner (Digital Globe)
DARPA defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DEM digital Elevation Model
DGA délégation Générale pour l′Armement.
DOD US Department of Defence
DRS direct Receiving Station (Airbus Defence and Space)
DSP délégation de Service Public (contractual scheme for the
commercial distribution of Pleiades imagery)
DTM digital Terrain Model
EAR export Administration Regulations
EARSC European Association of Remote Sensing Companies
EC European Commission
EDRS European Data Relay Satellite
EO Earth Observation
EU European Union
EUSC European Union Satellite Centre
FIA future imagery Architecture
G2G Government to government
GCP Ground Control Point
GFW global Forest Watch
GSD ground Sampling Distance
HR high Resolution
IDIQ indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity
IMINT image Intelligence
IOT internet Of Things
IT information Technologies
ITAR international Traffic in arms Regulations
KH key Hole satellites family
LBS location-Based Services
LEO low Earth Orbit
MR medium Resolution
MS member States (Europe)
MTF modulation Transfer Function
MS member State
NGA National Geospatial Agency
NIIRS National Imagery Interpretability Rating Scale
NIMA National Imagery and Mapping Agency
NRO National reconnaissance office
NSG National System for Geospatial Intelligence
NSP National Security Policy
NSR Northern Sky Research
NTM National Technical Means
PAN panchromatic imagery
PDD Presidential Decision Directive
PPP Public Private Partnership
P/F platform
R&D research and development
SAR synthetic Aperture Radar
SLA service Level Agreement
SIA satellite Industry Association
S/C spacecraft
SME small and Medium enterprise
SSO Sun Synchronous Orbit
UAV unmanned Aircraft Vehicle
VC venture Capital
VHR very High Resolution
WB World Bank
WRI World Research Institute
XS multispectral imagery
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
416
1.2. Structure of the paper
Section 2 introduces the current landscape of Earth Observation
and the main changes. It also draws an historical perspective, highlighting the evolution of policy context and international environment
since the first spy-satellites launched during the cold war. In Section 3,
we describe the challenges faced by the data providers and satellites
manufacturers: higher resolution and higher revisit, a bit like trying to
square the circle. The profile of the main stakeholders is summarised in
Section 4, with a specific focus on New Space trends and its actors,
often privately funded.
Section 5 describes the recent evolution of the market and the new
perspectives in this new context. Scenarios for the future identified as
possible evolutions and their consequences on the role and influence of
the various stakeholders are presented in Section 6. Section 7 provides
a wider perspective of disruptions in GEOINT with some considerations about the strategic scenarios for Europe, where new space actors
are currently nearly absent.
2. Setting the scene: historical perspective and new trends
2.1. Introduction
Different types of Earth observation models have been developed
over the last forty years bringing significant changes in paradigms:
– Public data with Landsat in the US.
– Development of the commercial market initiated by Spot image
(1986) and then by Digital Globe.
– National support to private companies by nations thought anchor
tenant contracts: Digital globe backed by the National Geospatial
Agency (NGA).
– Development of dual systems (defence and commercial): Cosmo
Skymed and Pleiades.
– Purely private investment for SPOT-6 and SPOT-7.
– Development of shared satellites and virtual constellations (DMC,
Disaster Monitoring Constellation).
– The so-called “New space” era and the recent development of Earth
Observations constellations.
2.2. New space and old recipes: historical perspective, evolution of
policy context and international environment
2.2.1. This old good New space
New Space is new, until a newer disruption arrives… Since the
launch of Landsat 1 in 1972 and the failed attempt to privatize this
programme with EOSAT (Earth Observation Satellite Company),
several disruptive events have shape the EO history.
2.2.2. SPOT 1: the advent of commercial era
From this point of view, in 1986, SPOT 1 launch and the decision of
the French government and CNES to use a commercial model for image
distribution were a revolution.
Two months after this launch, SPOT 1 was tasked to acquire the first
10-meter images after the explosion of reactor n°4 at the Chernobyl
nuclear plant in Ukraine (Fig. 1). These images demonstrated the
potential role of commercial satellites in support of intelligence missions:
no other imagery, either from civil satellites (Landsat resolution was too
coarse) or from US spy satellites (the images were classified), was able to
witness the reality of the disaster behind the Iron Curtain.
SPOT 1 demonstrated one of the main benefits of commercial
remote sensing for intelligence missions: that it can be shared with
anyone. The US newspaper “USA today” called SPOT satellite “The
ultimate skycam”. In the nineties the French took the leading role in
this commercial market although the data sales revenues covered only
the cost of satellite operations.
2.2.3. Towards US leadership on the commercial market
Already in 1983, Spot Image Corporation was considered by the
Wall Street Journal as an “Invader”, illustrating the willingness of the
US government to restore the US dominance on this market. In the
seventies Carter’s Administration identified the opportunity for the US
to develop a commercial market in order to capitalize on the huge
investment in space already done.
Taking into account the lessons learnt, successive US Administrations
(Reagan, Bush and Clinton) built up the foundation of the US policy on
the commercial market expressed in the Clinton Administration Policy on
Remote Sensing Licensing and Exports (1994).
An important milestone is undoubtedly the launch of Ikonos-2 in
September 1999: Ikonos-2 was the first commercial Earth Observation
able to collect images with a ground sampling distance below 1-meter
(0.82 m GSD at Nadir in panchromatic mode). US took the lead of the
race for higher resolution (ref [1]).
Innovative approaches adopted by NGA, such as Clearview,
NextView and Enhanced View, awarded to Digital Globe and Space
Imaging in 2003, were the cornerstones for the implementation of the
new US policies. They have substantially changed the procurement
schemes: instead of relying only on dedicated assets owned and
operated by governments, often at national level, these framework
programmes were the first Private Public Partnership (PPP) in Earth
Observation.
2.2.4. Autonomy or dominance
For security concerns US Administrations for the two last decades
have favoured Commercial Services aimed at minimizing the proliferation or the uncontrolled dissemination of very high resolution images.
US players, such as Digital Globe, offer the best resolution to deter
countries who could plan to acquire their own EO satellites. Robert
Cardillo, director of the NGA, recently stated (Ref [2]): “I recognize
that there are two sides to the world’s growing transparency”.
2.2.5. Google Earth: the beginning of “New Space”
In this context, the introduction of Google Earth in June 2005,
based on a virtual globe created by Keyhole Inc., triggered also a
disruption, in democratising access to satellite imagery, even if criticisms have been made with respect to the threat to privacy or national
security.
Google Earth opened the door to full private investment from nonSpace players.
2.2.6. HELIOS, a unique example of cooperation in EO for defence
The implementation of French political decisions to acquire
France’s own optical space system (HELIOS 1) in 1984 in support of
national sovereignty and nuclear deterrence policy has taken full
benefit of the SPOT experience, paving the way of the future duality
concept.
HELIOS 1 and SPOT 4 were based on the same platform built by
former Matra Espace (now Airbus Defence and Space), the optical
Fig. 1. In 1986, Chernobyl disaster seen by SPOT 1. Copyright CNES - Distribution
Airbus DS
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
417
instruments for both systems built by former Aérospatiale Cannes (now
TAS). CNES expertise on overall system architecture, control ground
segment, user ground segment and operations (Spot Image) was key
for support the development of the HELIOS ground system and its
handover by the military users for the operations and maintenance.
HELIOS remains the unique prototype of international military
cooperation in space imagery. Spain, Italy, for HELIOS 1, and then
Belgian, Greece, Germany have the right to task HELIOS 2 satellites for
their own needs following specific arbitration rules under government
to government (G2G) agreements, and to receive and process the
corresponding images. As compensation, the national partners fund
the participation of their industry to the realization of part of the
satellites and the ground segments, or, for Italy and Germany,
exchange SAR data, coming from respectively Cosmo Skymed and
SAR-Lupe satellites for HELIOS optical data.
2.2.7. Towards dual use and export markets
15 years after HELIOS, the Pleiades system was designed as a full
dual system, able to provide imagery to both commercial/civil and
military users with appropriate security and priority rules. After 5 years
of operations this duality concept is considered as a success. Italy with
Cosmo-Skymed implemented the same concept: the satellites are
shared between the defence organisation and the commercial ones.
This model is an alternative of the US one to respond to the lack of
market maturity.
In parallel, in the middle of nineties, France and the United
Kingdom developed earth observation satellites for the export market,
under ITAR regulation. The rationale of this market is to offer to space
as instruments of sovereignty:
– Integrity of the image (no modification by third parties).
– Full access of the satellite resources.
– Confidentiality of national areas of interest.
2.2.8. SPOT-6: when EO satellites are privately funded
Another major innovation occurred in France in 2012 with the
launch of SPOT-6, aimed at ensuring the continuity of wide-swath
high-resolution observation services provided by the SPOT-5 mission.
In this case, the disruption is the funding model: while the two
Pleiades spacecraft were publicly funded, SPOT-6 and SPOT-7 opened
a new era: for the first time in the remote-sensing industry, satellite
development costs have been funded entirely with private funds
provided by Airbus Defence and Space.
2.2.9. Radar case
The commercial High resolution radar satellites emerged in 1995 in
Canada with Radarsat-1 operated by MDA. In 2007, Italy launched the
first radar constellation of 4 satellites, this system is dual.
The German joint venture between the DLR and Airbus Defence
and Space has developed a radar system: TerraSAR-X (2007) and its
twin satellite TanDEM-X (2010). The key application is WorldDEM, a
worldwide high accuracy Digital Elevation Model (DEM). It is worthwhile mentioning that there is no commercial SAR system in the US.
2.2.10. New space, at the crossroads of space and IT
New Space can be considered as the meeting of the Space world with
the IT (Information Technology) one. The first one has developed the
relevant concepts with the associated technologies: e-Corce, Rapid Eye,
when the second one brings the massive development of the Information
technology (big data, analytics) with full private investment. As usual in
the IT world, some of these new players will disappear but some of them
will survive, supported by the NGA’s willingness to consider emerging
players to diversify its imagery supply.
Over time, satellite EO-based services were provided towards
private customers increasing revenues and competitiveness of services
industry. But until recently, acquisition of satellite assets was only
affordable for governments or major economic actors. EO-based
services providers were made sustainable mainly through government
and public procurement.
In parallel, development of the internet increased mass market
interest for geo-information. This context was favourable for crossfertilizing space EO imagery with digital economy, paving the way to
new businesses and services.
2.3. A wind of change in the atmosphere?
The advent of New Space applied to Earth observation is the last
and most visible change (Ref [3]), with the first start-ups, such as
Skybox Imaging (today Terra Bella), created in 2009, and Planet Labs
(today Planet), founded in 2010, proposing constellations of several
small or medium and low-cost satellites. Their objective is to propose
revolutionary operational and business models with cost effective
services combining high resolution and high revisit.
Providing administrations with space imagery and information
added-value products on an operational basis promoted development
of new companies and employment. The expected development of
procurement of geo-information services by US administrations reinforced motivation of entrepreneurs for developing commercial offers
using space assets. This impulse at developing new business using
satellite EO-based services found a favourable relay towards venture
capitalists. Benefiting from first achievements obtained by Space-X and
Blue origin, the space sector was identified as a new promising sector
for making business.
Last but not least, even if less publicized than the new space
ventures, new countries invest in earth observation capacities. Some of
them (Russia, India, China, South Korea) are already active and
recognised players but show new ambitions. There are also newcomers,
buying or building earth observation satellites, as instrument of
sovereignty or soft power, to ensure an independent access to imagery
or to develop its industry.
For the “Traditional Space” the resolution has been a significant
advantage to drive the business within the last 30 years, it moved from
10 m (Spot 1) to 31 cm (Worldview-4). New Space entrepreneurs target
the revisit through consequent constellations with medium or high
resolution sensors. The change of paradigm is not limited to the New
Space initiatives coming from Silicon Valley:
– Airbus Defence & Space for the first time transferred one of its
satellite (SPOT 7) to Azerbaijan (Azersky) in the frame of a wider
cooperation agreement.
– SSTL has created a new hybrid model with DMC3, a satellite
constellation of 3 1 m GSD satellites fully leased by a single company
from China (21AT).
– On the export market with PerúSAT-1, Airbus Defence & Space has
built up a new type of offer combining services (immediate access to
the Airbus fleet of satellites) and classic satellite export.
– Through full ground segment interoperability, both Airbus Defence
& Space with Azercosmos and Digital Globe with Taqnia have
developed strategic partnerships for the exploitation of satellite
constellations.
2.4. Current landscape of Earth Observation
In a nutshell, the current landscape of VHR EO can be summarised
through following trends:
2.4.1. Customer needs and technical performance
– The performance of commercial satellites is increasing: high degree
of convergence with the defence needs. 25–30 cm resolution is now
the benchmark or at least a very short term target for the
commercial missions.
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
418
– Other performance criteria are becoming more and more important
for institutional and commercial operators on top of GSD: volume of
acquired surface per day, reactivity and revisit frequency, image
freshness, video capability, multispectral capability, automatic processing, delivery mechanisms, etc.
– The performance of ground infrastructures and distribution
platforms (data and services) becomes paramount: huge increase of space imagery data to be processed exploited and
distributed.
– Satellite lifetime is much longer (10 years) than before, enabling a
better business case.
2.4.2. Market and competition
– There is a continuous and worldwide growth of the VHR imagery
market.
– Military institutions especially in US are increasingly reliant on VHR
commercial imagery providers with appropriate security rules.
– The value chain is shifting from the raw data to services and
applications.
– Value for money: there is a strong pressure to reduce infrastructure
and operational costs.
– Hybrid procurement schemes, combining proprietary missions and
data buy framework contracts, partly triggered by the budgetary
constraints of public customers and nations.
– Increasingly, the new comer countries invest in their own EO
capacity, confirming the soft power dimension of space but also
opening new opportunities for international co-operation or commercial agreements.
– New space and disruptive initiatives are not only developed by startups but also by large web actors with a huge investment capacity.
Both aim at transforming space as a commodity.
– To complete this global picture, new players are targeting the export
market: South Korea, China and Israel.
2.4.3. Regulations
– VHR Imagery remains highly sensitive information and legislation
could continue to evolve impacting the new business models.
3. The digital Earth challenge: one Earth, one meter, one
day… or more?
3.1. High resolution and high revisit: like squaring the circle around
the Earth
Commercial providers of EO imagery are used to say that resolution
or Ground Sampling Distance (GSD) is not the sole criterion for
choosing a geospatial data source. Depending on the specific application, revisit time, speed of delivery to the customer, radiometric and
spectral quality, geolocation accuracy and acquisition capacity (km2
/
day) are other key performance factors.
Nevertheless, both for defence and commercial markets, there is a
worldwide and continuous race for sharper images and higher revisit
(Fig. 2).
For Low Earth Orbit, increasing the resolution of the sensor means
that the swath, the area covered by the satellite during its pass over a
region, becomes smaller. In the case of polar orbits, it means a longer
revisit time for a given area as the satellite orbits the globe (the typical
cycle is 14 orbits per day).
In order to serve many applications requiring both data freshness
and regular updates (e.g. agriculture, site monitoring for intelligence or
geo-marketing).
Basically, swath and number of orbits per day give an indication of
the number of satellites needed for a daily coverage of the whole Earth.
In their quest for better performance and acquisition capacity, engineers and satellites try to find the smarter trade-off between
resolution and revisit for a specific market.
For a given GSD, several solutions can reduce the revisit time and
increase the acquisition capacity: steerable mirrors, agility of the
platform or multiple satellites, specific orbits (geo-synchronous, inclination), etc. Beyond a single satellite, small or large constellations
are popular solutions. While the established data providers rely on
small or virtual constellations of agile satellites, new comers seem to
bet on a large number of small and low-cost satellites. It is worthwhile
recalling a couple of basic rules of physics and space mechanics in
order to better understand the current and future initiatives and
business cases.
3.2. New space and old physics
10 m, 1 m, 50 cm… 30 cm GSD is the new benchmark for very high
resolution satellites.
Commercial and marketing people would like to believe that
Moore’s law, predicting that the density of integrated circuits doubles
approximately every two years, drives also the evolution of the
resolution of earth observation satellites.
Unfortunately, system engineers and optical specialists temper
their enthusiasm each time they recall that Kepler’s law and
Rayleigh’s Criterion remain applicable. The first one is related to the
orbit parameters and the second one to the performance of an earth
observation instrument.
In a nutshell, Kepler's law states that a space-borne sensor can’t fly
at low altitudes and stay stationary over our heads. Roughly speaking,
Kepler caps the revisit time and acquisition capacity of a single, nadirpointing satellite.
Rayleigh’s criterion defines the minimum resolvable detail for a
specific observation instrument. The resolution of any imaging system
is limited by diffraction. For a given wavelength, the angular resolution
is inversely proportional to the aperture of the instrument (i.e. the
diameter of the main mirror). Other parameters such as the Modular
Transfer Function (MTF) are used to specify optical performance but
Rayleigh’s criterion is very useful for a first and simple estimate.
The aperture of the instrument and the size and mass of the mirror
are key difficulties facing the satellite manufacturers. A large telescope
needs a large satellite.
Even with the miniaturisation of components, ensuring the accurate
and stable but rapid pointing of a large instrument requires a
sophisticated platform, with star-trackers, accurate inertial measurement units and control moment gyroscopes (CMG).
This is not always cutting-edge technology but, even with a product
approach, that comes at a cost, in particular for the small number of
“exquisite satellites” used for reconnaissance or for dual-use applications.
New space actors target less expensive data collection systems, with
compromises or new approaches on the image performance features. It
Fig. 2. The Digital Earth challenge, a wealth of pixels.
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
419
does not mean poor performance: integration with IT and software
open new avenues, such as a new breakdown of functions between
space and ground segments or advanced data processing and fusion
with GCP/DTM in order to mitigate the reduced stability of smaller
platforms (e.g. Blackbridge announced 10 m CE90 accuracy using
Landsat GCP, suitable for some applications).
New space actors make the assumption that commercial VHR
systems are firstly designed to meet the needs of defence and
governmental users.
From their point of view, they are therefore not always well suited
for commercial applications (e.g. cost, revisit time, global coverage)
and a large proportion of the resource is pre-empted, leaving limited
capacity for civilian use. Pleiades dual use model is a notable exception.
It explains also why the new space initiatives shall not be seen as a
homogeneous trend. Design choices made by Planet, Terra Bella or
UrtheCast, focusing either on resolution or revisit show different
visions of business and markets to be addressed.
3.3. Small pixels and big data
An important driver is the volume of data captured each day by the
Earth Observation Systems. Even before the era of new space, there
were two main approaches:
– Capture every point each day (as meteorological satellites do in LEO
such as Metop or Terra).
– Capture any point each day (the operational model for most of the
current VHR satellites such as Pleiades or WorldView-3).
The main EO data providers use the second option. Some of the
New Space actors have chosen the first solution, possibly limited to
land surface area (29% of the Earth’s surface area).
3.3.1. A wealth of pixels
In both cases, a wealth of pixels is acquired by the satellite
instrument. The first option is obviously the most challenging one in
terms of data volumes: for instance 57 terapixels (tera=1012) for a full
Earth coverage at 3 m GSD or 5.7 petapixels (peta=1015) at 30 cm GSD.
Focusing on land surfaces only reduces the total volume by a factor of
3.
Even with a very efficient image compression algorithm and a
datalink offering a comfortable bandwidth, the transmission time
between the spacecraft and the ground remains significant.
As there are only few minutes of visibility between the ground
receiving station and the satellites, the number of ground stations shall
fit the total capacity of the system. An alternative is the use of data relay
satellites (such as EDRS already implement on some Copernicus
satellites).
It is worthwhile mentioning that the performance of the future
satellite system will depend increasingly on its ground-based infrastructure.
Last but not least, access to space remains a key issue: new launcher
concepts targeting affordable access to space for small or medium-size
satellites are emerging but they have still to demonstrate the reliability
and their performance. Fig. 3 summarises the “Digital Earth
Challenge”.
3.4. The needs of defence and intelligence
It is, of course, not possible to discuss the detailed requirements of
the main intelligence missions and to describe the performance of
current or planned system. But it is worthwhile having a look on the
National Imagery Interpretability Rating Scale (NIIRS) and the main
GSD thresholds enabling a particular intelligence task (detection,
reconnaissance or identification).
Even if developed in the early seventies, the National Imagery
Interpretability Rating Scale remains a very useful scale. Originated in
the Intelligence Community, NIIRS is a task-based scale for rating
imagery acquired from imaging systems. It was defined in order to
predict image interpretability: this analysis cannot be done from simple
physical image quality measures (such as GSD or MTF). The NIIRS
consists of 10 graduated levels 0–9), with several interpretation tasks
or criteria within each level. With a NIIRS 2 panchromatic image, for
example, image analysts are able to detect large hangars at an airfield,
while on NIIRS 6 imagery they are able to distinguish between models
of small/medium helicopters.
Five typical GSD thresholds can be defined with respect to the main
geo-intelligence tasks (detection, reconnaissance, identification and
description):
– Above 10 m, the detection performance is poor. It reaches only 25%
for an image with a 10-m GSD.
– Around 4–5 m, satisfaction rate for detection reaches 50% and first
reconnaissance of large assets (buildings, vessels) becomes possible.
– Between 1 and 2 m, the reconnaissance performance increases
significantly but identification hit rate remains poor.
– Identification tasks are performed much more efficiently (satisfaction above 50%) with a GSD around 30–40 cm.
– 10–15 cm GSD images enable detailed description.
Fig. 3. When New space meets old physics: a pale blue dot, hard to digitize. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of
this article)
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
420
The minimal requirements to meet NGA needs with commercial
imagery (3 mission layers such as BASIC) can be found in the report of
the expert panel chaired by Peter Marino in 2007 (ref [4]).
4. A new game of thrones: the usual suspects, the space
invaders and new nations in a worldwide competition
This section gives an overview of the EO imagery landscape in
September 2016 with a short presentation of the main providers of EO
data and services.
4.1. Main providers of EO data and services
4.1.1. The usual suspects
The two champions are Digital Globe (US) and Airbus Defence and
Space (Europe).
DigitalGlobe is today the worldwide leader. It offers today the
sharpest imagery (30 cm GSD) with WorldView-3 and WorldView-4
(launched in November 2016). DG’s first market is US administration
(63.7% in 2015 and 2016) with 55% for NGA as anchor customer
(framework contract). In 2015, DigitalGlobe communicated on its
“steady business with the U.S. and other governmental customers”
compared to disappointing results to the private sector showing the
challenge to address both non-governmental customers and a large
number of customers (Ref [5]). DigitalGlobe and TAQNIA (Saudi
Arabia) recently entered a joint venture for a small constellation.
Since June 2014, DigitalGlobe is allowed by US government to collect
and sell imagery at the best available resolutions (up to 25 cm
panchromatic and 1.0 m multispectral GSD). In February 2017,
Digital Globe entered into a merger agreement with MacDonald,
Dettwiler and Associates Ltd.
Airbus Defence and Space Intelligence division is the second
champion and first commercial operator: SPOT 1 operations started
in 1986. Its uniqueness is the capacity to offer both VHR optical
(Pleiades-1A and Pleiades 1B) and X-band radar imagery (TerraSAR-X
and TanDEM-X). Airbus Defence and Space provides also HR / wide
swath imagery with SPOT-6 and SPOT-7. There is no major anchor
tenancy contract but the twin Pleiades satellites have been funded by
the French government, in a dual use scheme.
It was not anymore the case for SPOT 6 and SPOT 7: satellite
development costs have been funded entirely by private funds provided
by Airbus Defence and Space. The first market is the commercial
market. The Geo-intelligence division is backed by Airbus Defence and
Space (Space Systems) for the development of new satellites. For
Airbus Defence and Space, the next important milestone is the
estimated end of life of Pleiades-1A and Pleiades-1B around year
2020 (Pleiades follow-on, end of DSP). Timely and predictable renewal
of space assets, performance improvement (resolution and revisit) and
continuity of data supply are essential conditions to maintain customers’ trust and fidelity. As announced at the World Satellite Business
Week by Nicolas Chamussy, Head of the Business Line Space Systems,
Airbus Defence and Space is designing and building a new constellation
of optical satellites, comprising four identical and very agile sensors
delivering very high-resolution imagery.
Despite their differences, DigitalGlobe and Airbus Defence and
Space share similar elements of profile: they deliver high quality VHR
imagery (up to 30 cm), with a focus on acquisition capacity and
powerful distribution services, based on a fleet of agile satellites with
large telescopes for VHR imagery, direct receiving stations (DAP or
DRS) and networks of distributors. Most of their revenues come from
image sales, direct access and delivery services, targeting both domestic
and export markets. They propose information services, mainly
through vertical markets, including defence.
The other established commercial actors are Imagesat International
(Israel), e-GEOS (Italy). Imagesat International operates the family of
EROS satellites. EROS-B delivers 0.7 m GSD at nadir from 510 km.
The swath is 7 km. EROS-C is expected to be launched in 2019. It will
deliver 0.4 m GSD from 500 km. e-GEOS operates the Cosmo-Skymed
SAR constellation and distributes Digital Globe imagery in Europe.
4.1.2. The space invaders: welcome to the club?
They can also be called “aliens” or “barbarians” (Ref [6]): they do
not belong to the regular crowd of the “space club”, have their own
rules, coming mainly from the IT world and they are fast and agile, with
a fresh look on entry barriers.
For a few years, several private companies have emerged in the U.S.
with the project to develop and operate space systems on an industrial
basis with disruptive commercial objectives.
4.1.3. The rise of New Space
These firms, mainly based in the Silicon Valley or near Seattle, bet
on low-cost technology to provide more affordable space systems and
services both for earth observation and for telecommunications.
These projects are designed to maximize the benefits reaped from
Commercial off-the-shelf technologies, from reduced manufacturing
costs as well as from leaner industrial processes. The massive use of
high-performance COTS technologies has already proved the feasibility
of constellations of several tens of cubesats weighing around 5 kg and
costing a few thousands of dollars per unit. But New Space is not
always “small is beautiful”-oriented: some initiatives are based on
medium-size or even large satellites.
4.1.4. The nations
Whether they are veterans in space activities (China or India) or
newcomers deciding to have their own EO capacities, more and more
nations are becoming active players in Earth Observation. This affects
both the competition and the accessible market.
For example, SI imaging Services (South Korea) distributes since
mid-2016 VHR imagery (GSD < 50 cm) acquired by Kompsat-3A.
Another example is the drastic reduction of EO data imported by
China, since the “Middle Kingdom” operates high and very high
resolution satellites. Soon or later, China will enter the worldwide EO
market as a new provider.
4.2. Focus on new Space: business not as usual?
4.2.1. New space: the old good recipe of the Silicon Valley
The “new space” trend appeared recently. New private actors are
more and more active in the space ecosystem with two different
profiles:
– Many start-ups and small and medium size enterprises (SME) are
betting on the development of very small satellites, not only for
technology testing and education but also for operational missions.
– The big players of the Web sphere are increasingly interested by
Space and able to invest massively: Elon Musk with SpaceX is the
most famous example but Google and Facebook announced also
their own initiatives. Their assumption is the disruption will be
triggered by the convergence between advanced information technologies and EO.
The big players with a start-up spirit are very impressive, with a
scalable business model able to impact more than one billion customers, aggressive and agile solutions.
They are able to lower or break the entry barriers of the targeted
market and have a huge cash capacity. In June 2014, a major
announcement was made by Google Inc: an agreement to buy Skybox
Imaging for $500 million in cash. In April 2015, SpaceX announced
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
421
court action to open Air force space Launch mission to competition.
The most significant initiative is Oneweb with a massive constellation
of several hundreds of small LEO satellites providing high speed
connectivity.
Either from start-ups or major actors, these initiatives have
common features. They are launched by private actors, even when
supported by public money or public orders. Even if not based in
California, they apply also the Silicon Valley recipe for success. They
are fast and agile, proposing scalable systems and are convinced that
their dream will become a reality.
The viability of the business plan is perhaps questionable, in
particular when one has in mind the attempts to develop the first
constellations of satellites (Iridium, Globastar, Teledesic, Celestri) but,
as depicted on Fig. 4, the new entrepreneurs are able to raise funds (ref
[7]), sign strategic partnerships and, for some of them, build and
launch satellites and start their operations.
4.2.2. New Space and Earth observation
In the field of space imagery, many firms have planned to use large
constellations of EO satellites. They propose new paradigms and new
visions of the value chain:
– Cheaper systems and ground segments.
– Multi sensors ground processing systems.
– Lower cost / reliability and higher replacement rate.
– B2C / Mass market / Vertical integration.
– Data analytics.
– Free of charge imagery to enter new markets.
– New solutions for Capex / Opex optimization.
– And the scalability, i.e. the capacity to start business before the full
deployment of the system.
“Democratising” the access to space imagery is usually one key
element for their business strategy. Web portals and subscriptions via
Internet are commonly referred as preferred marketing tools. However,
some of these projects seem to clearly address the usual institutional
customer as their reference business partners.
New space in earth observation is mainly an US story, with the
exception of Satellogic in Argentina (Ref [8]) and NorStar Space Data
in Canada. Most of the investment is from the US, in particular from
the Silicon Valley. Other the past ten years, more than 33 projects of
EO satellite constellations have been announced. Despite the bloom of
new satellite EO constellations, many experts remained sceptical on the
capability of all these projects to become operational. On the 33
announcements, today only 9 have actually started and none is fully
operational.
In June 2014, when acquiring Skybox Imaging for 500 M$, Google
surprised space remote sensing experts and traditional players. This
acquisition highlighted the potential economic value of “low-cost”
satellite EO constellations, even if few demonstration satellites have
been launched. The potential threat was taken seriously by established
providers of EO data and services who started to adapt their offer and
their organisation. In 2015, Planet and Urthecast have raised sufficient
funding to acquire the space assets of established competitors such as
Blackbridge and DEIMOS, re-enforcing their business model with a
“traditional” satellite constellation and a client portfolio. These first
buybacks are observed with interest by satellite EO experts and venture
capitalists to understand the dynamic of this new economic ecosystem.
Even if none of the newly announced constellations have reached full
capacity, there are already concrete consequences on the market and
the existing players: the Rapid Eye (Blackbridge) and Deimos acquisitions give better access to market and a customer base for Planet and
UrtheCast but creates an exit strategy for the two former European
players.
A new value chain for “low-cost satellite EO” is being developed
including satellite and sensor manufacturers, integration and tests
providers, communication systems and operations services providers.
Downstream services are been developed, aiming at irrigating economic sectors with appropriated analytics for agriculture, resources monitoring, transports, maritime surveillance and many other sectors. If
stakeholders agree on the fact that few projects will be operational and
that the space EO sector landscape will evolve, no one will make a
prognostic in a domain where agility is the rule of the game, and where
some players have already change their business model twice.
4.2.3. Presentation of the main initiatives
Planet, (formerly Planet Labs) has put into orbit nearly 150
cubesats. Their GSD is between 3 and 5 m. While modest in terms of
pure performance (when compared with 0.30 m resolution from the
best commercial satellites), the main feature of these new initiatives is
the high number of platforms in orbit. This allows very high revisit
rates and makes space sensors much more reactive than when placed
on a few satellites only. Other on-going projects plan to make use of
somewhat heavier satellites, even if they can still be considered in the
class of micro-satellites.
Terra Bella (formerly Skybox Imaging before its acquisition by
Google in 2014) has planned to put up in space a constellation of
around 24 satellites in the next few years. 7 satellites have already been
launched (the last 4 ones in September 2016). The mass is around
100 kg and allow a ground resolution of about 0.90 m as well as
producing short videos. Blacksky Global, located in Seattle, plans to
put into orbit 60 imaging satellites allowing a performance of around
Fig. 4. 2015, a record year for VC investment in space. Source: Spacetec Analysis / Tauri Group data (Ref [7]).
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
422
1 m ground resolution (with an additional video capacity) by 2019.
Already 6 satellites are under preparation. UrtheCast, a Canadian firm
based in Vancouver plans to serve the governmental market with its 8
optical and 8 radar satellites in preparation. This firm targets a highquality phased optical and radar product with 0.50 m and 1–5 m
resolution respectively in the optical and radar domains.
Many other projects (Ref [9]) exist as of today, with different mixes
regarding the number of satellites, the mass, the complexity and the
performances, but with a common objective to reap market shares
using innovative dissemination practices. The table in the Annex
provides a technical overview of the main initiatives. The selection is
not exhaustive and focuses mainly on operators who have already
launched at least one satellite. Known specifications confirm that there
are actually two types of satellites: very small or small ones (less than
50 kg) and medium-size or even large ones (e.g. 670 kg for the
Urthecast optical satellites).
4.2.4. A vast programme indeed
The pitches and value proposals give an indication of plans,
differentiators and ambition of each company. Nearly all promote
information freshness, apps or platforms and data analytics tools.
Urthecast “moves pixels from space to the screen” and states that its
“business model borrows more from DG than form Terra Bella”. Terra
Bella wants to “empower global businesses to make better decisions
with timely, high fidelity imagery and infinite analytics”. Google’s
fingerprint is not too far: “Rethinking geospatial data in a bigger way,
Imagery is only the beginning…”.
Planet’s motto is “See change. Change the World. Anywhere,
anytime”. Planet claims to “design, build and launch satellites faster
than any company or government in history. We use commodity
consumer electronics to build highly capable satellites at drastically
lower costs. With the most advanced satellites launching into orbit
every 3–4 months, our capabilities are on the cutting edge”.
4.2.5. Some innovative private financing
Most of these firms have been supported by private funds.
According to a recent study (ref [10]) performed by Bryce Space and
technology (formerly Tauri Group), the space start-ups (all activities
included) have raised almost $13 Billion of private investments
between 2000 and 2015. For the sole year 2015, a yearly record of
more than $2.3 Billion has been spent in more than 50 investments in
space start-ups in the U.S.
Investments can be of different nature when made by business
angels, venture capitalists, or by major industrial groups eager to make
acquisitions of strategic nature or simply as space enthusiasts.
Obviously, the objectives of those respective types of investors may
be very different. Mainly, expectations on the nature and the level of
return on investments can be very distinct, business angels being more
inclined to support the space activity of a start-up on the mid to longterm while some venture capitalists are more demanding for rapid
financial results.
From the standpoint of space imagery activity, venture capitalist
financing but also the interest manifested by major groups has
formed the bulk of the resources for fresh start-ups. It must be noted
that this phenomenon is rather new in a field that had been
supported until now by very few private financers. It must also be
noted that such investments can be highly rewarding. The example
of Terra Bella comes immediately in mind when Google paid more
than $480 Million for acquiring it, while only a total of $91 Million
had been invested in the start-up by a few venture capitalists. The
benefits for them were well worth the initial effort. Planet has
managed to go through five rounds of investments representing in
2016 about $206 Million contributed by 17 investors and bought
recently Terra Bella.
4.2.6. Mixed with some level of government support
Obviously, many questions remain unanswered about the reality
and the size of the market for such new economic actors. This explains
the importance of initial investments for sustaining the first years of
operations.
At a minimum, one can note in the U.S. a real interest from the
public institutions for supporting this activity. A bit like in the case of
early support for more traditional operators like Digital Globe for many
years now, the U.S. government through the National Geospatial
intelligence Agency (NGA) has declared many times its enthusiasm
for the new comers. In 2015, a first initiative known as NextGen
Tasking Initiative has been announced to sustain these new commercial activities, especially to help for the development of new methods
for the collection, processing and dissemination of commercially
generated data.
This interest has found its official expression in an agency document titled Commercial Geoint Strategy published the same year by
the NGA (ref [11]). Six months later, the creation of an “Outpost
Valley” close to Silicon Valley start-ups was announced via the
reinforcement of the NGA Californian Branch.
More recently even, a new Commercial Initiative to Buy operationally Responsive GEOINT (CIBORG) has been publicized with the
explicit goal to support the new space imagery industry both for federal
users (ref [12]). Terra Bella, UrtheCast, Planet and BlackSky Global
have been identified as the first potential interested parties. The first
CIBORG contracts shall be passed early 2017 with an expectedly rising
yearly budget over the period 2018–2022.
4.2.7. Beyond Earth Observation
New endeavours beyond the sole imagery may emerge very soon for
future commercial constellations. The announcement made in July
2016 about the cooperative venture between Lockheed Martin and
HawkEye 360 to develop a small sat constellation for radio-frequency
mapping is a good example of possibly evolving missions for small
satellites.
If these techniques are deployed operationally, their multi-purpose
character can be key to reorganize the missions of each specialized
constellation. A possible trend may be to end up with global “spacebased utilities” capable of carrying out mixed and adaptable missions.
4.2.8. Other actors
Some start-ups do not plan to fly their own satellites: based in Palo
Alto, Orbital Insights, for instance, has recently received $20 Million in
new investment, including $5 Million from In-Q-Tel, the investment
arm of the US intelligence community. Orbital insights receives its data
through contracts with EO data owners. While gathering data on a
large scale from external sources, the start-up develops software to
extract insights from satellite and aerial imagery. Typical Analytic data
products are:
– Counting cars on retail parking lots.
– Gauging the amount of oil stored in tanks (floating lids shadows).
– And a new list of targets: trucks, ships, trains, plants, deforestation
(WRI), WB in Sri Lanka.
A second interesting example is SpaceKnow, also based in Silicon
Valley. Founded in 2013, SpaceKnow uses space imagery and other
data sources to track global economic trends from space through their
Analytics-as-a-Service products (analytics, alerts and indices). They
target a wide range of commercial and governmental clients across all
major industries. SpaceKnow SMI (China Satellite Manufacturing
Index) is the first trading index based on satellite data to be featured
on the Bloomberg Terminal. SpaceKnow SMI for China is based on the
monitoring of over 6000 industrial facilities across China to measure
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
423
levels of manufacturing activity.
4.3. Time to stop playing? Next steps?
The space activity landscape may radically change in its very nature
in the coming years.
New comers from the web and from the information technology
world have already contributed to change the balance in a significant
manner.
In this respect, it is interesting to compare the current situation with
the one that prevailed in the 1990′s when initial projects for gigantic
telecommunication constellations had been envisioned by some heavy
weights of the industry (such as Microsoft) but ultimately failed.
While some people tend to warn about a possible new internet
“bubble” that may end with a similar fate, two considerations can be
presented to moderate the relevance of this analogy.
First, technology has evolved and new small satellites have improved in terms of performance/cost and performance/size ratios. If
not totally overcome, some technological obstacles (not all, as recalled
in Section 3) tend to disappear or to be of less crucial importance in the
design of the space and ground systems. For example, LEO communication systems can now be developed with a good level of efficiency.
In addition, comparing the support from the web industry in the
1990′s and today gives a clear indication of the huge progresses made
by this industry and by its financial and industrial strategies regarding
its massive needs for broad-band telecommunication and information
dissemination worldwide.
The interest of some powerful players (e.g. Google) and the level of
their financial capabilities will undoubtedly influence the market
landscape.
5. Shifting lines and new boundaries: market evolution and
perspectives
5.1. EO value chain: market figures in 2015, main trends and
evolution
5.1.1. Overview
Well-known global consulting companies such as Euroconsult,
Bryce Space and Technology or Northern Sky Research (NSR) publish
regular forecasts and updates. Professional associations such as EARSC
or Eurospace provide also comprehensive figures on the health of their
respective industry and describe the market trends.
Their assessments of total market value differ but they agree on the
main trends and evolutions. Except if specifically stated, the figures used
in this section are based on the report “Satellite-based Earth Observation,
Market Prospects to 2025” released by Euroconsult (Refs [13,14]).
Commercial data market reached $1.7 billion in 2015 (6% growth on
2014), largely driven by defence and IMINT ($1.1 billion). All other
market shares are below 10%. According to Euroconsult, Optical data
represented 84% of the market. SAR data (16%) has not experienced the
same ramp-up, except in maritime surveillance. Value-added services
market reached $3.2 billion in 2015 (Fig. 5). In 2016, new entrants
continue to raise capital, develop satellites and deploy initial constellations.
5.1.2. Market trends and drivers
From a very broad perspective, EO development is closely linked to
the worldwide digitalisation of our societies, with endless appetite for
information, increasing number of data sources and need for interoperability, finance and economics, interconnected ecosystems (governments, industry, commerce) and last but not least security issues,
national prestige and soft power.
In a nutshell, the global EO landscape is as follows:
– More and more commercial EO satellites, both for governments and
private companies, will be launched over the next decade: over 400
satellites ( > 50 kg) compared to 163 over 2006–2015, from 35
countries.
– In addition 1200 small satellites ( < 50 kg) could be launched with
the growth of constellations.
– 50 countries are now investing in EO programmes.
– Environmental monitoring, food security and climate change are top
priorities in political agendas. Border monitoring and Eastern
tensions are major trends.
– In 2025, the market for commercial EO data is expected to reach $3
billion (6% CAGR over 2015–2025). Current market forecast for
value-added services is $5.3 billion for 2025 (5% CAGR).
– Regionally, North America will remain the first market (forecast >
$1 billion in 2024). Asian markets, Latin America (forecast: $350
million in 2024) and Africa ($65 million in 2024) are expected to
have strong growth profiles. Natural resources management, engineering and infrastructure, LBS and Non-US defence are the main
activities supporting growth.
– The number of commercial satellites is expected to increase
significantly, fostered by the growing demand and the number of
new entrants in the commercial market. Business and environmental intelligence are their new Eldorado.
– New regulations and evolution of ITAR restrictions (supporting the
competitiveness of US industry and services) will boost the VHR
data market. More operators will try to address this market.
One shall add the free and open data sets delivered under
Copernicus programme, providing a wealth of environmental data
likely to catalyse added-value services and data analytics, but also with
a possible impact on the sales of medium-resolution data. Here, the two
key questions are:
Fig. 5. Commercial EO data market 2015 and Value-added services market 2015 (source: Euroconsult, ref [13]).
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
424
– Will the development of added-services compensate the drop of
imagery sales at least for medium and high resolution)?
– Who will be the main beneficiaries of this evolution?
New Space adds a new dimensions and potential game changers
with new entrants from ICT domains, a platform-based economy and
shorter mission cycles.
5.1.3. Structure of the value chain, evolution of prices and market
demand
Three risks associated to these growth prospects can affect the main
data providers:
– The evolution of prices, influenced by increased availability of VHR/
HR, impact of free imagery and the redistribution of value between
the data and the services.
– The evolution of international demand, when small and large
countries invest in their own EO capacities, while they were
accounted so far as major commercial opportunities.
– The increasing number of suppliers.
Until now, data prices are mainly driven by « image quality ». GSD
is important but geolocation accuracy, image freshness and radiometric
accuracy are also part of the criterions. The usual model (except for
direct reception of telemetry) is the price per square kilometre or the
price per image.
5.1.4. From scarcity to abundance
In this context, standard imagery prices could drop drastically. A
typical example is the evolution of the EO sales in China. Until recently,
China was buying imagery from foreign suppliers. Since 2011, the
volume of medium-resolution data acquired by Chinese satellites
exceeds the imported share and China meets its needs independently
(Ref [15]).
A similar move affects the higher resolution products. The strategy
of the various suppliers to mitigate this risk depends on their profile.
There are two main, non-exclusive options (Fig. 6).
The “high end approach”: the usual suspects will seek to secure
their revenues with differentiated products, taking advantage of their
existing or future high end assets, i.e. in further increasing imagery
resolution and targeting customers needing these new VHR data and
acknowledging their value.
They will also develop the use of new IT platforms and service hosting,
at least for their main vertical markets. The key criteria in this scenario: a
significant percentage of total value comes from EO image value.
The “service-based strategy” of the new entrants: it is not only a
low-cost approach: it makes the assumption that the EO will become a
commodity and that the value of their products will be the information
and the services created from the EO data and from other data sources.
5.1.5. B2G, B2B or B2C: B2C rules applied to B2B
The pricing is thus based on service value. The global value
increases because the volume of services and the number of customers
increase. The challenge is to propose as far as possible standardized
products. The feasibility and the benefits of an evolution towards more
“horizontal markets” have to be demonstrated. In this situation the
customer becomes a consumer.
In both cases, the specific solution for the optimization of CAPEX
and operational costs will determine the strategy of each operator.
5.2. Shifting lines and new boundaries: position in the value chain,
resolution and revisit, data, services and information
5.2.1. Focus on EO data
Fig. 7 is a tentative representation of the commercial EO data
market evolution, with two types of changes. On the horizontal axis,
there is a shift between the resolution boundaries, from the right side to
the left side, corresponding to the trend toward higher resolution. On
the vertical axis, the vertical arrows show the factors driving the growth
or the contraction of a specific segment.
One tricky question is the appropriate number of segments to
consider in the analysis of EO data. Apart from the core military needs,
three segments are usually defined by the commercial operators:
medium resolution, high resolution and very high resolution.
The segmentation is mainly based on the offer and does not
necessarily fit the actual demand. Market evolutions, growth perspectives and interactions between segments could justify a finer-grained
analysis, in particular for orphan segments or overlaps between
different offers.
In particular, a narrower definition of VHR (for instance < 30–
40 cm) could open a new avenue for “less high VHR” (e.g. between
50 cm and 1 m), if its price is attractive compared to the one of the
sharpest imagery. Beyond GSD, similar trade-offs can be made with
other performance parameters (geolocation accuracy, spectral resolution, etc).
It could mean that a “high-end” option could find its own niche,
even is this market segment is mainly addressed by “low-cost”
products. Table 1 summarises, in a nutshell, the shifting factors and
growth drivers.
Fig. 6. Trends in commercial imagery - Resolution versus revisit, two strategies.
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
425
5.2.2. Typology of information services and customers
In all areas, service market is the main (or first) growth opportunity
for the new operators. From satellite manufacturing to service delivery
to the end user, the EO value chain is usually structured in tiers with
the upstream, midstream and downstream layers, as depicted on Fig. 8.
The main components of a generic service chain based on EO data are:
– EO Imagery and other data sources.
– Processing and access middleware.
– Mid-stream and downstream infrastructure (algorithms, cloud,
analytics, etc.)
– Service providers, with possible hosting in mid-stream infrastructures or as external components.
One can identify several types of services: depending on the weight
of image data compared to other data (data-agnostic services), there
may be opportunities for EO data owners or satellite operators, EO data
brokers or for pure service players.
Another important factor is the level of automation (processing,
advanced analytics, role of models) and the need for human expertise
in the information production process.
Both for institutional and private customers, the need to integrate
customer data in service production can raise security and confidentiality issues and justify sometimes a local implementation of the service.
For activities which are usually implemented directly by the
customer (GEOINT, Insurance, etc.), the readiness to outsource the
service production is obviously a critical point. Typical markets and
maturity (use of EO data and services) are presented in Tables 2, 3.
6. Food for thought: scenarios for the future
6.1. Introuduction
This part of the paper has a prospective dimension. It discusses the
realism and likelihood of possible scenarios of market development and
identifies their impacts on the EO landscape and the main stakeholders
involved. Three main scenarios have been identified as “extreme options”.
It would probably not be realistic to expect that one of these
scenarios may actually happen but this tool is useful to forecast market
evolutions and interactions between market segments. These scenarios
are not necessarily exclusive. This section provides also a first review of
the driving factors and possible consequences (threats and opportunities) on the main actors.
Fig. 7. Shifting lines and new boundaries; evolution of EO data supply.
Table 1
Evolution of the EO data landscape. Shifting factors and growth/contraction drivers.
Very high resolution High resolution Medium resolution
Shifting factors • Increased use of commercial data in
IMINT (+).
• More monitoring needs (+).
• Budgetary constraints and impact
on national means (+)
• Regulations and export rules (-)
• High competition (+)
• Success of services offers (+)
• Regulation and dissemination control
(-)
• Success of the commercial and institutional service offers
using this range of data. Evolution towards higher-end (+).
• Evolution of public missions such as Copernicus NG /
Copernicus Security (+)
Growth or contraction
drivers
• Increasing use of commercial
satellites (+)
• Increased capacity (+)
• Increased competition and
newcomers (-)
• New national missions (-)
• Competition from aerial market and
other sources (-)
• One size fits all impact on customer
base (-)
• Quantitative development of services
with lower costs (+)
• New national mission (-)
• Market saturation or competition with
open data (-).
Not applicable
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
426
6.2. Between business as usual and market disruptions: some science
fiction
6.2.1. Scenario 1: solid revenues from the VHR data for the
intelligence community
This scenario is based on a steady continuity of the VHR market,
with a sustainable or growing demand of the defence and IC for highend products.
In parallel, a significant market share comes from commercial
customers (domestic and export markets), ready to pay a premium for
high-class imagery. The main driving factors are:
– Evolution of defence and commercial markets using VHR imagery.
– Regulations and export control rules, also depending on dissemination policies implemented by new countries (e.g. China).
– The availability of high performance online distribution systems
(e.g. OneAtlas by Airbus Defence and Space).
Main opportunities are related to the evolution of the global threats
and instability (increasing needs for GEOINT) and the sustained
demand for accurate geo-information in the main vertical markets.
The threats are linked to the evolution of intelligence needs (other
priorities such as cybersecurity, ELINT), the use of other sensors
(UAVs, HAPS or ground-based assets) and the obstinacy of competitors
(commercial companies or new countries) to enter this market beside
their initial business. Another risk is the possible gap between
intelligence needs and commercial needs. The needs of some commercial customers could be met with lower resolution (50 cm to 1 m) data,
with a direct impact on price sensitivity.
Service development opportunities for GEOINT missions are not
obvious, as long as the readiness to outsource remains low. The
institutional human resources constraints can trigger innovative
schemes with private providers with two conditions:
– Ensure sensitive data integrity and confidentiality and system
security.
– Define new governance rules.
6.2.2. Scenario 2: a new Eldorado with EO-based services for
commercial applications
Convert promises into tangible achievements… The expected explosive growth in geo-information services and applications materialises. This success depends on:
– The actual implementation of some of the planned constellations.
– The confirmation of commercial demand in key sectors.
– The public demand and the readiness of the public sector to outsource this activity.
Fig. 8. EO services – Structure of the value chain. Background image: Ricardo Liberato (Licensed under CC-BY-SA).
Table 2
Types of services.
« Image +» services Specialised services and niches markets Vertical markets Horizontal approach
“Image-only” services (real time, time
series, etc.)
Thematic or Geographic specialisation Defence, agriculture, oil and gas,
assurance, etc.
Geo-marketing, geo-analytics, monitoring,
LBS
Automated processing High Expertise
Customer intimacy
B2B or B2G rules B2B or B2G rules B2B or B2G rules B2C or B2B2C rules applied to B2B
or B2G
Close link with the satellite owner Tailor-made solutions. Ready-to-wear. One size fits all.
Fragmented ecosystem of VAC and SME Standard product portfolio for families of
customers
Customer = consumer.
Main target for new space actors
Table 3
Types of customers.
Defence Civil institutional Commercial Consumer
market
Typical
activities
Mapping Cartography Agriculture,
oil and gas,
insurance, etc.
Mapping,
LBS, etc. for
web actors
Intelligence Environmental
C2-ISR monitoring
Maturity High High Variable Low
Growth
potential
Medium High High High
Customers 100 100-1000s 1000s Millions
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
427
– The demonstration of EO data value in the information production
and the benefits of platform-based analytics.
Main opportunities are:
– The development of new services for new markets with game changers
on demand side, related either to global environmental issues (adaptation to climate change, water and food security, insurance, etc.) or to
new commercial usages (geo-marketing, mapping and LBS, etc.)
– Successful implementation of services in areas where space data
plays a major role and can’t be substituted.
The main threat is the “hype effect” with the collapse of new
initiatives due to lack of funding or a viable business models. Dataagnostic services (terrestrial networks of sensors, IOT, crowd-based
sensing) pose another threat (see scenario 3).
6.2.3. Scenario 3: EO becomes a commodity («banalization») and
strong competition with other sources of information
“There is really not that much demand”: even if only two or three
new initiatives succeed, there is a risk of oversupplying the market.
This scenario is roughly a nightmare variant of scenario 2. The main
unknown is the actual role of space data in a big data world.
The wealth of data will also come from other information sources
(drones and HAPS, crowd-based and in situ in a connected world). In
particular, in the case of high revisit, the need for real time information is
often linked to tactical needs and direct action / response with security
forces, first responders, troops, etc. In this case, in-field operators carry
sensors (e.g. police helicopters, short range UAVs) and this model can be
very efficient. Crowd-sourcing is another trend, possibly fostered by the
development of mobile devices and networks (incl. IOT). If EO data
become really a commodity with huge competition between data and
satellite owners, there is an opportunity for pure content aggregators or
data brokers, without investment in proprietary data collection systems.
An evolution towards source-agnostic service provision is also credible:
most of end users (GEOINT can be an exception) are sensor/data
agnostic: they want the information not the data.
6.3. Consequences and impacts: focus on Europe
In a worldwide competition where the disruptive offers are mainly
initiated in the US, the accessible market share for European actors is a
strategic issue, with commercial consequences but also stakes in
relation with sovereignty and non-dependence. This section reviews
the possible consequences and impacts on the main stakeholders:
– GEOINT community.
– EO data and services providers.
– Satellites manufacturers.
– Nations and institutions.
6.3.1. GEOINT community
The United States have adopted a well-publicized policy that is
intended to make the best use of future constellations for government
and intelligence needs. Mid-2015, a so-called “NextGen Tasking
Initiative” has been launched by the National Geospatial Intelligence
Agency (NGA) with the goal to develop new methods for collecting,
processing and disseminating commercially generated information for
intelligence purposes.
Web and cloud-based solutions have been particularly highlighted
at this occasion. Even more recently, the head of NGA has confirmed an
effort to devote several tens of million dollars from the FY 2017 budget
to directly feed up the most prominent start-ups of the domain. More
generally, these declarations are fully in line with a “Commercial
Geoint Strategy” published in October 2015 (ref [11]): NGA makes no
secret of the relevance of future commercial constellations for the U.S.
government.
In the European Union, it seems that some Member States have
also expressed interest in these developments. In France for example, a
recent report mandated by the French Government (ref [16]) has
insisted on the changes induced by the rise of the new commercial
space sector and the need to adapt the institutional practices and
procedures to nurture theses evolutions. Similar studies have been
commissioned in Germany. However, the level of governmental
involvement is far below what can be seen in the U.S. in the rise of
the security and defence-oriented utilizations of the New Space. It is
highly likely that a number of obstacles linked to real-world intelligence
and defence issues, such as data policy and security or public-private
relationships will remain to be overcome for some time before it
becomes a new standard for the practitioners.
Since the end of the cold war, the defence budgets have significantly
and regularly decreased in Europe. In countries such as France,
Germany or Italy, the priority to space have been more or less assured
due to instable geostrategic situation, but not enough to enable the
implementation of robust and consistent military space capacities
(equipment, human resources to operate and exploit, training, etc).
As an example, Europe has no space early warning capacity to face
increasing threats coming from some rogue countries equipped with
ballistic missiles. We can assume the following trends in the coming
years:
– More and more dual systems especially in the field of hybrid
security/defence needs: maritime, borders and critical sites surveillance, control of inter-national treaties, etc. with funding shared
between defence and civil entities or even private operators.
– More civil space assets owned and operated by private
companies assuring guaranteed and secured access of data to
military customers.
– Limitation of state owned systems to those strictly connected to national security and sovereignty: identification
optical systems, SIGINT space systems, etc.
– More and enlarged cooperation and sharing processes
between European partners. The current SAR/optical data
sharing implemented between France, Germany and Italy is a
virtuous process which shall be reinforced and enlarged in the
future.
– More synergies with civil IT technologies (big data, cloud,
automatization of processes, fusion of data, etc.) in ground segment
and operations in order to follow the rapid evolution of technology
and the exponentially increasing amount of space data to be
processed by the military operational users.
In brief, the objective of defence actors will be to use more space
assets with less or same amount of money and people. Moreover this
growing and strategic use of space capacities and data either for
military, dual or civil uses stresses the importance of the security of
these capacities which are today vulnerable to external threats. A
specific effort is required at the level of major European space
countries.
6.3.2. European space ecosystem: from satellites to services
The service ecosystem is heterogeneous with various profiles:
SMEs, large web actors, large GIS actors.
According to a study prepared by EARSC (European Association of
Remote Sensing Companies) on the State and Health of the European
EO Services Industry (ref [17]), 451 companies were active in the
domain of EO services in Europe (and Canada) in 2014. The majority of
companies (63%) have less than 10 employees (95% < 50 people). The
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
428
total sector employment is 6811 persons in 2014. The total revenues
for the EO Services sector in 2014 reached €910 million (€786 million
in 2012) and is growing at a rate of around 7.6% p.a.
The new space context means new opportunities (with new EO data
sources) but also more competition and a risk of information dominance by a small number of worldwide champions (monopoly) or
global service providers backed by the large web actors.
The priority support action should be to secure the market position
of the commercial VHR data providers. Market analysis confirms that
the public sector has a key role in helping its European champions:
even if a European NGA will not be easily implemented, anchor-tenant
contracts can be developed by a public sector in its customer role with a
new balance between patrimonial assets or in-house activities and
external services. In her report on “open space” (Ref [16]), Genevieve
Fioraso recommends a “Buy European Act”.
The value-adding EO services in Europe are in an emerging state
and delivered by a very fragmented base of suppliers. The consolidation
of this supply chain (through mergers or strategic agreements) leading
to European champions is an option but this fragmentation is not
necessarily a weakness. It can mean a closer link with the final
customers and a solid territorial footprint.
In this case, the main need is to strengthen networking between
local commercial actors. This assumption is the rationale behind
Eugenius, A European Group of Enterprises for a Network of
Information Using Space, an initiative started by Terranis, a French
SME, in cooperation with a core team of European service providers.
Targeting the development of Copernicus downstream services, the
objective is to federate and transform isolated SMEs into a powerful
network of expert partners serving their proximity customers.
Eugenius concept is based on three foundations: the regional hubs
(geo-information service platforms), the applicative tools (thematic
software suites for specific needs such as agriculture, risk assessment,
coastline monitoring) and a set of organisational and commercial rules
between Eugenius partners. GEO4i is another good example: this
French SME combines the expertise of image analysts and geomatics
skills from the Ministry of Defence. GEO4i emphasises its close relation
with the final customer and its capacity to propose ad hoc solutions.
Fig. 9 highlights the potential use of medium resolution data as
information source for added-value services. A coherence map of two
radar images (Sentinel-1) reveals the activity detected between the 8th
March 2016 and the 20th March 2016. It allowed detecting many
passages of vehicles and showed intense activity. This suspicious
activity is confirmed by the optical image (Sentinel-2) acquired
March, 11th.
6.3.3. Opportunities for satellite manufacturers
Market forecasts predict $39 billion in manufacturing revenues
over the period 2015–2024, an 80% increase over that of the previous
decade. It is obviously an opportunity for European satellite manufacturers and the related supply chain, if they are competitive on the
worldwide market and sometimes ready to invest as partners in new
ventures. Recent successes in the telecommunication domain (OneWeb
or O3B) show that European space industry was able to play the game.
The support of space agencies is key, for the preparation of the future
(non-dependence and critical technologies, disruptive technologies,
etc.) and a contribution to “de-risking” activities (ref [18]).
The relation between space industry and space agencies could
evolve from a customer / supplier relationship to a cooperation / codevelopment approach (“together in the driver’s seat”). The situation is
much more complex for the IT component, as there is no European
champion, able to compete with Google or Amazon on the mid-stream
segment. Being able to change this situation is questionable, even if it
raises serious issues with respect to security and sovereignty.
6.3.4. Between sovereignty and dominance
Governments are responsible for regulations (including export control
and data policies) but these regulations can also become incentives for the
development of services and infrastructures. Governments have also a
significant role to play in agreements between governments (G2G) and
support to export activities, both for infrastructures and services: one can
anticipate an evolution of the concept of sovereignty, with hybrid
procurement schemes, between full ownership (e.g. PerúSAT-1) and
guaranteed access to information, helping to mitigate a risk of information
dominance by a single country. In a world of continental states, these
recommendations apply also to Europe and its 28 Member States.
Lessons learnt from Copernicus implementation (ref [19]) could help to
define an innovative and efficient scheme for a new generation of
Copernicus with a security component.
6.3.5. The cost of non-Europe
Towards a more coordinated approach between Member States in
Europe for GEOINT missions? Or even shared capacities? Is it
realistic? The European Union Satellite Centre remains the main focal
point in Europe for imagery and GEOINT sharing. Its functioning is
based on the fair exchange of information between all member States
as soon as it has been produced by the centre on request of one or
several member States. In this context, high performance commercial
imagery has been playing a key role, allowing the dissemination of
homogeneous information among the member States in a context when
national intelligence procedures might have impede the sharing of
intelligence generated by national systems. It is clear that such regional
arrangements can provide avenues for commercial systems to become
key providers of sensitive but sharable data on a collective basis.
6.4. GEOINT disruptions: considerations about the strategic scenario
for Europe
The “New space” paradigm represents a mix of visionary entrepreneurial operations bonding with a large amount of investments coming
for a very proactive venture capitalist ground. Main IT players are
investing in the EO sector in order to be able to offer an always more
Fig. 9. Added value services for GEOINT, derived from Sentinel imagery. Clandestine
refineries in Deir ez Zor (Syria). Credit: GEO4i.
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
429
integrated set of services, based on worldwide data retrieving, transmission and processing (Ref [20]).
This is indeed an incredible boost for the EO and GEOINT sector
which, for a long time, was linked to institutional markets, both in the
US and in Europe. But furthermore, this vision to provide an “all
inclusive” value added service chain on Earth is sometimes presented
as propaedeutic for space exploration and human colonization of planet
Mars. Even if Elon Musk or Jeff Bezos have to be considered very
seriously, also observing their achievements in the launching activities,
this grand vision has to be scrutinized in order to draft scenarios and
recommendations for EU GEOINT sector.
In a pure market logic, the consequences could be highly disruptive:
the integration of EO space based capabilities within an IT commercial
offer, integrated in apps developed by Alphabet or other Silicon Valley
champions, seems able to wipe out the EU industrial and technological
effort, based on a long term investment, often triggered by technology
push, relying on a public demand. On the other hand, new constellations can potentially provide better performances than existing EU
systems, relying on a more frequent revisiting time, a factor paving the
way for a set of new applications able to push on the side the technical
performances of institutional systems such as defence ones. This type
of thinking pushes the European space champions to try to position
themselves inside a renewed chain of added value in order to stay in the
game. This calls for offers of services such as agreements or sub
contracts with IT companies willing to produce and launch satellites, or
the development of European IT clusters in order to valorise existing
data gathering capabilities through processing and service development. It is a mix of response between collaboration and competition
with the main US initiatives. But on another hand a resilient scenario
shall be taken into consideration: European capabilities in terms of EO
and GEOINT are developed by companies which are also strategic, both
at national and EU level.
If we have in mind the French, German and Italian cases, we can
observe a mix where States partially own some key companies (directly
or sometimes through public agencies), companies able to produce an
applied technology which can serve the national security interests of
those states.
In a nutshell, those companies are strategic not only in terms of
products and applications to be used for national security purposes, but
also because they represent a specific know-how and capability which
shall be maintained in order to keep a reasonable level of independence.
6.4.1. Independence and interdependence
This question of independence is a key issue. IT companies are
often (and rightly) perceived as highly pervasive, with huge risks on
individual rights, rule of law and democracy. The growing control of the
information chain by a few multinational US based companies has to be
carefully monitored in order to avoid some totalitarian effect based on
the capacity to retrieve and process all kind of data. Europe hasn’t
developed such an integrated company. Space capabilities however
represent a sector where Europe has always kept a decent level of
technology, with some fields of excellence. The fact that Europe is able
to master the technologies of the entire space chain represents an asset
for today and tomorrow.
It is a key feature in terms of autonomy, but it is now an asset for
EU independence in terms of information gathering and processing.
If we take for granted a huge development of GEOINT capabilities
following the “new space” boost, there is a danger to loose some
pieces of the chain if the “Alphabet” or “Amazon” market driven
trend pushes the EU products out of the market. Loosing such
capacities would also be synonym of the loss of an autonomous and
reliable information gathering. For example one can be cautious in
terms of defence and security decisions based on US IT gathering
and processing, also because huge IT companies can have objectives
rather different than the ones of EU governments. Let’s recall that
France has been the first country to invest in defence EO satellite, a
decision reinforced by the difficulties in obtaining satellite intelligence from the US ally during the Balkans conflicts. The main EU
countries (Italy, Germany) have followed, considering that they shall
reach some autonomous capabilities. GEOINT capabilities shall be
considered as a key feature of an EU resilient capability. And this is
the reason why public R & D projects but also public demand shall
sustain the space EO sector, in order to avoid that important pieces
of technologies or companies finished completely preyed by some
Silicon Valley money drop.
This trend also calls for a major awareness at MS and EU levels, a
priority agenda to be translated in EU cooperation frameworks such
as Copernicus or the bilateral agreements between the main
European countries. These strategic considerations shall lead to a
quite conservative but also resilient paradigm: in order to maintain
the control over the GEOINT chain, Europe shall pursue its current
programme in order to maintain know how but also autonomous
capabilities.
Some thinking shall also be made to understand whether there is an
optimum for the size of the market. In Europe over the last decades, the
paths between Europeanisation trends and national ones were diverFig. 10. EO services – A new gold rush… and opportunities for Europe structure of the value chain.
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
430
ging. Often, Europe is presented as a minimum size market in order to
ensure the sustainability and the growth of European industrial
capabilities. This analysis is based on the concept of minimum level
of concentration for technology and capital.
This logic was also present when the supply side has been pooled,
meaning the creation of EADS (today Airbus) on one side and the
merging of Alcatel Space and Alenia Space on another hand. If we
take for granted the progressive integration of the EU market, those
industrial mergers follow that trend. But we have also noticed
contradictory elements, such as the correspondence between public
programmes and national champions: it is easier to provide public
support on a national basis than on a pan European one.
Furthermore today’s technical disruption involves small teams of
engineers and technicians.
After many years with pressure to always think bigger, we can
observe some prudence towards the MS level which represents often a
guarantee in terms of continuity and has the advantage of a “natural”
ground of expertise from academia to industry. Furthermore countries
such as France, Germany or Italy are today relying on regional
technological clusters, a relatively small dimension which is synonym
of a virtuous mix with research and development capabilities.
Those clusters can also foster the development of smaller companies able to make their way in the application market, the key driver for
the commercialization of technologies. The space sector in general, and
specifically in Europe, does not rely on a huge organisation, but rather
extremely qualified middle-size entities. The growth or at least the
preservation of this system could be identified as a strategic goal for
Europe. If US IT companies penetrate and conquer the EO sector
through their holistic applications, this could threaten the very
existence of the EU producers. The relations between Space EO
industries and IT applications oriented service providers is a very
touchy issue, that shall be dealt with a cautious, if not resilient,
approach.
7. Conclusions: and the winner is?
“Predictions can be very difficult - especially about the future.”
(Niels Bohr, attributed).
7.1. Trends to watch…
Who will be the winner?
Can European industry secure its role and competitiveness with
respect to the growing influence of the large US actors, the New Space
dynamism in the Silicon Valley? And will the promise of a huge growth
of the geoinformation market fostered by the convergence between IT
and EO become a reality?
It is too early to answer. The next three or five years will be very
interesting with trends and key indicators to be monitored:
– Actual implementation of the new space initiatives and consolidation of the landscape.
– Evolution of the market of the VHR (all market segments between
30 cm and 1 m) and respective shares of Digital Globe, Airbus
Defence and Space and potential newcomers.
– Actual development of the EO services and profile of the top winners
(SME, web actors, midstream actors), level of outsourcing by public
sector and degree of consolidation of the service supply chain.
– Evolution of the defence market and governmental policies.
European perspective (mutualisation, capacity sharing, European
policies).
– New space countries investing in their own capacities and/or acting
as new providers (e.g. China).
Will we see new and hybrid service schemes instead of black or
white options (including data policies) and new dimensions of dual use
between Public and Private, Civil and Defence, National sovereignty
and collective instruments (e.g. capacity sharing)?
Even if it does not provide a clear answer to the future industrial,
technical and political structure of EO systems, this study shows that
the EO markets and related industrial landscape can evolve significantly or even be disrupted in the coming years.
The consequences of the possible scenarios can affect the main
stakeholders involved, in particular in Europe (Fig. 10).
7.2. A new gold rush?
The current situation is similar to California Gold rush in 1849 with
lot of gold miners. Beside the development of service companies,
satellite manufacturers can find their way and become the new shovel
sellers.
Small is beautiful and Silicon Valley entrepreneurs, often space
enthusiasts, are very active. But one can observe that European
champions, both big companies and SMEs, have already demonstrated
their agility and ability to stay ahead and propose competitive products
and solutions. OneWeb is a typical example in telecommunication.
PerúSAT-1, built in less than 24 months in Airbus Defence and Space
“Projects Factory©” is another one in Earth Observation.
Despite the increasing influence of the private investment, public
sector support for commercial initiatives, not only via policy-making,
regulations and preparation of the future (R & D) but also as customer,
plays a key role to fostering the development of its world-class
champions and its ecosystem of SMEs. There are obviously opportunities in Europe:
– Strengthen the European champions: accompany R & D, involvement in risk sharing and develop anchor tenancies.
– Stimulate and support an ecosystem of innovative SMEs in EObased services for defence, institutional and commercial applications.
– Foster European space and defence policy/market (capacity sharing
/ mutualisation).
– And some open questions such as the dependence on mid-stream
infrastructure built outside Europe.
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
431
Annexure. New constellations for Earth Observation (non-exhaustive list, green part: at least one satellite in operation in orbit)
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
432
References
[1] “Alternative Futures: United States Commercial Satellite Imagery in 2020”, Report
prepared for the Department of Commerce by Robert A. Weber and Kevin M.
O′Connell, Innovative Analytics and Training, November 2011. See 〈https://gis.
idaho.gov/pdf/Framework/Imagery/IAT_DoC_Alternative_Futures_
Commercial_Satellite_Imagery.pdf〉.
[2] “Team GEOINT: This is Our Moment”, Remarks as prepared for Robert Cardillo,
Director, National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, US Geospatial Intelligence
Forum GEOINT Symposium, Washington, June 2015. See 〈https://www.nga.mil/
MediaRoom/SpeechesRemarks/Documents/2015/20150623_GEOINT_As_
Delivered.pdf〉.
[3] “EO embracing the new space environment: the significance of EO smallsat
constellations”, Earth imaging Journal, July 2015, Euroconsult, Canada, Adam
Keith. See 〈http://eijournal.com/print/articles/earth-observation-embracing-thenew-space-environment-the-significance-of-eo-smallsat-constellations〉.
[4] “Independent Study of the roles of commercial remote sensing in the future
national system (NSG)”, Final report of the panel chaired by Pete Marino, July
2007.
[5] “See a Better World”, 2015, annual report, Digital Globe.
[6] “Des Aliens et des barbares : une révolution dans l′observation de la Terre”, Thierry
Rousselin, Revue Prospective Stratégique, n°45, 1st trimester 2016.
[7] “Financial landscape for space-related ventures in Europe”, Spacetec Partners,
slides presented during the workshop Access to Finance for European space
industry, European Commission, DG GROW Brussels, 3 May 2016.
[8] “Satellogic on its way to launching 300 satellite constellation for Earth
Observation”. Satellitetoday, Caleb Henry, March 2016.
[9] “2016: State of the Satellite Industry Report”, prepared by Bryce Space and
Technology (formerly The Tauri Group) for Satellite Industry Association, June
2016. See: 〈https://brycetech.com/downloads/SIA_SSIR_2016.zip〉.
[10] “Start-Up Space: Rising Investment in Commercial Space Ventures”, Bryce Space
and Technology (formerly The Tauri Group), January 2016. See: 〈https://
brycetech.com/downloads/Start_Up_Space.zip〉.
[11] “Commercial GEOINT Strategy”, National Geospatial- Intelligence Agency, October
2015, 15 p. See: 〈https://www.nga.mil/MediaRoom/PressReleases/Documents/
2015/NGA_Commercial_GEOINT_Strategy.pdf〉.
[12] “CIBORG Introductory Industry Day”, Slides presented by NGA, 16 June 2026.
〈https://interact.gsa.gov/sites/default/files/CIBORG
%20IndustryDay16Jun2016FINAL%2016-493%20Release%20%281%29.pdf〉.
[13] “Satellite-Based Earth Observation: Market Prospects to 2025”. Report prepared by
Euroconsult, 9th edition, September 2016.
[14] “Earth Observation: state of play and future prospects”, presented by Adam Keith,
Managing Director, Euroconsult Canada. Summit on Earth Observation Business,
15th September 2016.
[15] “China Launches High-resolution Commercial Imaging Satellite”, Peter de Selding,
Space News, October 2015. See: 〈http://spacenews.com/china-launches-highresolution-commercial-imaging-satellite〉.
[16] “Open Space, l′ouverture comme réponse aux défis de la filière spatiale”, Fioraso
Geneviève, Rapport au premier Ministre, Paris, France, July 2016, 170 p. See:
〈http://www.gouvernement.fr/sites/default/files/liseuse/7791/master/index.
htm〉.
[17] “A survey into the state and health of the European EO services industry”, Study
prepared by EARSC. September 2015. See: 〈http://earsc.org/file_download/265/
EO+industry+survey+september+2015+vf.pdf〉.
[18] “The challenge of future space systems and services in Europe: Industrial
competitiveness without a level-playing field”, Gil Denis (Airbus Defence and
Space) and Xavier Pasco (Fondation pour la Recherche Stratégique). Presented at
IAC 2013 (Pekin). Published in New Space (Vol. 3, No. 1) March 2015. DOI: 10.
1089/space.2013.0034.
[19] “GMES and the development of Earth observation services: threats and opportunities for the service industry”, Gil Denis (Airbus Defence and Space), Toulouse
Space Show 2010, Space ECO workshop.
[20] “NewSpace: New business models at the interface of the space industry and digital
economy. Opportunities for Germany in a connected world”. Study prepared for the
German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy by SpaceTec Partners
and BHO Legal. See: 〈https://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/DE/Publikationen/
Studien/bmwi-new-space-geschaeftsmodelle-an-der-schnittstelle-von-raumfahrtund-digitaler-wirtschaft.pdf?__blob=publicationFile & v=7〉.
G. Denis et al. Acta Astronautica 137 (2017) 415–433
433