International Journal of Information Management 59 (2021) 102334
Available online 1 March 2021
0268-4012/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Research Article
Real-time analytics, incident response process agility and enterprise
cybersecurity performance: A contingent resource-based analysis
Ayesha Naseer a
, Humza Naseer b,d
, Atif Ahmad b
, Sean B. Maynard b,
*, Adil Masood Siddiqui c
a Department of Computer Software Engineering, National University of Sciences and Technology, Rawalpindi, Pakistan b School of Computing and Information Systems, Faculty of Engineering and IT, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia c Department of Electrical Engineering, National University of Sciences and Technology, Rawalpindi, Pakistan d Centre for Future Enterprise, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Real-time analytics
Incident response
Agility
Resource-based view
Enterprise cybersecurity performance
ABSTRACT
Emerging paradigms of attack challenge enterprise cybersecurity with sophisticated custom-built tools, unpredictable patterns of exploitation, and an increasing ability to adapt to cyber defenses. As a result, organizations
continue to experience incidents and suffer losses. The responsibility to respond to cybersecurity incidents lies
with the incident response (IR) function. We argue that (1) organizations must develop ‘agility’ in their IR
process to respond swiftly and efficiently to sophisticated and potent cyber threats, and (2) Real-time analytics
(RTA) gives organizations a unique opportunity to drive their IR process in an agile manner by detecting
cybersecurity incidents quickly and responding to them proactively. To better understand how organizations can
use RTA to enable IR agility, we analyzed in-depth data from twenty expert interviews using a contingent
resource-based view. The results informed a framework explaining how organizations enable agile characteristics
(swiftness, flexibility, and innovation) in the IR process using the key features of the RTA capability (complex
event processing, decision automation, and on-demand and continuous data analysis) to detect and respond to
cybersecurity incidents as-they-occur which, in turn, improves their overall enterprise cybersecurity
performance.
1. Introduction
From large-scale manufacturers to government agencies and
healthcare providers, no enterprise remains safe from today’s sophisticated and targeted cyber-attacks. Whether attackers are after trade secrets, intellectual property, classified information, or financial data, the
constantly evolving cyber threat landscape and the rapid growth of
network environments are providing more opportunities for attackers
(Lemay, Calvet, Menet, & Fernandez, 2018; Naseer, Maynard, & Desouza, 2021). It is no longer a matter of if, but when, attackers will break
into enterprise networks. That is why the ability to swiftly detect and
respond efficiently to complex, dynamic and evolving cybersecurity
threats is becoming a major concern for organizations (Ahmad, Desouza,
Maynard, Naseer, & Baskerville, 2020; Baskerville, Spagnoletti, & Kim,
2014).
Organizations employ an incident response (IR) function to detect,
contain, eradicate, and recover from cybersecurity incidents. The
overarching IR process involves receiving and reviewing cybersecurity
events and reports by an IR team that is part of a multi-layered approach
towards protecting enterprise assets (Ahmad, Maynard, & Shanks, 2015;
Creasy & Glover, 2013). In this paper, we argue that for the IR process to
be effective in addressing emerging, sophisticated, and dynamic threats,
its core activities (detection, containment, eradication, and recovery)
must be conducted in an agile manner (Grispos, Glisson, & Storer, 2014).
A key factor in achieving agility is the length of time taken from
detection to recovery. The longer the time taken to respond to the
incident, the greater the likely impact on the organization (Ahmad et al.,
2020; Eastman & Versace, 2015). Therefore, the success of cybersecurity
IR is dependent on responding to, and thwarting, cybersecurity attacks
before they cause any damage (i.e., while they are happening).
One of the major activities in dealing with cybersecurity incidents is
the collection, storage and analysis of all data related to the incident that
has happened or is happening (Naseer et al., 2021; Pierazzi, Casolari,
Colajanni, & Marchetti, 2016). Business analytics (BA) is an
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: ayeshanaseer@mcs.edu.pk (A. Naseer), humza.naseer@qut.edu.au (H. Naseer), atif@unimelb.edu.au (A. Ahmad), seanbm@unimelb.edu.au
(S.B. Maynard), dradil@mcs.edu.pk (A. Masood Siddiqui).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Information Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijinfomgt
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2021.102334
Received 8 November 2019; Received in revised form 18 February 2021; Accepted 19 February 2021 
International Journal of Information Management 59 (2021) 102334
2
organizational capability that helps in collection, storage and analysis of
business data to generate insights that can help business executives in
making informed business decisions (Grover, Chiang, Ting-Peng, &
Dongosng, 2018; Wixom, Yen, & Relich, 2013). Building on a BA
capability, BA scholars have proposed a real-time analytics capability
(RTAC), which is a specialized BA capability that helps organizations to
monitor and analyze business events as they occur (Phillips-Wren,
Lakshmi, Kulkarni, & Ariyachandra, 2015; Wixom et al., 2013). Therefore, we propose that RTAC provides organizations with a unique opportunity to detect ongoing cybersecurity incidents as they happen and
respond to them proactively.
Information Systems (IS) scholars have used the resource-based view
(RBV) theory to argue that BA capabilities contribute to superior firm
performance (Seddon, Constantinidis, Tamm, & Dod, 2017; Sharma,
Mithas, & Kankanhalli, 2014). This argument has been backed by
empirical evidence demonstrating that BA does indeed contribute to
superior firm performance (Kevin, Yang, Olson, & Sheu, 2014). Despite
the significant appeal of the concept, there is a lack of agreement in IS
literature regarding how BA capability contributes to superior organizational performance (Seddon et al., 2017). Rather than drawing a direct
relationship between BA capabilities and firm performance, our
approach is to consider intermediate processes by which an organization
utilizes its BA capabilities to achieve superior performance (Aydiner,
Tatoglu, Bayraktar, Zaim, & Delen, 2019; Bronzo et al., 2013).
To this end, we draw on the RBV argument that internal business
processes are crucial for linking BA capabilities and firm performance
(Bronzo et al., 2013). We focus on incident response process agility, a
feature of the internal IR business process (Grispos et al., 2014; Tallon,
Queiroz, Coltman, & Sharma, 2019). Agility in the IR process refers to
how efficiently and swiftly organizations can alter their IR resources and
processes to detect and respond to complex and new cybersecurity
threats. Agility is critical to the IR process, since an organization’s
capability to achieve superior cybersecurity performance depends on its
response to cybersecurity incidents which are happening or have
happened within the unpredictable cyber threat environment (Baskerville et al., 2014). Building on the fact that the main drivers of business
process agility are technology and analytics, organizations can
strengthen their IR process by leveraging RTAC (Park, El Sawy, & Fiss,
2017). Even though organizations are paying increasing attention to
enable IR agility, not enough is known about the role of RTAC in
enabling IR agility and its impact on enterprise cybersecurity performance. This gap in the literature motivates our study’s research question: How does the use of real-time analytics in the incident response process
improve enterprise cybersecurity performance?
To investigate this research question, we conducted twenty in-depth
expert interviews with cybersecurity analytics professionals discussing
how RTA is being used in the IR process. Based on the findings from the
empirical data, we developed a framework that explains the application
and key features of RTA in the IR process. The details of the framework
advance and simplify our understanding of how organizations instill
agile characteristics (innovation, flexibility, and swiftness) in the IR
process using the key features of the RTA capability (complex event
processing, decision automation, and on-demand and continuous data
analysis) to detect and respond to cybersecurity incidents as-they-occur
which, in turn, improves their overall enterprise cybersecurity
performance.
In the following sections, we provide theoretical background on
RTAC, IR process agility and contingent RBV theory. In the Research
methodology section, we provide the details of the expert interviews
data collection and analysis process, and then go on to present the results of the fieldwork. A discussion of our findings follows, in which we
identify implications for theory and practice and conclude the paper by
providing limitations of our study and directions for future research.
2. Theoretical background
2.1. Real-time analytics – a specialized business analytics capability
Organizations are increasingly using BA capability to achieve
competitive advantage (Cao, Duan, & Cadden, 2019; Seddon et al.,
2017; Wixom et al., 2013). The most vital feature of BA capability is the
development of reporting and analysis applications (Eckerson, 2012;
Holsapple, Lee-Post, & Pakath, 2014) that enable the collection, storage,
and analysis of important business data to generate new business insights. Analytics in particular refers to a systematic computational
analysis of data or statistics (Davenport & Kudyba, 2016; Wixom et al.,
2013). From an analytical perspective, BA capability has three main
types: (1) descriptive analytics, (2) predictive analytics, and (3) prescriptive analytics. Descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive analytics
are valuable as these provide insights for both historical analysis and
future planning (Naseer et al., 2021). However, they are affected by
latency (data latency, analysis latency, and decision latency) as data are
first saved to an analytical platform before insight generation occurs
(Phillips-Wren et al., 2015). These applications are therefore not ideal
for business events that need to be analyzed as they occur (for example,
situational intelligence, event-based campaigns, and fraud detection).
To address this problem, BA scholars have proposed the concept of
real-time analytics which is a specialized BA capability that enables
monitoring and analysis of business events as they occur (Phillips-Wren
et al., 2015; Russom, Stodder, & Halper, 2014).
Although the concept of RTA has existed in BA for more than a
decade, the understanding of this concept is still limited (Townsend
et al., 2018). There are two major reasons for this limited understanding.
First, the keyword “real-time” has many meanings in terms of how
frequently and quickly data should be fetched and processed to deliver
business insights. Second, implementation of RTA requires several
additional capabilities in a typical BA architecture such as real-time
event processing and interoperability across multiple analytical platforms (Phillips-Wren et al., 2015; Russom et al., 2014). In this study, we
define real-time analytics capability as the ability to leverage people,
process and technology towards delivering analytical insights within the
timeframe that meets the requirements of a particular business process
(Davenport & Kudyba, 2016; Phillips-Wren et al., 2015). Since the
concept of RTA is still developing and needs more investigation, this
study investigates the key features of an RTA capability, its role in
enabling IR agility and its impact on overall enterprise cybersecurity
performance.
2.2. Agility in cybersecurity incident response process
In the cybersecurity IR process, cybersecurity IR teams aim to detect,
analyze, eradicate, and recover from potential cybersecurity incidents in
a timely and cost-effective manner (Cichonski, Millar, Grance, & Scarfone, 2012). This is a critical enterprise process as organizations are not
always able to prevent breaches and a quick response to an attack can
reduce the impact on their reputation and competitive advantage
(Ahmad et al., 2020; Desouza, Ahmad, Naseer, & Sharma, 2020).
In our review of the cybersecurity IR literature, we found that the
goal of the cybersecurity strategy in many organizations is to invest in
sophisticated preventive controls aimed at combating known threats,
rather than in a dynamic and sophisticated response process to address
unknown complex and new threats (Baskerville et al., 2014; Eastman &
Versace, 2015). The result of using a prevention-oriented strategy is that
organizations are better equipped to deal with cybersecurity threats that
are predictable and static in nature. However, they are more vulnerable
to dynamic, unpredictable, and new cybersecurity threats, such as
zero-day threats (Eastman & Versace, 2015; Naseer, Maynard, Ahmad,
& Shanks, 2018).
In a zero-day attack, the perpetrator exploits an unknown vulnerability in the organizational infrastructure such as hardware, software, or
A. Naseer et al. 
International Journal of Information Management 59 (2021) 102334
3
firmware (Kaur & Singh, 2015). The organization remains oblivious to
the vulnerability or threat and there are no predefined controls in place
to prevent the breach. These vulnerabilities are highly sought after by
cyber criminals, software vendors, and governments who will pay high
prices for access to the exploit (Desouza et al., 2020). The attackers take
advantage of the unknown nature of zero-day exploits and use them to
carry out targeted and highly sophisticated attacks (Ahmad, Webb,
Desouza, & Broom, 2019).
It is difficult to defend against such exploits as the data is generally
only available for analysis after the attack has completed its course
(Lemay et al., 2018). Therefore, organizations need to a develop a dynamic response capability that can help them detect cyber-attackers’
activity such as spying, spreading, and stealing inside the perimeter in
real-time and provide security managers with actionable insights in a
timely manner to stop the attack and prevent damage. Agility is a key
characteristic of the dynamic IR capability (Baskerville et al., 2014).
Although organizations are paying increasing attention to enable IR
agility, not enough is known about how agility can be realized in IR
(Baskerville et al., 2014). Therefore, we apply the contingent RBV lens to
examine how RTAC helps organizations to achieve IR agility.
2.3. A contingent resource-based view
The RBV argues that organizations can generate competitive
advantage by developing bundles of resources (Barney, 1991; Newbert,
2007). These resources consist of assets and capabilities and may be
tangible or intangible. Assets include data, people, infrastructure, and
applications, while capabilities include knowledge and skills of the
people, routines, and organizational processes that use assets to perform
business tasks. While many assets are readily available and some are
commodities, an organization’s superior performance can be mainly
attributed to the unique, valuable, rare, inimitable and
non-substitutable capabilities that enable the organization to perform
activities more efficiently and effectively than its competitors (Wade &
Hulland, 2004). In the literature, there are many examples of analytical
resources which include analytical systems and combination of people,
data-analysis processes, and technologies that enable business executives to make evidence-based decisions (Grover et al., 2018; Seddon
et al., 2017).
Although the RBV theory is dominant within the extant literature, it
has been considered to be essentially static in nature (Ling-yee, 2007).
This implies that the RBV is inadequate in identifying and explaining the
conditions in which capabilities are most valuable (Barreto, 2010). The
notion of contingent conditions is addressed in contingency theory
which suggests that external and internal conditions will impact the way
the organization is managed and subsequently may affect the capabilities required to be competitive in changing environments (Aragon-Correa & Sharma, 2003; Barreto, 2010; Naseer, Shanks, Ahmad, &
Maynard, 2016).
Organizational capability development and orchestration has contingencies that impact the outcomes or effectiveness of their capabilities’ integration processes. Environmental factors may change the effect
of capabilities on competitive outcomes (Sirmon, Hitt, Ireland, &
Gilbert, 2011). Contingency theory argues that organizations must adapt
to changing environments. Therefore, our research explores the
contingent cybersecurity threat environment factors on the relationship
between RTAC and IR agility. Furthermore, the BA and RBV theory
literature suggests that future research should link BA capabilities to
competitive advantage (Holsapple et al., 2014; Naseer, Maynard, &
Ahmad, 2016). Enterprise cybersecurity primarily serves to protect
competitive advantage (Naseer, Shanks, Ahmad, & Maynard, 2017;
Stoll, 2015). Therefore, we investigate the process through which RTAC
affects enterprise cybersecurity performance in an unpredictable threat
environment.
The development of contingent RBV is valuable for three reasons: (1)
for further improvement of the utility of the RBV, (2) for identification of
the conditions that affect the usefulness of RTA in enabling agile IR, and
(3) for the assessment of the extent to which various analytical capabilities contribute towards the improvement of enterprise cybersecurity
performance (Aragon-Correa & Sharma, 2003; David & Noble, 2016).
However, the contingent perspective on the RBV is underdeveloped in
cybersecurity management and IR literature. Therefore, in this study we
use the contingent RBV to explain how RTAC influences enterprise
cybersecurity performance through the mediating effect of IR agility and
how environmental factors moderate the effect of RTAC on IR agility.
3. Research methodology
The aim of our research is to investigate how organizations improve
their overall enterprise cybersecurity performance using RTA in their
cybersecurity IR process. Taking into consideration that the cybersecurity threat environment is highly dynamic, we employed an inductive
and exploratory research method to be open to new and unexpected
findings. We followed the guidelines outlined in Eisenhardt and
Graebner (2007) and Gioia, Corley, and Hamilton (2013). Although we
used contingent RBV as the sensitizing tool, we inferred our findings and
claims from, and grounded them in, the empirical data. Consistent with
the exploratory purpose of our study, we conducted twenty face-to-face
semi-structured interviews with cybersecurity analytics experts to
collect qualitative data (Silverman, 2015). The criteria for the selection
of participants for our study was that the participant needed to have at
least 5 years of experience in both cybersecurity and business analytics.
Table 1 provides a summary of the profile of the interviewees.
We opted for expert interviews as this approach enables our research
to be grounded in current practice and provides rich and in-depth information regarding the use of analytics in cybersecurity IR and how it
impacts enterprise cybersecurity performance (Silverman, 2015). The
interviewees were selected based on their cybersecurity and business
Table 1
Interviewee Profiles.
ID Role Industry Sector Experience
(Cybersecurity, BA)
1 Senior Cybersecurity
Manager
Finance 12 years, 10 years
2 Senior Security Architect ICT 13 years, 8 years
3 Head of Cybersecurity Insurance 20 years, 15 years
4 Chief Security Architect Big data and
Cybersecurity
10 years, 20 years
5 Head of IT Risk Finance 10 years, 7 years
6 Enterprise Security
Architect
Cross Industry 10 years, 12 years
7 Director of Cybersecurity
risk
Cross industry 11 years, 20 years
8 Cybersecurity manager Finance 8 years, 10 years
9 Data Scientist Banking and
Finance
6 years, 10 years
10 Senior Cybersecurity
Analyst
Banking and
Finance
10 years, 5 years
11 Cybersecurity Risk Manager ICT 12 years, 19 years
12 Chief Information Security
Officer
Banking and
Finance
20 years, 25 years
13 IT Risk Manager Insurance 8 years, 5 years
14 General manager of IT risk Banking and
Finance
22 years, 25 years
15 IT Risk partner ICT 21 years, 12 years
16 Senior Cybersecurity
Analyst
Banking and
Finance
8 Years, 5 Years
17 Threat Hunter Banking and
Finance
9 Years, 7 Years
18 Cybersecurity and IT
architecture Specialist
ICT 13 years, 8 years
19 Threat intelligence leader Banking and
Finance
15 years, 12 years
20 General manager of data
science & analytics
Cross industry 10 years, 20 years
A. Naseer et al. 
International Journal of Information Management 59 (2021) 102334
4
analytics experience and their job roles. The interviewees came from 18
distinct organizations (interviewees 6 and 7 came from the same organization as did interviewees 16 and 17). As we were using expert interviews, we asked the interviewees to reflect on their overall
experiences rather than those just in their current organization. Additionally, interviewees 6, 7 and 20 came from consulting organizations
and thus had a rich and diverse set of experiences across multiple industry sectors. Based on the concepts of RTA, cybersecurity IR and
corresponding literature on RBV theory, an interview guide was developed which contained open-ended questions about BA and IR in general.
The semi-structured interviews of approximately one-hour were
audio-recorded and transcribed. We also took detailed notes during the
interviews.
We used thematic content analysis to analyze the data. The raw
qualitative data was systematically transformed into theoretical interpretations using a three-stage process following Gioia et al. (2013).
Fig. 1 provides an example of the data structure that was developed after
several iterations of analyzing the data from first order concepts to
second order themes and then to final aggregate dimensions.
In the first stage, we did initial coding to develop first-order concepts
from the data by adhering to participants’ wording and terms. In the
second stage, we relied on the existing literature and our knowledge to
analyze and develop concepts that explained the data. We re-analyzed
the data by acting as knowledgeable agents and using researchercentric concepts. Focusing on the deep structure underlying the firstorder concepts and the similarities and differences between them, we
reduced the first-order concepts to more abstract second-order themes.
In the third stage, the data was further analyzed by investigating
whether it is possible to aggregate the concepts identified in second
order themes to form higher-level more abstract concepts (aggregate
dimensions). Although this paper is necessarily presented in a linear
structure, the entire process of data analysis that we carried out was
iterative to improve insights and generalizability. Table 2 below provides an example data table supporting emergent concepts and themes.
Although we have provided only a few examples of raw data in Table 2,
there are numerous examples for each first order concept and second
order theme.
Using the data structure, we revalidated the final concepts back to
the underlying data and established a clear connection between data,
the emerging concepts, and the aggregate dimensions. By preserving the
voices of both informants and researchers, we could rigorously develop
detailed and accurate definitions of concepts from the data. The integration of insights from empirical data analysis with extant literature
resulted in a framework (see Fig. 2) that explains how RTA indirectly
impacts enterprise cybersecurity performance through development of
agile characteristics of flexibility, swiftness, and innovation in the IR
process.
4. Findings
In this section, we present and provide evidence for the findings that
emerged during the analysis of the expert interviews.
4.1. Real-time analytics capability
In the highly dynamic and constantly changing cybersecurity environment, cybersecurity threats are continuously growing in volume and
sophistication. Time delays incurred in the detection and response to
cyber threats are a source of significant expense to organizations. As a
result, organizations look to adopt analytical practices and methods to
Fig. 1. Data Structure.
A. Naseer et al. 
International Journal of Information Management 59 (2021) 102334
5
help them to quickly detect, mitigate, and respond to cybersecurity incidents and thereby improve their cybersecurity resilience. Expert 14
noted that: “A security incident can be anything and we need to understand
what it is. It can be an active threat, an attempted intrusion or a successful
data compromise or breach…real-time analytics helps us to determine what
type of incident we are facing and then decide whether it requires our
attention right now and also to determine which assets are impacted by the
incident”.
Expert 7 identified complex event processing as a key aspect of RTAC
as it helps in the analysis of streaming data and explained that: “Using
real-time analytics, our focus is on continuous monitoring of cybersecurity events. Complex event processing enables us to analyze streaming
data from sensors, network flow, and meta-data…we look for anomalous
or suspicious network activities that give us a strong indication that a
security incident is in progress”. Similarly, Expert 3 highlighted decision
automation as an essential feature of RTA: “We use real-time analytics to
reduce our incident response decision times by automating the cybersecurity incident response activities”. Expert 12 explained the critical
role of RTA in enabling decision automation in IR as follows: “Real-time
analytics plays a key role in aggregating key data on the fly and identifying the actual threats which helps our security managers to decide
which are the priority incidents”. Finally, Expert 4 highlighted the ondemand and continuous data analysis feature of RTA and explained it
as: “On-demand data analysis is a reactive approach as it waits for the
security analyst to request a query and then delivers the insights,
whereas continuous data analysis is a proactive approach that continuously alerts security analysts with updates in real-time”.
4.2. Cybersecurity incident response agility
Based on the aforementioned features of RTAC, there are three ways
identified in the data through which RTAC can help organizations
achieve IR agility: (1) enabling flexibility in IR (2) enabling swiftness in IR,
and (3) enabling innovation in IR.
First, RTAC enables flexibility in IR as it provides two types of data
analysis in real-time (1) Continuous and (2) On-demand. Expert 9 noted
that the use of continuous and on-demand real-time data analysis helps
in the detection and analysis of different kinds of cyber-attacks and then
determines the specific type of attack: “We encounter phishing and spearphishing attacks on a daily basis. Our tier 1 security analysts are using security information and event monitoring tools to continuously monitor our
communication servers to detect any phishing attacks. Once a tier 1 security
analyst detects an attack, our tier 2 security analysts use threat intelligence
tools to further investigate if it is a phishing or spear-phishing attack”. He
further explained that threat intelligence helps them to understand in
particular the attacker’s intent: “Intent reflects the desire of the attacker in
targeting our assets … analyzing this information within a broader business
context is extremely vital and threat intelligence provides us this information”. Similarly, Expert 10 explained how they are using continuous data
analysis to rapidly identify alerts that are worthy of deeper investigation
and then initiating an appropriate response as soon as an incident is
detected: “Our security monitoring systems run all day and these systems
continuously monitor cybersecurity events as they occur and generate alerts
as soon as an incident is detected that needs a response. The response can
either come from the system itself or from our incident response team”.
Table 2
Data supporting emergent concepts and themes.
Representative Quotes First Order Concepts Second Order
Themes
Aggregate
Dimensions
“We use both
continuous and ondemand real-time
data analytics for
making IR related
decisions quickly…
On-demand waits for
the analyst to request
a query and therefore
is reactive. But in
contrast, continuous
analytics is more
proactive as it
generates threat
alerts in real-time as
the events are
occurring”. (Expert
12)
• Continuous data
analysis helps
incident responders
to monitor, detect
and analyze
different kinds of
cyber threats.
• On-demand data
analysis helps to
identify events that
require deeper
investigation.
Flexibility in
incident
response
Incident
response
agility
“The complex event
processing engine
ingests the streaming
data and analyzes it,
correlates values and
blends different
cybersecurity events
streams together…
we also use complex
event processing to
analyze cause-andeffect relationships
among cybersecurity
events”. (Expert 20)
• Incident responders
use complex event
processing to
capture, process,
integrate, and
analyze streaming
data in real-time.
• Probing cause-andeffect relationship
among cyber events
is vital for swift
response.
Swiftness in
incident
response
“Real-time analytics
helps in reducing the
incident response
time by automating
and speeding up the
whole decisionmaking process…
this allows incident
responders to focus
on threat hunting
and other valuable
tasks”. (Expert 15)
• Real-time analytics
enables innovation
in incident response
by building realtime decision automation systems.
• Decision automation
enables incident
responders to focus
on important tasks
Innovation in
incident
response
Fig. 2. A framework linking RTAC with enterprise cybersecurity performance.
A. Naseer et al. 
International Journal of Information Management 59 (2021) 102334
6
Therefore, both the on-demand and continuous data analysis features of
RTAC provide flexibility in detection and analysis phases of IR and can
be used in building an effective IR strategy.
Second, the security data generated by the different systems is mostly
streaming data that comes from various sources in the form of logs such
as firewalls, intrusion detection systems, intrusion prevention systems,
databases, applications, and servers; the challenge for the IR function is
to integrate and analyze this continuously growing stream of data in
real-time. Having the ability to swiftly detect dynamic and new cybersecurity threats and respond to them in a timely and proactive manner
can be a decisive factor in IR success or failure. Expert 5 noted that: “In
complex event processing systems, cybersecurity events act as a trigger…we
continuously monitor cybersecurity events by integrating and analyzing
streaming data and based on the alerts take appropriate actions against
suspicious events”. Therefore, the complex event processing feature of
RTAC enables capturing, processing, and integration of streaming data,
and helps in analyzing cause-and-effect relationships among cybersecurity events in real-time.
Third, organizations can use RTAC to enable innovation in IR by
building real-time IR decision automation systems. Expert 11 explained
that one of the major benefits of using RTA in IR is that it helps to
generate automatic threat alerts and trigger actions based on the predefined rules: “Everyday there is a new challenge for our security operations center. They need to deal with new threats and the most significant way
to combat against them is through an automated and intelligent defense
mechanism that can quickly identify new and existing threats and then has
the ability to generate alerts and trigger actions to mitigate them”. According
to Expert 14, the complete real-time automation system requires both
streaming analytics and rules. In the context of IR, these are the correlation rules that are built in the security information and event management systems (SIEM). Expert 14 noted that: “Our network security
appliances are constantly generating large amount of security log data that
goes to the SIEM system. We have built in correlation rules in SIEM to detect
which sequences of cybersecurity events could be indicative of anomalous
behavior that may suggest cyber-attack or security weaknesses. So, for
example, when a sequence of “x” and “y” or “x” and “y” plus “z” events
happen, then this action should be taken, or this person should be notified”.
Therefore, the combination of real-time event processing, advanced
analytical systems, IR strategy, complex algorithms, and predictive
models provides a data analysis and storage infrastructure that can
enable innovation in the IR process by delivering real-time automated
IR.
4.3. Cyber threat environment
The complex and dynamic nature of the cyber threat environment
drives organizations to develop RTAC in their IR process. Expert 4 noted
that: “Attackers use complex and dynamic ways to break into our networks.
For example, they will use zero-day attacks, stolen access credentials,
infected mobile devices, a vulnerable business partner, or other tactics to
carry out the cyber-attack. Having a real-time analytics capability means that
we have the ability to detect such attacks in real-time and respond to them in a
proactive way”. The complexity of the cyber threat environment originates from the interdependencies and interactions between threat
agents. Expert 1 explained that: “There is a direct correlation between security, complexity and stability…the complex environment like ours that have
multiple networks, databases and operating systems introduces instability into
the environment and therefore requires more security controls”.
In contrast, dynamism in the cyber threat environment refers to the
unpredictable, dynamic, and evolving nature of cybersecurity threats.
Expert 7 explained the dynamic nature of cybersecurity threats as:
“Attackers are continuously creating new tools and methods to leverage new
weaknesses and also exploit existing vulnerabilities…they are adapting to
their environment. With attackers looking back and forward to select best-fit
attack characteristics, how do organizations effectively respond to this is a big
challenge”. Thus, in dynamic and complex threat environments, RTAC
becomes more valuable as it enables organizations to detect cybersecurity incidents as they happen and respond to them in an agile manner.
4.4. Enterprise cybersecurity performance
Enterprise cybersecurity performance refers to the overall efficiency
and effectiveness of organizational cybersecurity processes that help in
the protection of business assets. According to Expert 12: “The main
benefit of using real-time analytics in incident response process is to proactively detect and respond to cyber threats…so that we can operate and
innovate our business processes in such a way that make them efficient and
effective”. The IR agility enabled by RTA allows organizations to proactively address cybersecurity incidents that have happened or are
happening in an unpredictable threat environment. Expert 12 noted
that: “The practice of incident response in an agile way ensures that we are
prepared to face cybersecurity incidents confidently and effectively and
manage both existing and emerging threats quickly”. Expert 3 explained the
role of RTAC in improving enterprise cybersecurity performance as
follows: “If we don’t invest in real-time analytics, we cannot improve our
security [performance] and we are at a competitive disadvantage. I think that
our peer organizations will all be making similar investments in such technology to improve their security performance and if we don’t, then we are at
competitive disadvantage”.
5. A framework relating real-time analytics capability to
enterprise cybersecurity performance
Up to this point, we have described how real-time analytics enables
agility in the cybersecurity IR process and thereby its impact on enterprise cybersecurity performance. Combining these insights with existing
literature informs a framework linking RTAC with enterprise cybersecurity performance (see Fig. 2). We use the ‘process view’ of the RBV and
propose that RTAC has an indirect impact on enterprise cybersecurity
performance and that IR agility serves as a mediator of this relationship
(Pang, Lee, & Delone, 2014). In addition, cyber threat environment
complexity and dynamism moderate the effect of RTAC on IR agility. In
particular, organizations use complex event processing, decision automation, and continuous and on-demand data analysis features of RTAC to
enable agile characteristics of swiftness, flexibility, and innovation in the
IR process. This, in turn, helps them to respond to dynamic and complex
cybersecurity threats quickly and proactively and thereby improves the
efficiency and effectiveness of their overall enterprise cybersecurity
performance. We now develop this framework in more depth.
Scholars have proposed a combination of prevention, detection and
response approaches to deal with both predictable and unpredictable
cybersecurity threats (Ahmad et al., 2020; Baskerville et al., 2014).
Ultimately, whatever response strategy is chosen by cybersecurity executives, it must be agile and timely so that it can influence the outcome
(Tallon et al., 2019). Our findings suggest that one way to achieve agile
and rapid IR is by utilizing the RTAC in the IR process. The complex
event processing, automated decision-making and on-demand and
continuous data analysis features of RTAC enable capturing and processing of streaming data and help to analyze cause-and-effect relationships among cybersecurity events in real-time, thereby enabling
agility in IR. Cybersecurity events cannot always be predicted (Eastman
& Versace, 2015; Naseer et al., 2021). In complex event processing,
events function as a trigger, therefore IR teams can proactively respond
to cybersecurity events as they occur by taking effective actions against
suspicious events.
RTA, as an innovative technology, requires architectural changes in a
traditional BA architecture (Phillips-Wren et al., 2015; Russom et al.,
2014). Our findings provide empirical evidence for this observation and
suggest that the implementation of RTA in the IR process requires
additional capabilities (such as in-memory analytics, data virtualization
and interoperability across multiple analytical platforms) than provided
in a typical security analytics architecture. For example, when data
A. Naseer et al. 
International Journal of Information Management 59 (2021) 102334
7
needs to travel across multiple analytical platforms in real-time, each
platform and tool requires some type of real-time capability (e.g.,
streaming input and data analysis, complex event processing, and
business rules). As such, the findings from this study correspond closely
to use of real-time business intelligence at Continental Airlines (Watson,
Wixom, Hoffer, Anderson-Lehman, & Reynolds, 2006). In summary, our
findings expand the current conceptualization of RTAC and extend the
prior literature by describing its specific features. Accordingly, we
formulate the following proposition:
Proposition 1. Complex event processing, decision automation, and
on demand and continuous data analysis are critical elements of realtime analytics capability.
Recent research observes that firms that have built process-oriented
analytical capabilities are able to improve their business process agility
so that they are better able to detect changes, threats and opportunities
in the environment which, in turn, help them to exploit opportunities for
innovation and competitive action (Chen et al., 2014; Queiroz, Tallon,
Sharma, & Coltman, 2018; Van Oosterhout, Waarts, & Van Hillegersberg, 2006). Further, business process agility is an important
mechanism through which firms can outperform competitors by
responding more effectively to changing business environments (Tallon
& Pinsonneault, 2011; Tallon, 2008). Our study supports these findings
and suggests that RTAC enables organizations to adopt to changes in
their cyber threat environment and become agile in responding to
cybersecurity incidents. Improving agility through RTAC instills the
characteristics of speed, flexibility, and innovation in the cybersecurity
incident response process. It provides organizations with the ability to
respond quickly to dynamic and emerging cyber threats.
With improvement in cybersecurity IR agility, organizations can
rapidly and flexibly redesign existing processes or create new ones to
cope with the dynamic threat environment (Lu & Ramamurthy, 2011;
Salvato & Vassolo, 2018; Sambamurthy, Bharadwaj, & Grover, 2003).
This kind of agility can be demonstrated by swiftness in sensing relevant
events, interpreting what is happening and assessing the impact and
consequences for the organization, exploring options, and making decisions, and implementing appropriate responses. We define IR agility as
the extent to which an organization can add and/or reconfigure its IR
resources and processes to detect and respond to unpredictable, unknown and new cybersecurity threats (Naseer, 2018; Tallon et al.,
2019). Although most of the RBV literature investigates BA capabilities’
role in achieving competitive advantage and/or creating value, our
study suggests that RTA-enabled IR agility is crucial for sustaining or
protecting competitive advantage. To summarize, given the increasing
need to address ongoing cybersecurity threats, the extent to which an
organization can swiftly alter or modify its IR resources and processes
appears to be heavily dependent upon its ability to implement and
leverage RTAC. Thus, we propose that:
Proposition 2. Real-time analytics capability enables organizations to
execute agile incident response by instilling the agile characteristics of
swiftness, flexibility, and innovation in their cybersecurity incident
response process and thereby respond to the complex and dynamic cyber
threat environment proactively.
Cybersecurity IR agility is beneficial for organizations as it enables
them to adapt and align their activities in a manner that helps to
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of their enterprise cybersecurity
performance. Enterprise cybersecurity relates to all the risks and threats
that can affect the core business of an organization (Naseer et al., 2017).
These include failed software processes, human error and both internal
and external cybersecurity threats (David & Noble, 2016). An organization’s level of IR agility indicates the manner and swiftness with which
it can adapt and respond to changing cyber threat environment. Our
findings suggest that an organization with a high level of IR agility can
respond to changing cyber threat environment swiftly and innovatively.
In addition, both IR process effectiveness and efficiency have been
individually linked to enhance the enterprise cybersecurity performance
by either reducing the cost of prevention, mitigation, and remediation,
or by reducing the cost of losses (Harrer & Wald, 2016). Based on RBV
theory, IR agility represents a valuable capability that can contribute to
superior enterprise cybersecurity performance. Hence, we propose that:
Proposition 3. Increasing agility in the incident response process enhances the efficiency and effectiveness of overall enterprise cybersecurity performance.
Building on the RBV, BA capabilities can influence firm performance
through the mediating role of other resources or capabilities (Aydiner
et al., 2019; Bronzo et al., 2013; Pang et al., 2014). Our findings suggest
that RTAC impacts the enterprise cybersecurity performance through
the mediating role of IR process agility. IR agility is dependent on the
organization’s ability to implement and leverage RTAC. IR agility indicates the manner and swiftness with which an organization responds
to dynamic and complex cyber threats. A mature RTAC may enable
organizations to strengthen their IR process in a way that infuses
swiftness, flexibility and innovation (Chen et al., 2014; Tallon et al.,
2019). The improvement in IR agility gives organizations a unique opportunity to swiftly detect cybersecurity incidents and respond to them
in a proactive manner. Without IR agility, organizations are less likely to
achieve superior enterprise cybersecurity performance and sustain their
competitive advantage. Therefore, we propose that RTAC has an indirect
impact on enterprise cybersecurity performance and that IR agility
serves as a mediator of this relationship. Accordingly, the following
proposition is derived from these arguments:
Proposition 4. Incident response agility mediates the relationship
between RTAC and enterprise cybersecurity performance.
Kraaijenbrink, Spender, Groen, Spender, and Groen (2010, p.365)
argue in their review and assessment of RBV that “the moment we try to
explain or predict the firm’s actual performance… the RBV turns out to
be incomplete because it ignores the material contingencies of the firm’s
situation”. Our research responds to this challenge by proposing cyber
threat environment complexity and dynamism as the contingent factors
that affect the relationship between RTAC and IR agility.
Complexity in the cyber threat environment refers to the heterogeneity and diverse range of threats that can expose enterprise assets
(Bojanc & Jerman-Blaˇziˇc, 2008; Eastman & Versace, 2015). Any event
that can have an undesirable impact on enterprise cybersecurity is a
threat. Various types of enterprise assets and media within which these
assets reside results in an increased number of targets for attack (Naseer
et al., 2021; Pierazzi et al., 2016). Furthermore, the distribution of assets
across different targets, such as data, software, network, physical components and applications increases the number of threat vectors and
thereby complexity (Creasy & Glover, 2013; Eastman & Versace, 2015).
Our findings suggest that threat complexity creates greater uncertainty
and thus an additional opportunity for RTAC to enable IR agility. Organizations with a smaller number of targets and vectors for attack have
less uncertainty and thereby a lower threat complexity. In contrast, organizations with a larger number of targets and vectors for attack have
greater uncertainty. In such situations, organizations that have superior
RTAC can better deal with the complexity induced by the large number
of targets and attack vectors. To summarize, in a complex threat environment, organizations with superior RTAC are better equipped to deal
with threats in a proactive manner and are therefore more likely to
achieve IR agility. Based on this rationale, we propose that:
Proposition 5a. Cyber threat environment complexity positively
moderates the impact of real-time analytics capability on incident
response agility.
Dynamism in the cyber threat environment is explained by the unpredictable and evolving nature of cybersecurity threats (Baskerville
et al., 2014; Naseer et al., 2021). Our findings suggest that in a dynamic
or highly unpredictable threat landscape, IR teams experience high
A. Naseer et al. 
International Journal of Information Management 59 (2021) 102334
8
degrees of uncertainty and have a greater need for both real-time information and the capacity to process it. Thus, in dynamic cyber threat
environments, RTAC becomes more valuable as it enables organizations
to detect cybersecurity incidents as they happen and respond to them in
a proactive way. Furthermore, when organizations are exposed to dynamic and evolving threats such as zero-day attacks, they need to
discover these new threats and new forms of attacks before they can
cause any damage (Ahmad et al., 2021; Grispos et al., 2014). To achieve
this, organizations require frequent reconfiguration of their IR process,
creation of new IR plans, and the ability to constantly look out for
innovative approaches to respond. Therefore, greater threat dynamism
is expected to create highly unpredictable and evolving threats, thereby
demanding superior RTAC to detect and respond to them. Accordingly,
we propose the following:
Proposition 5b. Cyber threat environment dynamism positively
moderates the impact of real-time analytics capability on incident
response agility.
6. Discussion
In this paper, we explain how organizations can improve their enterprise cybersecurity performance by using RTAC to enable an agile
response to sophisticated, unknown, and dynamic threats. We utilize the
contingent RBV theory to explain how RTAC indirectly impacts enterprise cybersecurity performance through the mediating role of IR agility
and how this effect is dependent on cyber threat environment
complexity and dynamism. We discuss the theoretical and practical
implications of our research results in the following subsections.
6.1. Theoretical contributions and implications
Our study advances current knowledge by developing a conceptual
understanding underpinned by relevant theories and empirical evidence. First, we identify the salient features of a RTAC and explain how
these features play a critical role in enabling agility in the cybersecurity
IR process. In this way, we explain how analytics-enabled IR agility may
help organizations to balance their efforts across the reactive and proactive approaches for cybersecurity IR. Second, following the work of
Baskerville et al. (2014) highlighting the need for enabling agility in IR,
we examine how the RTAC helps organizations retool and reconfigure
their IR resources and processes to detect and respond to unpredictable,
unknown, and new cybersecurity threats in an agile manner. Specifically, we introduce the RTAC and describe its usage to explain how
organizations may enable agility in IR and thereby improve their overall
enterprise cybersecurity performance. Specifically, our study addresses
the research question (How does the use of real-time analytics in the incident response process improve enterprise cybersecurity performance?) by
developing a framework (see Fig. 2) that links RTAC and IR agility with
enterprise cybersecurity performance using a contingent
resource-based-view.
Through the framework, we explain how organizations use complex
event processing, decision automation, and continuous and on-demand data
analysis features of RTAC to enable the agile characteristics of swiftness,
flexibility, and innovation in the IR process. This, in turn, enables organizations to respond to dynamic and complex cybersecurity threats
quickly and proactively and enhances their overall enterprise cybersecurity performance by improving their efficiency and effectiveness. Our
research also contributes to the BA and cybersecurity IR literature by
providing detailed definitions of concepts and propositions in the
framework, grounded in the contingent RBV. We provide empirical
evidence to support the key idea that to respond to dynamic and unknown cyber threats in an agile manner, organizations need to increase
their capabilities in real-time collection, integration, and analysis of
cybersecurity data.
Agility in the IR process is demonstrated by swiftness in anticipating
and detecting cybersecurity threats, understanding the motivation and
consequences behind cybersecurity attacks, exploring options, and
making informed decisions and then implementing appropriate responses. Our study explains how RTAC helps organizations to redesign
their existing IR process and to prepare for quick and effective reactions
for new types of unpredictable and unknown cybersecurity threats. In
this aspect, IR agility is a rare capability. By their very nature, every new
cyber-attack is inherently unpredictable. The practice of IR in an agile
way becomes rooted in organizational routines, thereby making it hard
for cyber-attackers to fully understand how a new attack will be
managed by the IR team. As such, the diversity of responses by the IR
team is varied, thereby making IR agility a valuable, inimitable, and
non-substitutable capability for the organization. IR agility is beneficial
for organizations as it allows them to proactively manage cybersecurity
incidents that have, or are, happening in a dynamic cyber threat environment, thereby helping them to achieve superior enterprise cybersecurity performance.
6.2. Implications for practice
Our contributions to cybersecurity IR practice are aimed at three
groups of stakeholders.
First, the implications of this study for cybersecurity managers
include the nuanced view of the role of RTA in cybersecurity IR process.
Rather than leveraging RTAC only at an operational level to continuously monitor the cyber threat environment, cybersecurity managers
need to recognize the more innovative role of RTA at the strategic level
in enabling IR agility and in improving enterprise cybersecurity performance. Our framework suggests that RTAC plays a fundamental,
albeit indirect, role in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of
overall enterprise cybersecurity performance. This highlights the
importance of investing in the development of a mature RTAC as it
enables agility in the IR process. Explicit consideration of the range of
agile features that are enabled by RTAC in the IR process will help
cybersecurity management appropriately evaluate technology investments in this area. Moreover, our results indicate that RTAC also
enables innovation in IR through the development of real-time decision
automation systems. Organizations that have real-time decision automation systems in IR detect and respond to cybersecurity threats and
attacks more swiftly than those running entirely on manual processes in
their IR. Enabling real-time decision automation in IR will help cybersecurity managers yield better performances out of their IR teams as
they can devote their time to work on more important and less repetitive
cybersecurity tasks.
Second, our findings show that RTAC minimizes reactivity in the IR
process and helps incident response teams take a more proactive
approach to mitigate vulnerabilities and defend against cyber threats.
RTAC enables incident responders to swiftly detect the cyber-attacks as
they happen and respond to them in an innovative and agile manner.
The use of RTAC enables IR teams to strengthen their IR process in a way
that infuses swiftness, flexibility, and innovation in their IR process.
These agile features are instrumental in effective mitigation of both
predictable and unpredictable cybersecurity threats. Furthermore, our
results indicate that IR teams wishing to develop complex event processing in their IR process need several additional components in their
typical security analytics architecture. Traditional security analytics
architectures first save the data and then process it for analytics. The
complex event processing feature of RTAC requires IR teams to add
platforms and technologies that can query data before it is stored in a
database or, in some cases, without data ever being stored. In complex
event processing, cybersecurity events are matched against defined
patterns and insights are generated to explain what is happening in the
cyber threat environment. This makes complex event processing a proactive capability that enables IR teams to monitor and analyze cybersecurity events in real-time.
Third, vendors who develop RTA and cybersecurity solutions should
A. Naseer et al. 
International Journal of Information Management 59 (2021) 102334
9
recognize the potentially far-reaching transformational role that their
solutions may provide to organizations. Creating cybersecurity solutions
that can quickly integrate threat intelligence data, automate investigations and forensic analysis, apply complex algorithms and visual
analytics to discover the potential threats will help their clients improve
agility in IR processes and execute innovative IR strategies that can
better deal with the dynamic cyber threat environment. The far-reaching
potential of the capabilities enabled by RTA, however, will also increase
the demand for data integration, automation, visualization, and analytics. Therefore, vendors who develop RTA and cybersecurity solutions
need to carefully consider these requirements when developing their
solutions.
6.3. Limitations and avenues for future research
The context of our study raises questions about the generalizability
of the proposed framework and requires future work to further develop
it. The generalization of our findings should be conducted with caution
as they do not provide an in-depth organizational context. Future
research is needed to further refine the framework and one-way of doing
this is by conducting multiple case studies. These case studies with
specific organizational context will add more depth to the framework by
providing rich insights on (1) factors that facilitate or hinder the
development of agile characteristics in IR using RTAC, (2) the skills and
knowledge required by the cybersecurity teams to utilize RTAC in IR,
and (3) conditions which affect the utility of RTAC in cybersecurity IR.
Finally, our research provides a fertile foundation for large-scale
quantitative studies that can investigate specific factors that help organizations improve IR agility using RTAC and its impact on overall enterprise cybersecurity performance. Linking BA capabilities and
organizational performance is a subject of ongoing research. Further
research is also needed to identify key differences between RTA and
other disruptive technologies to gain insights into how RTA may offer
distinct capabilities. As the adoption of RTA facilitates a paradigm shift
in the decision-making process, more detailed studies are required to
investigate its potential as well as the challenges it poses to organizations, both large and small.
7. Conclusion
The present study contributes to a better understanding of how organizations use RTA in the IR process to improve their enterprise
cybersecurity performance. Employing the contingent RBV as a lens, we
conduced expert interviews with cybersecurity professionals and the
analysis of data informed a framework that explains how RTAC indirectly impacts enterprise cybersecurity performance through the mediating role of IR agility. Moreover, we also identify cyber threat
environment complexity and dynamism as the contingent factors that
affect the relationship between RTAC and IR agility. We propose RTAC
as a specialized BA capability that enables integration, monitoring and
analysis of cybersecurity events as they occur. In particular, our research
introduces the concept of IR agility to cybersecurity research. IR agility
can be enabled by RTAC, a link poorly understood to date.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ayesha Naseer: Methodology, Data curation, Project administration, Writing - review & editing. Humza Naseer: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft,
Writing - review & editing. Atif Ahmad: Writing - review & editing.
Sean B. Maynard: Writing - review & editing. Adil Masood Siddiqui:
Writing - review & editing.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Editor-in-chief and anonymous reviewers who helped
us through the review journey to develop a high quality paper. In
addition, we acknowledge that this research was supported by the
University of Melbourne International Research Scholarship.
References
Ahmad, A., Desouza, K. C., Maynard, S. B., Naseer, H., & Baskerville, R. L. (2020). How
integration of cyber security management and incident response enables
organizational learning. Journal of the Association for Information Science and
Technology, 71(8), 939–953.
Ahmad, A., Maynard, S. B., Desouza, K. C., Kotsias, J., Whitty, M. T., & Baskerville, R. L.
(2021). How can organizations develop situation awareness for incident response : A
case study of management practice. Computers & Security, 101, 102–122.
Ahmad, A., Maynard, S. B., & Shanks, G. (2015). A case analysis of information systems
and security incident responses. International Journal of Information Management, 35
(6), 717–723.
Ahmad, A., Webb, J., Desouza, K., & Broom, J. (2019). Strategically-motivated advanced
persistent threat: Definition, process, tactics and a disinformation model of
counterattack. Computers & Security, 86, 402–418.
Aragon-Correa, J. A., & Sharma, S. (2003). A contingent resource-based view of proactive
corporate environmental strategy. The Academy of Management Review, 28(1), 71–88.
Aydiner, A. S., Tatoglu, E., Bayraktar, E., Zaim, S., & Delen, D. (2019). Business analytics
and firm performance: The mediating role of business process performance. Journal
of Business Research, 96(October 2018), 228–237.
Barney, J. (1991). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of
Management, 17(1), 99–120.
Barreto, I. I. (2010). Dynamic capabilities: A review of past research and an agenda for
the future. Journal of Management, 36(1), 256–280.
Baskerville, R., Spagnoletti, P., & Kim, J. (2014). Incident-centered information security:
Managing a strategic balance between prevention and response. Information and
Management, 51(1), 138–151.
Bojanc, R., & Jerman-Blaˇziˇc, B. (2008). An economic modelling approach to information
security risk management. International Journal of Information Management, 28(5),
413–422.
Bronzo, M., de Resende, P. T. V., de Oliveira, M. P. V., McCormack, K. P., de Sousa, P. R.,
& Ferreira, R. L. (2013). Improving performance aligning business analytics with
process orientation. International Journal of Information Management, 33(2), 300–307.
Cao, G., Duan, Y., & Cadden, T. (2019). The link between information processing
capability and competitive advantage mediated through decision-making
effectiveness. International Journal of Information Management, 44(September 2018),
121–131.
Chen, Y., Wang, Y., Nevo, S., Jin, J., Wang, L., & Chow, W. S. (2014). IT capability and
organizational performance: The roles of business process agility and environmental
factors. European Journal of Information Systems, 23(3), 326–342.
Cichonski, P., Millar, T., Grance, T., & Scarfone, K. (2012). Computer security incident
handling guide: Recommendations of the national institute of standards and technology,
800-61. Revision 2. NIST Special Publication, 800–61.
Creasy, J., & Glover, I. (2013). Cyber security incident response guide. CREST.
Davenport, T., & Kudyba, S. (2016). Designing and developing analytics-based data
products. MIT Sloan Management Review, 58(1), 83–89.
David, W., & Noble, T. (2016). Planning for the known, unkown and impossibleresponsible risk managment to maximize organizational performance. Journal of
Business Behavioral Sciences, 28(1), 40–48.
Desouza, K. C., Ahmad, A., Naseer, H., & Sharma, M. (2020). Weaponizing information
systems for political disruption : The Actor, Lever, Effects, and Response Taxonomy
(ALERT). Computers & Security, 88, 1–14.
Eastman, R., & Versace, M. (2015). Big data and predictive analytics : on the
cybersecurity front line. IDC white paper. February.
Eckerson, W. (2012). The secrets of analytical leaders: Insights from information insiders.
Technics Publications.
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Graebner, M. E. (2007). Theory building from cases: Opportunities
and challenges. The Academy of Management Journal, 50(1), 25–32.
Gioia, D. A., Corley, K. G., & Hamilton, A. L. (2013). Seeking Qualitative Rigor in
Inductive Research: Notes on the Gioia Methodology. Organizational Research
Methods, 16(1), 15–31.
Grispos, G., Glisson, W. B., & Storer, T. (2014). Rethinking security incident response:
The integration of agile principles. 20th Americas conference on information systems,
1–9.
Grover, V., Chiang, R. L., Ting-Peng, L., & Dongosng, Z. (2018). Creating strategic
business value from big data analytics. Journal of Management Information Systems,
35(2), 388–423.
Harrer, J., & Wald, A. (2016). Levers of enterprise security control: A study on the use,
measurement and value contribution. Journal of Management Control, 27, 7–32.
Holsapple, C., Lee-Post, A., & Pakath, R. (2014). A unified foundation for business
analytics. Decision Support Systems, 64, 130–141.
A. Naseer et al. 
International Journal of Information Management 59 (2021) 102334
10
Kaur, R., & Singh, M. (2015). A Hybrid real-time zero-day attack detection and analysis
system. I. Journal of Computer Network and Information Security, 9(August), 19–31.
Kevin, B., Yang, C., Olson, D., & Sheu, C. (2014). The impact of advanced analytics and
data accuracy on operational performance: A contingent resource based theory
(RBT) perspective. Decision Support Systems, 59, 119–126.
Kraaijenbrink, J., Spender, J., Groen, A., Spender, J., & Groen, A. J. (2010). The resourcebased view: A review and assessment of its critiques. Journal of Management, 36(1),
349–372.
Lemay, A., Calvet, J., Menet, F., & Fernandez, J. M. (2018). Survey of publicly available
reports on advanced persistent threat actors. Computers and Security, 72, 26–59.
Ling-yee, L. (2007). Marketing resources and performance of exhibitor firms in trade
shows: A contingent resource perspective. Industrial Marketing Management, 36(3),
360–370.
Lu, Y., & Ramamurthy, K. R. (2011). Understanding the Link Between Information
Technology Capability and Organizational Agility: an Empirical Examination. MIS
Quarterly, 35(4), 931–954.
Naseer, H. (2018). A Framework of dynamic cybersecurity incident response to improve
incident response agility (Doctoral dissertation). The University of Melbourne. http:
//hdl.handle.net/11343/221356.
Naseer, H., Maynard, S. B., Ahmad, A., & Shanks, G. (2018). Cybersecurity risk
management using analytics: A dynamic capabilities approach. Thirty ninth
international conference on information systems, 1–9.
Naseer, H., Maynard, S. B., & Desouza, K. C. (2021). Demystifying analytical information
processing capability: The case of cybersecurity incident response. Decision Support
Systems, 143, 1–11, 113476.
Naseer, H., Shanks, G., Ahmad, A., & Maynard, S. (2017). Towards an analytics-driven
information security risk management: A contingent resource based perspective.
25th European conference on information systems, 1–12.
Naseer, H., Maynard, S., & Ahmad, A. (2016). Business analytics in information security
risk management : the contingent effect on security performance. 24th European
conference on information systems, 1–12.
Naseer, H., Shanks, G., Ahmad, A., & Maynard, S. (2016). Enhancing information
security risk management with security analytics: A dynamic capabilities
perspective. Australasian conference on information systems, 1–11.
Newbert, S. (2007). Empirical research on the resource-based view of the firm: An
assessment and suggestions for future research. Strategic Management Journal, 28(2),
121–146.
Pang, M. S., Lee, G., & Delone, W. H. (2014). In public sector organisations: A publicvalue management perspective. Journal of Information Technology, 29(3), 187–205.
Park, Y., El Sawy, O. A., & Fiss, P. (2017). The role of business intelligence and
communication technologies in organizational agility. Journal of the Association for
Information Systems, 18(9), 648–686.
Phillips-Wren, G., Lakshmi, S. I., Kulkarni, U., & Ariyachandra, T. (2015). Business
analytics in the context of big data: A roadmap for research. Communications of the
AIS, 37(1), 448–472.
Pierazzi, F., Casolari, S., Colajanni, M., & Marchetti, M. (2016). Exploratory security
analytics for anomaly detection. Computers & Security, 56, 28–49.
Queiroz, M., Tallon, P. P., Sharma, R., & Coltman, T. (2018). The role of IT application
orchestration capability in improving agility and performance. The Journal of
Strategic Information Systems, 27(1), 4–21.
Russom, P., Stodder, D., & Halper, F. (2014). Real-time data, BI, and analytics. TDWI best
practices report, fourth quarter (p. 4).
Salvato, C., & Vassolo, R. (2018). The sources of dynamism in dynamic capabilities.
Strategic Management Journal, 39(6), 1728–1752.
Sambamurthy, V., Bharadwaj, A., & Grover, V. (2003). Shaping agility through digital
options: Reconceptualizing the role of information technology in contemporary
firms. MIS Quaterly, 27(2), 237–263.
Seddon, P. B., Constantinidis, D., Tamm, T., & Dod, H. (2017). How does business
analytics contribute to business value? Information Systems Journal, 27(3), 237–269.
Sharma, R., Mithas, S., & Kankanhalli, A. (2014). Transforming decision-making
processes: a research agenda for understanding the impact of business analytics on
organisations. European Journal of Information Systems, 23(4), 433–441.
Silverman, D. (2015). Interpreting qualitative data (5th ed.). London, UK: Sage.
Sirmon, D. G., Hitt, M. A., Ireland, R. D., & Gilbert, B. A. (2011). Resource orchestration
to create competitive advantage: Breadth, depth, and life cycle effects. Journal of
Management, 37(5), 1390–1412.
Stoll, M. (2015). From information security management to enterprise risk management.
Innovations and Advances in Computing, Informatics, Systems Sciences, Networking and
Engineering, 13(1), 9–16.
Tallon, P. P. (2008). Inside the adaptive enterprise: An information technology
capabilities perspective on business process agility. Information Technology and
Management, 9(1), 21–36.
Tallon, P. P., & Pinsonneault, A. (2011). Competing perspectives on the link between
strategic information technology alignment and organizational agility: insigths from
a mediation model. MIS Quarterly, 35(2), 463–486.
Tallon, P. P., Queiroz, M., Coltman, T., & Sharma, R. (2019). Information technology and
the search for organizational agility : A systematic review with future research
possibilities. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 28(2), 218–237.
Townsend, M., Le Quoc, T., Kapoor, G., Hu, H., Zhou, W., & Piramuthu, S. (2018). RealTime business data acquisition: How frequent is frequent enough? Information and
Management, 55(4), 422–429.
Van Oosterhout, M., Waarts, E., & Van Hillegersberg, J. (2006). Change factors requiring
agility and implications for IT. European Journal of Information Systems, 15(2),
132–145.
Wade, M., & Hulland, J. (2004). Review: The resource-based view and information
systems research: Review, extension, and suggestions for future research. MIS
Quarterly, 28(1), 107–142.
Watson, H. J., Wixom, B. H., Hoffer, J.a., Anderson-Lehman, R., & Reynolds, A. M.
(2006). Real-time business intelligence: Best practices at continental airlines.
Information Systems Management, 23(1), 7–18.
Wixom, B. H., Yen, B., & Relich, M. (2013). Maximizing value from business analytics.
MIS Quarterly Executive, 12(2), 111–123.
A. Naseer et al. 