Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
Available online 24 September 2022
0378-7206/© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Does privacy breach affect firm performance? An analysis incorporating
event-induced changes and event clustering
Manas Tripathi a,*
, Arunabha Mukhopadhyay b
a Management Information Systems Area, Indian Institute of Management Rohtak, India b Information Technology and Systems Area, Indian Institute of Management Lucknow, India
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Privacy breach
Event study
Market model
IT security
Seemingly unrelated regression (SUR)
ABSTRACT
Previous studies have analyzed the impact of cybersecurity breaches on firm performance, but the impact of the
privacy breach on firm performance is less explored. Needless to say, the privacy of the individual’s personal
information has been a rising concern for organizations over the years. Previous studies, primarily focused on
cybersecurity breaches, have used a simple market model (MM) to observe the impact of these breaches on firm
performance. Our study has used an advanced market model (AMM), which observes the event-induced changes
in the variance of stock returns and changes in MM parameters, which are ignored by the MM. The ignorance of
this may lead to a biased cumulative abnormal return (CAR) computation. We have also included the event
clustering observation (events that are very close to each other) in our study and evaluated AMM with seemingly
unrelated regression (SUR), i.e., AMM-SUR. We have used data of 193 privacy breaches related to the US firms
listed on NYSE (USA), NASDAQ (USA) for the years 2012 (43 breaches), 2013 (37 breaches), 2014 (51 breaches),
and 2018 (62 breaches). Abnormal returns for the firms are found negative due to these privacy breaches, but
AMM consistently reports more negative abnormal returns than MM for all the years. The AMM-SUR, observing
event clustering, consistently reports slightly lower negative abnormal returns than the AMM for all the years.
We have also calculated the average financial loss due to a privacy breach for these years and for three different
models, i.e., MM, AMM, and AMM-SUR.
1. Introduction
In October 2017, Yahoo reported one of the largest data breaches in
history. Yahoo revealed that hackers compromised around 3 billion
customer accounts in a data breach in 2013 [1]. The shares of Yahoo fell
as much as 3.8% after the day of the announcement of the data breach
[2]. In 2018, hackers compromised the data of 50 million users of
Facebook. The stock price of Facebook declined by 3%, and the company
lost around 13 billion dollars in value after the data breach announcements [3]. In 2019, Brian Krebs, an independent researcher, revealed
that about 885 million documents of the customers of First American
Financial were compromised. These documents include sensitive information, such as account numbers, social security numbers, tax documents, bank statements, mortgage records, and photographs of the
customers [4]. The stock price of First American Financial fell by 6%
after the announcement of the data breach. A technology research firm
Comparitech analyzed the impact of data breaches of at least 1 million
records leaked on stock prices of 28 companies. The analysis suggests
that the share price falls by 7.27% on average [5]. In 2019, Capital One
Financial Corporation suffered a data breach that affected the personal
information of more than 100 million customers. The Financial Times
stated that the stock price of Capital One dropped by 4% after the data
breach [6]. The findings of the IBM research suggest that an organization incurs an average of 3.29 million dollars cost of a data breach which
has increased by 12 percent over the past five years [7]. The data
breaches have impacted firms and individuals both. Consumers face the
consequences, such as fraud, identity theft, and the risk of impersonation, following a privacy breach. Even when there is no fraud following a
privacy breach, customers may be at an increased risk of phishing where
the attacker intends to gain the customers’ personal information.
Perceived privacy risk can be as important as the real privacy risk
because the fear of privacy harm can be counted as the negative
consequence of the privacy breach [8]. In some cases, organizations
have compensated to the customers in leu of the loss of the customers. In
2017, Equifax faced a data breach that put the personal information of
hundreds of millions of customers at risk. In a settlement, Equifax agreed
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: manas.tripathi@iimrohtak.ac.in (M. Tripathi).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Information & Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/im
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2022.103707
Received 23 June 2020; Received in revised form 17 September 2022; Accepted 21 September 2022 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
2
to repay the customers $380 million for loss of time, money, and credit
monitoring services [9]. In April 2019, the UpGuard Cyber Risk team has
reported a data breach on Facebook that compromised around 540
million records of third-party app data sets [10]. According to the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, a California-based non-profit corporation
engaged in educating and empowering individuals to protect their privacy, a total of 1476 data breaches have been reported in the USA from
the year 2013 to 2016 [11].
Information privacy refers to the concept of controlling how one’s
personal information is acquired and used [12,13]. With the advent of
the information age, there have been rising concerns about information
privacy [14]. Advances in information technology (IT) have often made
personal information to be accessible to multiple parties, thereby making information privacy a major concern in today’s world [15]. Any
incident which causes misuse of individuals’ personal information is
treated as a privacy breach. There are various ways through which one
can compromise an individual’s privacy. The possible ways are loss or
stealing of electronic equipment (PORT), loss or stealing of
non-electronic/physical paper documents (PHYS), misuse of personal
information by some insider (INSD), mishandling of credit and debit
cards (CARD), unintentional sharing of confidential information
through email, fax, or website posting (DISC), and unauthorized access
by an outside hacker, spyware, and malware by compromising cybersecurity system (HACK). These privacy breaches can involve both the
firm’s employee and customer data. These breaches affect the performance of the firm. Therefore, our primary focus is to study the impact of
the privacy breach on firm performance. Previous studies have mostly
focused on cybersecurity breaches and their impact on firm performance
[16–21]. But privacy breaches and their impact on firm performance are
less explored. We have derived the motivation of the study from the
study of [8], where the authors have focused explicitly on privacy
breaches as compared to security breaches.
The terms cybersecurity breach/security breach and privacy breach/
data breach are sometimes used interchangeably, but they are two
different things. We have used the terms privacy breach and data breach
interchangeably in the article as Privacy Right Clearinghouse (PRC), and
some other studies have used the word data breach for privacy breach
[8]. A data breach is any breach compromising the confidential data of
an individual or organization. The confidential data include the personal
data of various stakeholders of the firm; therefore, compromise of
confidential personal data is termed as a privacy breach. However, our
main emphasis is to illustrate the difference between cybersecurity
breaches and privacy breaches/data breaches. When an attacker attempts to compromise the cybersecurity of the system by exploiting the
vulnerability in the cybersecurity of the system, but, by any chance, does
not result in the compromise of personal information, this type of breach
would be a cybersecurity breach but not the privacy breach. A cybersecurity breach is effectively a break-in, whereas a privacy breach is
defined as the attacker got away with personal information. Cybersecurity failure often leads to a privacy breach, as any loopholes in
cybersecurity may cause damage to personal information. Cybersecurity
breaches take many forms, including computer viruses, distributed
denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks, and attacks causing unauthorized access to personal information (privacy breach), such as credit card data,
data stored in electronic devices, and physical paper documents. There
are types of cybersecurity incidents, such as denial of service (DoS),
impersonation, and website defacement, that do not involve unauthorized access to sensitive personal data [22]. Thus, privacy breach incidences involving the compromise of personal information can be
security motivated when a security mechanism designed to protect
private information fails. [16] have demonstrated that security breaches
involving unauthorized access to personal information (privacy
breaches) have a significantly negative market reaction, but no significant market impact is observed when breaches do not involve confidential information. While cybersecurity breaches are expensive, those
involving personal information may be the most expensive. For
example, in the case of a DoS security attack, the firm’s resources may
not be accessible for some period, i.e., the loss is temporary. Once the
DoS attack ends and necessary system corrections are made, the firm can
resume its operation, and the value of its systems is not permanently
damaged. On the other hand, a privacy breach may compromise a firm’s
customer data list, which is an important proprietary asset. In case of
unauthorized access to the firm’s customer list, the value of such strategic proprietary asset may be permanently compromised. Apart from
cybersecurity breaches exploiting the cybersecurity vulnerability of the
organization, other mechanisms such as loss of physical devices containing personal data, insider attack, intentional but illegal sale of customers’ data, organizations involved in blatant intrusion or violation of
other parties’ personal data, and loss of non-electronic documents may
also cause a privacy breach [8]. Amazon was once criticized for offering
differential prices based on the tracked customer data [8]. Amazon faced
strong opposition later they backed down, and Jeff Bezos apologized for
that. Here, the people inherently found it objectionable to use personal
data for price discrimination. In the example above, Amazon indulged in
the misuse of personal information (privacy breach), which they saw as
legitimate, so this incident will not be an example of security failure. The
privacy breach can be caused due to technical failure (malicious attacker
accessing the personal data by compromising the cybersecurity system
of the organization), managerial failure (fail to take proactive actions to
patch known vulnerabilities in the system), organizational failure
(inefficient and incomplete protection), or human failure (loss of electronic device and non-electronic documents). Anecdotal evidence suggests that privacy breaches significantly affect the performance of the
firm. Therefore, it is pertinent to ask: what is the impact of privacy
breach announcements on the market value of the firm? This is the
central research question that motivates our study.
In this paper, we use the event study methodology to understand the
impact of privacy breach events on firm performance [23]. Most of the
event studies in the information systems (IS) area have used a simple
market model (MM) for calculating cumulative abnormal return (CAR).
They have ignored the fact that often the MM parameter may get
changed by the event itself. Indeed, when event-induced risk changes
are significant, ignoring them can result in a biased estimate of abnormal
returns [24–26]. It is evident that if the event is significant, it may
induce changes in the variance of stock returns, which, in turn, changes
the MM parameters [27]. Thus, taking them as a constant can result in
biased returns. Therefore, we modify the MM and incorporate the
changes in MM parameters resulting from the event-induced changes in
the variance of stock returns. In light of event-induced variance changes
[24,25], it is relevant to inquire about: are there changes in MM parameters are caused by event-induced changes in the variance of stock
returns in case of privacy breach announcements, and if so, how do the
changes in MM parameters affect the abnormal returns of the firms? We
have included the effect of the event clustering problem where the
correlation of events occurring close to each other is taken into
consideration. We have observed the impact of event clustering using
seemingly unrelated regression (SUR). The motivation and scope of this
study differ from the work of related studies in the following ways. First,
this study explicitly centers on privacy breach announcements rather
than the cybersecurity breaches studied mainly in previous studies.
Privacy and security are partially overlapping sets. In the current study,
we explicitly focus on the privacy breaches extending outside the conventional cybersecurity breaches to address breaches caused by organizational and human failures. Second, our study uses an advanced
market model (AMM), which incorporates changes in MM parameters
caused by event-induced changes in the variance of stock returns. We
have also observed the impact of event clustering on the market value of
the firm as most of the privacy breaches is occurring very close to each
other. Finally, we perform a separate analysis of the data for the years
2012, 2013, 2014, and 2018 to allow for any transient market instabilities during this period. The world’s largest firms such as Google,
Microsoft, Facebook, Yahoo, and LinkedIn were affected by major
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
3
privacy breaches during that period. Firms of all types and sizes have
observed major privacy breaches during that period. The results of the
study suggest that privacy breach negatively affects firm performance,
and large firms are less adversely affected by privacy breaches than
smaller firms. The possible reason could be that large firms absorb the
negative market reaction of data breaches more easily than small firms
due to the enough resources required for mitigating the impact of privacy breaches. The results of the study provide an interesting observation that the BSF firms consistently observe negative abnormal returns
due to privacy breaches, as reported by all the models for all the years.
The possible explanation could be that financial services firms handle
highly valuable and personally identifiable information (PII); therefore,
they are an attractive target for privacy breaches.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The next section illustrates the state of the art of existing literature. Section 3 presents the
theory and hypotheses development. Section 4 explains the methodology, and Section 5 presents the data. Section 6 reports empirical findings. Section 7 discusses the results and implications of the work.
Section 8 concludes the paper by providing limitations and the future
scope of the work.
2. Literature review
We describe two streams of literature that inform our empirical examination. Authors have used event study methodology to find the
impact of event disclosure on firm performance. Therefore, the first
stream of research throws light on event studies performed in the IS
area. The second stream takes it further and focuses on only cybersecurity breach events, as cybersecurity breaches may result in a breach of
privacy. The contribution of our study is the confluence of these streams
of work, as discussed below.
2.1. Event studies in IS research
The event study methodology has been widely used by IS researchers. The type of events and the motivation behind the study
usually differ from the event study methodology used in the finance and
accounting literature. Authors have used a variety of events related to
the IS area and their impacts on the market value of the firms in IS
research. Most of these studies focus on security breach announcement
events. Other types of events are IT investment announcements, IT
outsourcing announcements, chief information officer (CIO) announcements, and enterprise application implementation announcements. One of the first event studies in the IS area is [28], which
examines the impact of IT outsourcing announcements on the market
value of the firms. They further demonstrate that announcements of IT
outsourcing events have a positive effect on the market value of firms.
[29] have examined the effect of the impact of IT infrastructure and
application announcements on the market value of the firm. They have
found out that innovative IT investments lead to a rise in firm value
while non-innovative investments do not. [30] have found that
outsourcing announcement of a firm’s IS has a positive effect on the
market value of the firm. [31] have observed a significant positive CAR
for 251 electronic commerce initiatives announced by firms between
October and December 1998. [32] are the first to study the impact of
enterprise resource planning (ERP) system implementation announcements. They have found an overall positive reaction to initial ERP announcements. [33] have examined that announcements of newly
created CIO positions provoke a positive market reaction for the firms
undergoing IT-driven transformation. The authors have also examined
the impact of IT governance adoption announcements on firm performance [34]. They found that IT governance structural mechanisms have
a positive impact, whereas IT governance processes and relational
mechanisms have a negative impact on firm performance. There are a
sufficient number of studies devoted to examining the impact of announcements of Internet security breaches on the market value of the
firm [16–18,35–37]. Most of these event studies report that announcements of Internet security breaches lead to negative CAR. [8] have done
a study on privacy breaches, where they have shown the difference
between the security breach and privacy breach. Their findings report
that announcements of privacy breaches have a negative and significant
impact on the firm’s market value. [38] have examined positive
abnormal returns for the firms receiving the “Most Admired Knowledge
Enterprise” (MAKE) award, which recognizes firms that excel in
knowledge management (KM). Their analysis is consistent with KM
leading to increased shareholder value. There is a study where authors
have examined the influence of organizational impression management
strategies on stock market reactions to IT failures [39]. They have performed an event study on a sample of 214 IT failures for eight years.
Further, they have found that a firm’s organizational impression management strategy has a significant impact on a firm’s market value. A
summary of event studies in IS research is shown in Table 1
2.2. Impact of security breaches on market value
There are studies that specifically focus on the impact of cybersecurity breaches on the market value of the firms. These studies have
primarily observed that cybersecurity events have negatively impacted
the firms’ performance. [16] have done a study on security breaches
where they have found that security breaches compromising confidentiality have a negative and significant impact. In contrast, events not
related to confidentiality do not have any significant impact on CAR.
[17] have done a similar study to observe the impact of cybersecurity
breaches on the firms’ performance. Interestingly, they have calculated
the loss of 2.1% of the market value, equivalent to $1.65 billion of
market capitalization for the firms due to these security breaches.
Further, their study has shown that firm-specific characteristics such as
firm type, firm size, and attack-specific characteristics, such as attack
type and attack severity, also affect the market value of the firm. [36]
have found that various characteristics, such as the objective of the
attacker, attacker type, tools used for attack, and result of the attack
significantly affect the market value of the firms. [40] have categorized
the security breach data into various dimensions such as victim type (e.
g., customers, employes, etc.), industry type (e.g., retail, financial, etc.),
data type (credit card number, social security number, etc.), and breach
type (hacking, employee access, stolen computer, etc.). [41] have used
the three-factor model of [42]. Their study reports that firms observe
about 1% negative returns in their stock prices on the day of the
announcement of a data security breach. [18] have tried to find the
impact of DDoS attacks on the market value of the firms. They have
found that only “Internet-specific” firms relying heavily on the web have
observed more market penalization than the “non-Internet-specific”
firms. Similarly, authors have identified that firms have faced the worst
reputation, higher expenses, lower profits, and lower sales revenues due
to information security breaches [43]. Another study has examined the
slower market reactions in the Japanese market than in the US market
due to a cybersecurity breach [44]. According to their study, it takes 10
days to observe the statistically significant market reaction due to
cybersecurity breaches. Announcements of the vulnerabilities of the
software products also affect the software vendors [21]. [45] have
studied the impact of cybersecurity breaches on market valuation with
respect to the timing of corporate crisis response to these breaches. To
optimize cybersecurity spending, the authors have proposed a list of
critical controls that help the cybersecurity manager to channel cybersecurity investments [46]. Authors have prioritized the controls based
on the healthcare data breaches of year 2016.
The authors have studied mainly the impact of security breaches on
firm performance. There are very limited studies that focus on the
impact of privacy breach announcements on firm performance. However, privacy breaches are often followed by the vulnerability exposed in
the security of IS. [8] have analyzed the impact of exposure of personal
information (privacy breach) on firm performance. Personal
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
4
information can be compromised by any cybersecurity failure, such as
hacking and poor data handling processes, or by some other way, such as
loss of electronic equipment and loss of physical documents containing
personal information. They found the negative impact of the privacy
breach on the firm’s market value. [47] have found that the data breach
has a negative impact on the shareholder’s wealth. A study shows an
interesting finding that the attacks related to data availability have a
higher negative impact on the stock market returns than the attacks
related to integrity and confidentiality of the data [48]. [49] have
assessed the severity of phishing alerts using risk level and potential loss
due to these attacks. With the hybrid approach based on supervised
classification and text phase extraction, they have predicted the severity
of attacks with up to 89% accuracy. Firms are using various identity
theft countermeasures (ITC) to combat the impact of identity theft
crime. Authors have analyzed the impact of ITC adoption announcements on the short-term and long-term market value of the firm [50].
Authors have revealed that the security breaches negatively hurt the
focal firm and help the rival firms to compete in the market [51].
Similarly, authors have examined that, in case of a breach, the competitors of the firm have the opportunity to capture the market power
[52]. Authors have tried to understand the economics of privacy using
economic value and the consequences of disclosing and protecting
personal data [53]. Marketers and managers often try to use the personal
data of the customers to increase market revenue [54]. However, such
efforts may create a threat of compromising customers’ personal data.
Thus, customers’ may express negative reactions to these kinds of privacy practices, which further affect the customers’ spending behavior
[51]. Authors have revealed that data breaches significantly decrease
Table 1
Summary of event studies in IS research.
Type of events Researchers Number of announcements Date of
announcements
Source of announcements
IT investments
announcements
[29] 97 1981–1988 PR Newswire PTS Prompt
[101] 238 1981–1996 PR Newswire, PTS Prompt and Business,
and Industry
IT infrastructure investments
or IT application investments
[102] 112 1992–1995 LexisNexis
[103] 355 1981–1996 IT investments events from all the previous
studies were added
[104] 150 1990–1997 Compustat annual database, Newswire
databases of Dow Jones Interactive
Information and
communication technology
investments
[105] 217 1996–2006 Signal G (Australia) maintained by the
Securities Industry Research Centre of AsiaPacific (SIRCA)
[106] 193 from prior studies and
158 from their search
1985–1999 LexisNexis and Prior Studies
Internet security breach
announcements
[16] 43 events affecting 38 firms 1995–2000 Washington Post, Wall Street Journal,
Financial Times, New York Times, USA
Today
Denial of service attacks [18] 23 January 1, 1998–June
30, 2002
LexisNexis — Business News
Denial of service attacks [107] 4,275 February 8–10, 2000 Keynote
[108] 22 1996-2002 —
[17] 66 1996–2001 LexisNexis, and the technology portals
ZDNET and CDNET
Virus attacks [109] 92 January 1, 1988 to
June 30, 2002
Lexis-Nexis database
[110] 72 1997–2003 New York Times, Wall Street Journal, and
technology portals ZDNET and CDNET
[41] 168 2004–2008 Lexis Nexis, PC Week, Wall Street
Journal, Register, and others
ourcing announcements [28] 58 LexisNexis
[111] 76 1990–1997 LexisNexis
[112] 66 1997–2002 LexisNexis
E-business outsourcing [113] 96 1999–2002 Business Wire, PR Newswire
[114] 192 1995–2003 LexisNexis
[115] 420 1989–1999 LexisNexis
ICT outsourcing [116] 48 January 1, 2000–July
1, 2005
LexisNexis
E-commerce initiative
announcements
[31] 251 October 1, 1998-
December 31, 1998
Business Wire, PR Newswire, LexisNexis
[93] 542 1998, 2000 LexisNexis, Business Wire, PR News Wire
[117] 349 Announcements of 100
firms
1999–2000 PR Newswire, Business Wire
[118] 232 January 1, 1988, to
June 30, 2001
Australian Stock Exchange
[25] 640 1996, 1998, 2000,
2002
PR Newswire and Business Wire in LexisNexis
ERP implementation
announcements
[32] 85 1990–1998 LexisNexis
[119] 116 1997–2001 LexisNexis Academic Universe database
CIOs announcements [33] 113 1987–1998 LexisNexis
[120] 461 1987–2002 LexisNexis Wire Service
IT Governance adoption
announcements
[34] 70 2004-2014 Factiva, Business Wire, China Business
Newswire, PR Newswire etc.
Privacy breach
announcements
[8] 79 2000–2006 LexisNexis, Proquest as well as various
online compilations
IT failures [39] 214 2005-2012 Lexis/Nexis
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
5
customers’ spending. Moreover, customers switch from the breached to
the un-breached channels of retailers [55]. Authors have studied the
impact of cyberattacks by malicious hackers on the competition in
software markets. The findings have revealed that malicious hacker
activities might alter the structure of the software market [56].
Most of the event studies in the IS area have used a simple MM for
calculating the CAR of the firms. They have ignored the fact that MM
parameters may sometimes get modified by the event itself. When eventinduced risk changes are significant, ignoring them can result in a biased
estimate of abnormal returns [24–26]. Based on the findings, it is
essential to look into the changes in MM parameters caused by the privacy breach. Furthermore, we will consider both pre-event and
post-event data to have a comprehensive analysis of the impact of privacy breaches using the AMM. If the privacy breach events are
happening very close to each other, it is essential to take into account the
event clustering phenomena [26]. The clustering of events may affect
the abnormal returns resulting from privacy breaches.
3. Theory and hypotheses development
Event studies follow the theoretical framework of efficient capital
markets [57]. It is based on the concept that the security prices of firms
reflect all the information available to the market [58]. Therefore, any
announcement made by a firm provides information to the market. This
information is reflected in the stock price of the firm. Various types of
announcements such as IT investments announcements, IT outsourcing
announcements, E-commerce initiative announcements, and data
breach announcements provide information into the market. The expected effect of new information is reflected in the stock price, which in
turn affects the firm value [59]. Therefore, it is pertinent to explore
whether an event provides new, incremental information that eventually affects the value of the firm. Various announcements made by firms
provide information about the strategy and planning and the success and
failure of the firms to the market. A positive market response is expected
in case where a newly disclosed announcement sends a signal which is
seen as beneficial to the firm. Similarly, a negative market response is
expected when a newly disclosed announcement sends a signal related
to the loss and failure of the firm. Privacy breaches may send signals to
the market that the breached firms are not concerned for the privacy of
the customers and do not have appropriate internal mechanisms and
resources to protect the privacy of the customers. This may result in the
investor’s low confidence in the firm’s performance.
The economic impact of a privacy breach can be better understood
with the help of various costs associated with these breaches and their
impact on firm performance under the efficient market hypothesis [8,
53]. These costs can be short-term costs (temporary costs) or long-term
costs (permanent costs). The short-term costs are often limited to the
period in which the privacy breach occurs. However, long-term costs
may incur over several periods. The immediate short-term impact of the
privacy breach includes the costs related to unavailability of the
breached resources, costs required to detect and repair the breached
resources, cost of evidence collection, cost of prosecuting the attacker,
and cost of providing information to media, public, and customers.
These short-term costs may have an immediate impact in the form of
decreased firm productivity and loss of business. The permanent
long-term costs are related to costs of compromise of personal confidential information, costs related to loss of trust of stakeholders, legal
costs arising from privacy breaches, costs related to loss of customers
switching to competitors, and costs related to challenges in acquiring
new customers due to loss of reputation. The long-term costs will impact
the firm’s future cash flow. A privacy breach can permanently damage
the trust and confidence necessary to build a long-term association with
the customers and partners. The loss of trust and confidence may create
the perception of increased business risk in the market that may also
result in increased insurance costs for the firm and a higher cost of
capital in the debt and equity market. The privacy breach costs can also
be classified as tangible or intangible costs. However, most short-term
costs are tangible in nature, and long-term costs are intangible costs. It
is easier to estimate the various short-term tangible costs, such as loss of
productivity, loss of sales and revenue, insurance costs, and cost of
material and labor, but long-term intangible costs related to trust and
confidence are difficult to calculate. Privacy has been addressed as a
fundamental component of trust [60]. The reputational loss due to
customers’ trust deficit resulting from a privacy breach can have
measurable ramifications for the company’s market value [61]. The
customers possess negative attitudes and impressions against firms
responsible for privacy breaches and change their consumption patterns
for these firms [62]. Various e-commerce and Internet companies collect
and transmit the consumers’ personal information for performing their
business. Researchers have addressed the issue of Internet privacy
concerns of the customers as Internet technologies pose significant
challenges to the consumers’ information privacy; therefore, consumers’
personal information becomes more vulnerable [63]. Privacy breaches
occur because despite increasing privacy concerns over potential privacy breaches, customers seldom follow activities that protect their
personal information. Therefore, there is a discrepancy found between
consumers’ privacy attitude and actual behavior. Consumers often
involve in activities where they see short-term benefits and allow the
other party to have access to their personal information. The resource
dependency theory explains the dependency of the consumers on the
resources provided by the firms [64,65]. Access to these resources motivates the consumers to share their personal information with the firms.
Consumers disclose their personal information because it can affect their
purchase behavior and can be used for personalization and targeted
marketing [66]. However, personal information disclosure comes with a
risk of privacy breach as many firms have experienced significant privacy breaches. A study conducted by [67] suggests that chief information security officers (CISOs) of major corporations in the USA strongly
indicate that privacy breaches, phishing attacks, malware, hacking, and
insider threats will pose significant management challenges and
continue to be important concerns over the next 5–7 years. Anecdotal
evidence suggests that privacy breaches have a significant impact on the
breached firm. For example, in a report prepared by Ponemon Institute
and IBM security, the global average total cost of a data breach is reported as $ 3.86 million, with the USA having the highest country
average cost of $ 8.64 million [68]. The report is prepared based on the
524 organizations that suffered data breaches between August 2019 and
April 2020. The report takes into account various types of costs, such as
detection and escalation costs, costs of lost business, costs of notification, and costs of post-data breach response. The global cost of a data
breach is expected to reach $6 trillion annually in 2021 [69]. Thus,
privacy breaches can have a significant financial impact on firms. Privacy breaches may signal to the market that the internal privacy policy
of the firm is not appropriate, and the firm is not concerned about the
customers’ privacy. The customers’ negative perception derived from
the trust deficit can translate into the reduction of firm value. Therefore,
one may expect a negative abnormal stock return near the privacy
breach announcement. Thus, we hypothesize the following:
H1: A firm’s announcement of a privacy breach is negatively associated with its abnormal stock return.
The variance of stock returns is taken as the measure of the total firm
risk. Total firm risk consists of systematic risk and unsystematic or
idiosyncratic risk. Taking the variance of both sides of the MM (Eq. 1: Rit
= αi + βiRmt + εit), we get Var (Ri) = βi
2 Var (Rm) + Var (εi), where Var
(Ri) is the total firm risk, βi is systematic risk, and Var (εi) is an unsystematic or idiosyncratic risk [70]. Suppose the event leads to an increase
in systematic risk βi. Then, this will tend to raise the expected normal
return and lower the expected abnormal return. Now, suppose the event
results in an increase in the unsystematic risk Var (εi), then this will
reduce the significance of the abnormal return. We now see whether the
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
6
privacy breach impacts the systematic and unsystematic components of
the total firm risk. Systematic risk is driven by market-specific characteristics, such as natural disasters and exogenous shocks. Thus, systematic risk cannot be avoided through portfolio diversification. In
contrast, the unsystematic risk is related to the microeconomic risks of
firms and can be eliminated through portfolio diversification. Evidence
suggests that privacy breach affects the systematic risk of the firm. [71]
have observed that privacy breach increases the systematic risk by 4%.
The privacy breaches create strategic uncertainty specific to individual
firms or industries. Therefore, the corresponding risk effects of privacy
breaches are likely to be idiosyncratic or unsystematic in nature. Privacy
breach affects the volatility of the company’s stock price thus creating
the unsystematic risk that raises doubts about the company’s future
performance. Therefore, privacy breaches affect both systematic and
unsystematic risk, i.e., affect the MM parameters, thereby inducing
variance change in the returns of the firm. Thus, we hypothesize the
following:
H2: Privacy breach affects the MM parameters, thereby inducing
variance change in the returns
Firms adopt IT resources that have a larger market share because
these resources are compatible both internally as well as with their
business partners. In this way, firms enjoy the benefits of positive
network effects driven by compatibility and interoperability. We can
attribute the rise of Microsoft Windows as the most popular choice for
the operating system to this very fact. However, the negative network
effects associated with the use of common IT resources by the firms are
often ignored. Attackers often target the popular and common IT resources being used by many firms and their partners [72]. In the case of
sensitive information, firms share the correlated risk of privacy breaches
due to common technology and computer interconnectivity. Privacy
breaches often exploit the shared vulnerabilities across common IT resources and interconnected networks. Therefore, firms are encouraged
to share their security information to identify and repair vulnerabilities
in their systems, which will lead to increased sales revenues resulting
from effective security products and a better security reputation among
customers [73]. The sharing of security information may act as a
deterrent for hackers. The common IT infrastructure, business proximity
of firms, and relatedness of certain organizational attributes often lead
to the correlated risk of their being concurrently breached [74]. Firms
facing close-by privacy breaches may share (i) the same market in which
they operate, (ii) relatedness of businesses in terms of products or services, or (iii) the underlying IT resources used [75]. Due to business
relatedness, shared IT resources, and the nature of the privacy breach,
the firm performance may be affected by a close-by privacy breach
occurring on some other firm. Empirical evidence suggests that data
breaches not only influence the stock price of the breached firm but also
that of the competitors in the same industry [76]. For example, a study
of the security breaches between 1997 and 2007 has found that these
incidents not only affect the stock price of breached firms but also that of
their non-breached competitors [77]. Therefore, we believe that if the
privacy breach events are happening close to each other, then the impact
of one privacy breach on firm performance is affected by some close-by
privacy breach that occurred on some other firm. Thus, we hypothesize
the following:
H3: The impact of a privacy breach event on a firm may be affected
by other close-by privacy breach events
It is interesting to explore the impact of various firm-specific characteristics, such as firm size and firm type, and attack-specific characteristics, such as attack type and attack damage potency (DP), on
negative abnormal returns. Anecdotal evidence suggests that 60% of
small companies go out of business within six months from the incident
of the data breach [78]. [8] have empirically demonstrated that the
larger firms are less affected by a data breach than the smaller firms.
Large firms absorb the negative impact of data privacy breaches easily
due to diversified product portfolios, various income sources, and easier
access to the capital markets. Abnormal returns due to an event may
vary systematically by industry [23]. The threat of a data breach depends on the type of firm and the type of data stored in the organization.
Retail and finance are some of the sectors that are mostly affected by
data breaches [79]. These firms rely mainly on IT for doing business, and
data privacy breaches may lead to lost opportunities and lost revenues
for these firms. Therefore, data security mechanisms for these firms are
not just optional but essential ingredients for success. The impact of a
data breach is driven by the DP of the data breach. [8] have highlighted
that the data breach of more than 100000 subjects reduces the stock
returns by 1.2%. There are various types of data breaches such as insider
(INSD) attack, accidental disclosure (DISC) of information, loss or
stealing of portable device (PORT), debit or credit card fraud (CARD),
hacking or malware (HACK) attack, and loss or stealing of
non-electronic paper documents (PHYS). Each type of these attack may
compromise the confidentiality of customer information, data integrity,
and availability of applications and services of the organizations. Privacy breaches that compromise the confidentiality and integrity of
customers’ data may lead to liability suits and long-term competitive
disadvantages. These attacks access or modify the confidential information of the organization. In an access attack, the attacker tries to gain
unauthorized access to personal information without modifying the
content. However, in case of a modification attack, the attacker tries to
make unauthorized insertion or deletion of the information. Thus,
different types of breaches may have a different impact on the firms.
Therefore, both the firm-specific and attack-specific characteristics
could affect how investors view the data breach event. Thus, we hypothesize the following:
H4: Firm-specific and attack-specific characteristics affect the
magnitude of abnormal returns resulting from privacy breaches
4. Methodology
In this section, we describe various mythologies used in the study.
First, we use a simple MM to observe the impact of privacy breaches on
firm performance. Second, we develop a multivariate regression model,
i.e., AMM, to understand the event-induced changes in the variance of
stock returns and changes in MM parameters, which are ignored by the
MM. The ignorance of this may lead to biased CAR computation
[24–26]. To further strengthen our study, we have included the event
clustering observation (events that are happening very close to each
other) in our study and evaluated AMM with SUR, i.e., AMM-SUR.
We have taken stock market returns as the firm performance. However, researchers have also taken other measures to firm performance.
[80] have conducted an exploratory analysis to evaluate the contribution of IT using Tobin’s q, which is defined as the ratio of the capital
market value of the firm to the replacement value of assets. [81] have
reported that the variable for IT expenditure has increased the variance
explained in q significantly. However, there are a few limitations of
Tobin’s q. Tobin’s q includes information about various intangibles
beyond IT, such as advertising, research, and development, etc. Therefore, the model can suffer from measurement error if other intangible
factors are correlated with the variable under consideration. [82] have
reported that there is an endogeneity problem associated with q.
On the other hand, the theory of efficient capital market provides
strong theoretical support for the use of stock returns as a measure of
firm performance [57]. [58] highlights that security prices reflect all
available information. [83] have suggested that the accounting measures such as return on assets (ROA), return on equity (ROE), and return
on sales (ROS) have often been criticized because they are not adequate
indicators of firm performance. Accounting-based measures typically
reflect the historical information and are not forward-looking to observe
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
7
the future cash flows. Managers and executives may manipulate the
accounting profits as they select the accounting-based procedures [84].
On the other hand, insiders cannot manipulate the financial
market-based measures, such as the stock price of the firm. Stock prices
incorporate all the relevant information and are supposed to reflect the
true value of the firm. Therefore, event studies based on stock returns
should measure the financial impact of an event more effectively than a
methodology based on accounting measures [83].
4.1. Standard market model
Previous studies have used the MM or the standard event study
methodology to examine the abnormal returns (AR) caused by any security breach. In this method, abnormal returns are the difference between actual returns and the expected returns of the stock based on the
MM. According to MM, the stock returns Rit, and market returns Rmt are
related as follows:
Rit = αi + βiRmt + εit (1)
where i stands for the firm, and t stands for the date of the returns
relative to the event date. All the firms in our analysis are US firms. Thus,
we have used the Standard and Poor’s 500 (S&P 500) as the market
index. We have trained the MM over some days before the event date.
The training period is called the estimation window for the MM, as
shown in Fig. 1.
For example, Citibank was hit by a hacking attack on March 13,
2012. We can represent that attack by the following Fig. 2
To train the MM, we have taken an estimation window, which is
usually taken to be an interval of several days prior to the event. We
have taken the size of the estimation window as the 120 trading days
prior to the privacy breach event. We calculate the expected returns
after training the model and compare it with the actual returns within
the event window, as shown in Fig. 1. Abnormal returns of stock i are the
difference between the actual returns and the expected returns from the
MM. We calculate the AR of stock i for each day k in an event window of
[t1, t2] days long as shown in the following equation:
Marketmodel : ARik = Rik − − (αi + βiRmk), fork ∈ [t1, t2] (2)
where αi and βi are the MM parameters estimated by MM. We have taken
one short window, i.e., three-day event window [-1, +1], and one
relatively long window, i.e., 21-day event window [-10, +10]. However,
the longer window has a few limitations. The longer window may suffer
from the interference of extraneous confounding events. It is difficult to
control for the confounding events in a longer event window. [85] have
illustrated that the longer event window reduces the power of test statistics and may lead to false inferences about the significance of the
event. On the other hand, a short window limits the impact of events
other than the event of concern on the market reaction [16]. The short
window reflects the impact of data breach announcements more accurately than the long window [23]. Short event window tests provide the
“cleanest evidence on market efficiency” [58,59]. Authors have
empirically established that a short event window captures the effect of
the event significantly [86]. However, if the data breach information is
leaked in advance before the actual event, the longer window will
address the leaked information in a better way than the short window
[25]. In the case of complex events such as mergers, acquisitions, alliances, and joint ventures, the short window may exhibit incorrect inferences [87]. These types of strategic organizational events involve
complex strategic actions that may take an extended period to reflect in
the firm performance in the form of accounting measures. However,
event studies are based on the assumption of the efficient market hypothesis that suggests that stock prices incorporate all the relevant information and support the use of a short window. It is true that the
short-term market reaction of the event may not be an accurate indicator of the long-term performance of the firm. The short-term market
reactions should be considered as the collective sentiments of the investors regarding the event announcements. Therefore, [87] have suggested the use of a longer event window along with the short event
window. The event study should use a short event window to limit the
impact of other events and longer event window to capture the significance of the event of concern [83]. Therefore, we have adopted both the
windows, i.e., short window and long window to get the better understanding of the impact of the event. Another reason for taking both the
types of windows is to provide a measure of robustness to the analysis.
Different types of privacy breach attacks will have different impacts on
firms that will lead to variance in abnormal returns.
4.2. Advanced market model
The common event study methodology fails to account for eventinduced changes in the variance of stock returns and changes in MM
parameters. However, [27] suggested that “if the event is significant
enough to change MM parameters then values from before the event are
not appropriate and situation of changes in MM parameters can be
handled by using an estimation period as pre-and post-event window to
test for the MM parameters shifts.” To see this, consider the case where
systematic risk β (in Eq. 1) increases due to the impact of a significant
event. This would increase the expected returns (refer to Eq. 1) and
correspondingly decrease the estimated abnormal return (refer to Eq. 2).
Thus, a conventional event study methodology based on the standard
MM (described in Section 4.1) that does not account for the change in
systematic risk β would result in a biased, exaggerated abnormal return
[25]. However, innovations in the event study methods have enabled
the researchers to account for induced variance changes and changes in
the MM parameters by using pre-and post-event data as in a multivariate
regression model [88]. These developments in the event study methodology have encouraged the researchers to apply the multivariate
regression in a variety of contexts, such as electronic commerce announcements [25], banking deregulations [89], and corporate bankruptcy [70]. We have got the motivation to use multivariate models from
the studies of [25,88,90]. Therefore, we build on and extend the event
study methods used in prior research to analyze event-induced variance
changes and changes in MM parameters in the context of privacy
Fig. 1. Graphical representation of event study methodology.
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
8
breaches.
We develop a multivariate regression model, i.e., AMM, that takes
the effect of event-induced variance change in the returns, which in turn
affects the MM parameters. We will demonstrate that MM is a special
case of AMM and describe the conditions under which the AMM
approach is preferred over MM. We build our empirical model using a
multivariate regression model [88], which allows for the change in MM
parameters. The important feature of this model is that it extends the
estimation window to include both pre-event and post-event returns
data and incorporates the changes in MM parameters α and β following
the event [90]. The multivariate regression equation of the advanced
MM is as follows:
Advancemarketmodel : Rit = αi + α,
i
Dt + βi
Rmt + β,
iDtRmt + γiD0 + εit (3)
We can set the value of the dummy variable Dt to zero before the start
of the event window and one after that. Thus, the parameters α’i and β’i
will measure the changes in the value of the parameters αi and βi,
respectively, following the event. Fig. 4 illustrates the AMM for the preevent window, event window, and post-event window. Values of dummy
variables (i.e., Dt, D0) are mentioned in the bracket against every
equation. The value of dummy variable D0 is one inside the event window and zero outside it, which allows us to estimate the average daily
abnormal return, measured by the coefficient γi—in the MM itself. AMM
uses both pre-event and post-event returns data, which allows us to
incorporate the changes in MM parameters. To see this, suppose we find
the case where β’ > 0, which means that the event increases systematic
risk. This would increase the expected returns and would correspondingly decrease the estimated abnormal returns, perhaps even making it
insignificant. By contrast, the MM, which takes only pre-event returns,
does not incorporate the changes in MM parameters and will neglect this
β’ > 0. This would exaggerate the abnormal returns.
For example, Citibank faced a hacking attack on March 13, 2012, as
shown in Fig. 3. It is important to take all the estimation periods around
the event, i.e., pre-breach, during the breach, and post-breach estimation period, to get a more comprehensive insight into the impact of a
hacking attack on Citibank.
In general, we can show the different estimation periods around the
privacy breach event, as shown in Fig. 4.
MM is a special case of AMM. By putting α’ = β’ = 0, we can derive
MM from the AMM. The coefficient γi represents the average daily
abnormal returns in the standard event study method. We can observe
that AMM calculates AR using all the estimation periods, i.e., pre-event,
during the event, and post-event period data. AMM ensures a more
comprehensive analysis of the impact of the data breach on firm
performance by incorporating changes in MM parameters.
4.3. Advanced market model with seemingly unrelated regression
We enhance our multivariate regression model AMM to understand
the effect of the event clustering problem [26]. We need to adjust our
AMM for the event clustering phenomenon, which causes the MM residuals to be correlated across the firms. It is essential to take into account the event clustering phenomena when events are happening very
close to each other. We have estimated our multivariate regression
model AMM using SUR for contemporaneous correlation of MM residuals across firms to account for the event clustering phenomenon. The
estimation of AMM using SUR is reasonable in the case of two events
happening close to each other because it controls for the impact of the
nearby event on the abnormal return of the firm under consideration.
This study is in the context of privacy events to simultaneously handle
event clustering, event-induced variance change, and changes in MM
parameters. In our data set, events are happening very close to each
other, which motivates us to consider event clustering. We have plotted
some of the significant events in February 2013 in a timeline as shown in
Fig. 5. It is evident that the events are very close to each other, and a
privacy breach event may affect the impact on the firms caused by other
close-by privacy breach events. Apple faced a data breach on February
19, 2013, and just after two days, Microsoft also faced another data
breach on February 22, 2013. Apple and Microsoft are firms doing
similar types of businesses. There is a possibility that the data breach on
Apple may affect the impact of the data breach on Microsoft.
Therefore, due to the event clustering phenomenon, there is no
reason to believe, on a priori grounds, that privacy breaches will have a
similar effect on all firms. These concerns will violate the ordinary least
square (OLS) assumptions, and the regression residuals may suffer from
contemporaneous cross-sectional correlation [91,92]. Therefore, a more
rigorous approach is required that takes into consideration the possible
violation of some of OLS assumptions [16]. Thus, to deal with the event
clustering problem, we have used [92] SUR in AMM. We have performed
this study with the variant of AMM, i.e., AMM-SUR. We can observe that
AMM-SUR calculates AR using event clustering and all the estimation
period, i.e., pre-event, during the event, and post-event period data.
4.4. Impact of firm-specific and attack-specific characteristics on firm
performance
We formulate a regression equation that captures the impact of
various firm-specific characteristics, such as firm type and firm size, and
Fig. 2. Hacking attack on Citibank.
Fig. 3. Advanced estimation of impact of hacking attack on Citibank.
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
9
attack-specific characteristics, such as attack type and DP on firm performance.
ARi = α + β1Firmsizei + β2Firmtypei + β3Attacktypei + β4DamagePotencyi
+ εit
(4)
where ARi represents the negative value of AR for the ith firm. Table 2
shows the variables, their description, and their theoretical support from
the literature.
5. Data
We have taken the first public disclosure of a privacy breach of a firm
to the media as an “event” for examining the impact of privacy breaches
on the market value of firms. We have taken the definition of a privacy
breach as an instance where data of customers, employees, employers,
and third-party service providers are compromised through insider attacks, theft of confidential data, loss of electronic equipment, and any
loopholes in the security system. We have extensively explored the
various privacy breaches that occurred in the past. We present results by
year separately for 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2018 because our objective is
in part to understand the shifting perceptions over the years regarding
the impact of the privacy breach on firm performance. Firms of all types
and sizes have observed major privacy breaches during that period.
Time is an important characteristic of the event studies through issues
such as stationarity and the importance of a particular time period. Some
event studies use a long time period with the assumption of stationarity
of stock market data for that long period. However, the stock market
data is not likely to be stationary over time. Therefore, it suggested
breaking the period into different groups [59]. A lack of stationarity in
data may find the results stronger for one time period and weaker for
another period. For example, [93] observed that the e-commerce announcements had a significantly greater impact in 1998 than in 2000.
Thus, the selection of the time periods can be critical. It may be possible
the market becomes more aware of the impact of privacy breach over
time as the technology progress on its life cycle, and a “market reaction”
may turn into a “no market reaction” over time, or vice versa [94].
Fig. 4. Advanced market model for pre-event, during-event, and post-event window.
Fig. 5. Event clustering of privacy breaches.
Table 2
Firm and attack specific variables.
Variable Description Theoretical
support
Firm size Firm size as market capitalization of firm [8,17,121]
Firm type Three types of firms, i.e., BSF (banking, finance,
and insurance domain firms), BSR (retail firms),
and BSO (other firms including technological
firms)
[8,17,121]
Attack type Various types of attacks such as credit or debit
card loss, hacking, loss of electronic equipments
or documents, unintentional disclosure of
information on public websites, etc. (details are
given in Data section).
[8,17,18,48,49,
121]
Damage
potency
The number of records damaged due to privacy
breach
[8,17,121]
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
10
Therefore, we select the data for four different time periods 2012, 2013,
2014, and 2018 to understand the shifting perceptions regarding the
impact of privacy breaches over the years (please refer to Appendix 3, 4,
5, and 6 for the details regarding privacy breaches in 2012, 2013, 2014,
and 2018). We have done the analysis of these years separately to understand a clear separation between three different periods of privacy
breach announcements. We have collected the data from Privacy Rights
Clearinghouse, a non-profit organization in the USA, whose mission is to
educate and empower individuals to protect their privacy. The reason
for referring to the data provided by Privacy Rights Clearinghouse is that
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, in particular, manages and collects the
privacy breach data from authentic sources, such as state Attorneys
General and the US Department of Health and Human Services. Therefore, our privacy breaches are limited to only US firms.
5.1. Types of privacy breaches
The study includes the following types of data breaches in the sample, as shown in Table 3.
5.2. Types of organizations
We have taken the following types of organizations listed in NYSE
(US) and NASDAQ (US) to apply the event study methodology as shown
in Table 4.
We have also collected the data of the publically non-traded firms.
However, we have not considered these firms for the final sample
because information about stock prices is not publically available for
these firms. Hence, we cannot apply the event study methodology to
these firms. Following are a few examples of publically non-traded firms:
1 Nonprofit organizations
2 Defense organizations
3 Healthcare service providers
4 Government organizations
5 Organizations providing educational services
We have collected the data of the firm’s stock price and data of the
American stock market index for 120 days prior to 120 days after the
announcement of the privacy breach event. We have taken the S&P 500
as the American stock market index for our study because this index is
based on the market capitalizations of 500 big firms having common
stock listed on the NYSE or NASDAQ. We have collected the data of these
firms from the Bloomberg terminal provided by Bloomberg L.P. We have
dropped those firms from the list for which we have not found the
trading history for 120 days prior to 120 days after the privacy event.
Further, we have also dropped the firms having other multiple confounding privacy breach events within the three-day window around the
event date.
After cleaning the data, the final data set consists of 43 breaches, 37
breaches, 51 breaches, and 62 breaches for 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2018,
respectively, i.e., 193 breaches for all the years. We have done the study
separately for these years to understand better the impact of privacy
breaches in three different years. The following Table 5 presents the
descriptive statistics of the data.
We have also reported the descriptive statistics of the stock price data
used in the study. We have taken stock price data of 43 firms, 37 firms,
51 firms, and 62 firms for 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2018, respectively. To
present the descriptive statistics properly, we have reported the average
of the minimum, maximum, and mean values of 243 stock price data
points (120 days prior to 120 days after the 3-day event window) of all
the 43 firms, 37 firms, 51 firms, and 62 firms for the year 2012, 2013,
2014, and 2018, respectively. The following Table 6 presents the
descriptive statistics of the stock price data.
6. Results
6.1. MM and AMM results
In this section, we present the result of AMM for all the years, i.e.,
2012, 2013, 2014, and 2018, together, and we also compare these results with simple MM. We have run AMM for a 3-day event window and
a 21-day event window. As explained earlier, γ corresponds to the
average abnormal return (AAR) obtained from AMM, and we compare
the value of γ with AAR obtained from simple MM. The results are
presented in Table 7. In the results, we have only included those firms
for which any of the α’, β’, and γ (%)-AAR (AMM) are found significant.
Results indicate that some data breaches significantly change the
MM parameters, and this change is clearly evident. Most of the changes
in the MM parameters are found significant after the announcement of
the data breach event. The change in MM parameters affects the overall
AR of the firms, as explained in the methodology section. Due to changes
in MM parameters, the difference between AAR obtained by AMM
(denoted by γ (%)-AAR (AMM)) in Table 7) and AAR obtained by MM
(denoted by AAR (%) MM in Table 7)) is clearly apparent in the above
results. This further indicates that ignoring the changes in MM parameters caused by the data breach event results in biased AR. HACK, INSD,
PORT, CARD, DISC, and PHYS attacks have significantly changed the
Table 3
Types of attacks.
Types of attacks Description
Insider (INSD) Some insider intentionally accesses and shares the
confidential information of customers, employees, and
employers to the wrong party.
Accidental disclosure
(DISC)
Unintentional disclosure of confidential information
shared through fax, email, or website posting.
Portable device (PORT) Loss or stealing of electronic devices such as smartphones,
laptops, hard disks, portable hard disks, pen drives, etc.
Debit or Credit Card
Fraud (CARD)
Mishandling of credit and debit cards through skimming
devices at point-of-service terminals.
Hacking or malware
(HACK)
Unauthorized access by some outside hacker, malware,
and spyware by compromising cybersecurity system.
Physical loss (PHYS) Loss or stealing of non-electronic paper documents.
Unknow breach (UNKN) Not enough information about the privacy breach is
known
Table 4
Types of organizations
Types of organizations Description
Businesses – Banking and Financial
Services (BSF)
Firms in the banking, financial, and
insurance domain
Businesses - Retail (BSR) Firms having businesses in the retail
industry
Businesses – Other (BSO) Other firms, mostly technological firms
Table 5
Descriptive statistics based on the firm type
Firm type 2012 2013 2014 2108 Total
BSF 14 9 12 27 62
BSO 12 13 27 14 66
BSR 17 15 12 21 65
Total 43 37 51 62 193
Descriptive statistics based on the attack type
Attack type 2012 2013 2014 2108 Total
CARD 3 3 2 8
DISC 3 9 5 8 25
HACK 17 16 36 11 80
INSD 11 4 5 2 22
PHYS 3 1 2 6
PORT 4 5 2 11
STAT 1 1
UNKN 1 39 40
Total 43 37 51 62 193
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
11
MM parameters that affect the AR. All types of firms, i.e., BSF, BSR, and
BSO, experience the change in AR caused by a data breach event. In
2012, firms F10 (McDonald), F13 (Global Payment Inc.), F16 (The Home
Depot), and F17 (Rent-A-Center Inc.) have significant AAR obtained by
AMM for a 3-day event window. F10, F16, and F17 are BSR firms, while
F13 is a BSF firm. INSD attack hits F10 and F16, while CARD and PHYS
attacks hit F13 and F17, respectively. In 2013, firm F31 (Republic Services), a BSO firm, has a significant AAR obtained by AMM for a 3-day
event window due to a PORT attack. Similarly, in 2014, firms F11
(Sears), F15 (American Express Company), F38 (The Home Depot), and
F40 (Pulte Mortgage) have significant AAR obtained by AMM for a 3-day
event window. F11 and F38 are BSR firms, while F15 and F40 are BSF
firms. HACK attack hits F11, F38, and F40, while the CARD attack hits
F15. In 2018, the results present significant AAR by AMM for a 3-day
event window for firms F2 (Rite Aid Corporation), F11 (Marriott International Inc), F24 (Pershing Llc), F47 (Dollar Shave Club Inc), F49
(Chegg Inc), F53 (Brinker International Inc), F56 (Marriott International), F57 (Goldman Sachs & Co Llc), F59 (Health Equity Inc), and F61
(Liquidity Services). F2, F11, F47, F49, F53, F56, and F61 are BSR firms,
while F24, F57, and F59 are BSF firms. UNKN attacks hit F2, F24, F49,
F53, F59, and F61, while HACK attacks hit F11, F47, F56, and F57. We
have also presented the results of Table 7 in the following Fig. 6 to increase visualization and understanding. It is evident from the figure that
the abnormal returns due to privacy breaches are largely reported as
negative by all the models for all the firms. However, BSF and BSR firms
have reported higher negative abnormal returns calculated by all the
models due to privacy breaches for all the years than BSO firms. Fig. 6
The following Table 8 illustrates the difference in ARs obtained by
MM and AMM. Table 8 illustrates that AAR obtained from AMM is more
negative as compared to AAR obtained from MM consistently for the all
years 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2018. The abnormal return reported by
AMM is 25%, 50%, 60%, and 14% more negative than MM for 2012,
2013, 2014, and 2018 respectively, for the 3-day event window. The
number of firms having negative AR is higher in AMM than MM in 2012,
2013, and 2104 for the 3-day event window and in 2018 for the 21-day
event window. It is evident from the results that there is a significant
improvement in the abnormal returns in AMM after incorporating
changes in MM parameters that are missing in MM. It is illustrated in
Table 8 that the BSF firms have consistently reported negative abnormal
returns for all the years for the 3-day event window.
6.2. MM, AMM, and AMM-SUR results
In our data sets, privacy breach events are very similar in nature, and
their event dates are close to each other. Therefore, it is imperative to
take into account the event clustering phenomena. The impact of one
event may affect the abnormal returns caused by a close-by event.
Therefore, the ignorance of event clustering may lead to a biased estimation of abnormal returns. The event clustering problem causes the
MM errors to be correlated across the firms. The estimation needs to
adjust for contemporaneous correlation of MM errors. Thus, we estimate
the model using SUR. SUR is different from OLS. It includes the correlation of error terms of every regression equation into the final model
(please refer to Appendix 1 for details of SUR). A firm has its error
correlated with other firms.
Table 9 illustrates the number of firms having significant error correlation (event correlation) with a given firm (due to space constraints,
we are not able to show the full error correlation matrix). For example,
in the year 2012, F14 (Experian) has an error correlation with ten other
firms. Experian, a BSF sector firm, was hit by the PORT attack. Similarly,
in the year 2013, F29 (Exelixis) has an error correlation with eight firms.
Exelixis, a BSR sector firm, was hit by the PORT attack. In the year 2014,
F27 (Lockheed Martin) has an error correlation with 13 firms. Lockheed
Martin, a BSO sector firm, was hit by the HACK attack. In 2018, F9
(Dollar General Corporation) has observed an error correlation with 13
other firms. Dollar General Corporation, a BSR firm, was hit by a DISC
attack. Other firms are also showing error correlation with other firms.
Thus, we account for contemporaneous error correlation and estimate
the model using SUR.
In Table 10, we have shown the values of parameters (α’and β’),
which represent the changes in MM parameters due to the effect of the
data breach event. We have included the average abnormal return
(denoted by γ (%)-AAR (AMM-SUR) in Table 10) obtained by applying
AMM using SUR methodology. We have compared the AAR obtained by
AMM-SUR to AAR obtained by AMM (denoted by γ (%)-AAR (AMM) in
Table 10) and AAR obtained by simple MM (denoted by AAR (%) (MM)
in Table 10). We have included only those observations of results where
any of the α’, β’, and γ (%)-AAR (AMM-SUR) are significant for both the
event windows, i.e., 3-day event window and 21-day event window. It is
apparent from the above results that there is not enough difference between the AAR of AMM and the AAR of AMM-SUR. But there seems to be
a significant difference between the AAR obtained from AMM or AMMSUR and AAR obtained from simple MM [25]. Interestingly, the results
show that HACK, INSD, PORT, CARD, DISC, and PHYS attacks have
significantly changed the MM parameters that affect the AR. All types of
firms, i.e., BSF, BSR, and BSO, experience the change in AR caused by a
data breach event. In 2012, all three types of firms, i.e., BSF, BSR, and
BSO, have seen significant changes in the MM parameters and observed
significant AAR. However, in 2013, most of the firms are BSR firms. In
2014, most of the firms belong to the BSO category that also includes
technological firms. In 2018, all types of firms have observed significant
changes in MM parameters and significant AAR. In 2012, firms F10
(McDonald), F13 (Global Payment Inc.), F16 (The Home Depot), and
F17 (Rent-A-Center Inc.) have significant AAR obtained by AMM-SUR
for a 3-day event window. F10, F16, and F17 are BSR firms, while F13
is BSF firm. INSD attacks hit F10 and F16, while CARD and PHYS attacks
hit F13 and F17, respectively. In 2013, firm F31 (Republic Services), a
BSO firm, has a significant AAR obtained by AMM-SUR for a 3-day event
window due to a PORT attack. Similarly, in 2014, firms F11 (Sears), F15
(American Express Company), F38 (The Home Depot), and F40 (Pulte
Mortgage) have significant AAR obtained by AMM-SUR for a 3-day
event window. F11 and F38 are BSR firms, while F15 and F40 are BSF
firms. The HACK attacks hit F11, F38, and F40, while the CARD attacks
hit F15. In 2018, the results present significant AAR by AMM-SUR for a
3-day event window for firms F2 (Rite Aid Corporation), F14 (Walmart
Inc), F17 (The Ups Store), F21 (First Merchants Bank), F28 (Nordstrom
Inc), F30 (Intuit Inc), F37 (Cbiz Mhm Llc), F39 (Delta Steel Inc), F41
(Alphabet Inc), F42 (Mondelez Global Llc), F44 (Humana Inc), F45
(Intuit Inc), F47 (Dollar Shave Club Inc), and F49 (Chegg Inc). F2, F14,
F28, F47, and F49 are BSR firms. F17, F39, F41, F42, and F44 are BSO
firms, whereas F21, F30, F37, and F45 are BSF firms. UNKN attacks hit
F2, F21, F28, F30, F37, F39, F42, F44, and F49. HACK attacks hit F17,
F45, and F47, whereas DISC attacks hit F14 and F41. We have also
presented the results of Table 10 in the following figure to increase
visualization and understanding. It is evident from Fig. 7 that the
abnormal returns due to privacy breaches are largely reported as
negative by all the models for all the firms. However, BSF firms have
reported higher negative abnormal returns calculated by all the models
due to privacy breaches in 2102 and 2014 than BSO and BSR firms.
We have shown in Table 11, the overall mean of all the AARs obtained from the three models, i.e., MM, AMM, and AMM-SUR. From the
results, it is clear that AAR obtained from all the models is different. We
have already observed that AAR obtained from AMM is more negative
than MM consistently for all the years. Interestingly, AAR from AMM
Table 6
Descriptive statistics based on the stock price
Factor 2012 2013 2014 2108
Average (Min) 24.34 40.31 41.86 84.82
Average (Max) 36.81 59.21 58.40 124.13
Average (Mean) 30.37 49.21 49.48 103.93
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
12
Table 7
Changes in market model parameters and abnormal returns using AMM
3-day event window 21-day event window Attack type Firm type
Firm α’ β’ γ (%) -AAR (AMM) AAR (%) (MM) α’ β’ γ (%) - AAR (AMM) AAR (%) (MM)
2012
F6 -0.0017 0.21* -0.21 -0.37 -0.0018 0.3*** -0.10 -0.23 HACK BSF
F7 0.0026 -0.78** -0.37 -0.11 0.0025 -0.71** -0.24 0.01 INSD BSR
F8 0.0015* 0.07 -0.08 0.08 0.0012 0.07 -0.04 0.08 PORT BSR
F10 -0.0015 0.04 -0.0136*** 0.46 -0.0009 0 -0.24 -0.29 INSD BSR
F12 -0.0006 -0.38** 0.25 0.07 0 -0.36** 0.17 0.15 INSD BSF
F13 -0.0007 -0.07 4.92*** -5.01 -0.0011 -0.06 -0.61** -0.72 CARD BSF
F16 -0.0011 0.28** 1.15** 1.04 -0.0013 0.28** 0.08 -0.05 INSD BSR
F17 -0.0004 -0.14 -1.63** -1.79 -0.0008 -0.19 -1.63 -0.42 PHYS BSR
F20 0.001 -0.39** -0.54 -0.13 0.0015 -0.29* -0.44 -0.21 HACK BSR
F24 0.0048 -0.8** 0.30 0.76 0.0042 -0.92*** -0.36 0.15 INSD BSR
F29 -0.0013 -0.23 0.05 -0.15 -0.0013 -0.25* 0.01 -0.18 CARD BSF
F31 0.0043** 0.17 -0.57 -0.06 0.0034 0.05 0.08 0.43 INSD BSR
F33 -0.006** 0.43 0.64 0.08 -0.0061*** 0.44 0.66 0.10 HACK BSR
F35 -0.0003 -0.46*** 0.25 0.44 -0.0005 -0.37*** 0.16 0.14 PORT BSF
F37 0.0025 -0.61** -0.80 -0.66 0.0015 -0.57** -0.57 -0.36 HACK BSO
F40 0.0015 -0.43** 0.39 0.82 0.0008 -0.39** -0.07 0.00 HACK BSO
F43 0.0009 0.34** -0.19 -0.16 0.0009 0.23 0.13 0.28 PHYS BSO
2013
F8 0.0035 -0.88*** -1.13 -0.60 0.0036 -0.94*** 0.10 0.01 HACK BSR
F12 -0.0001 0.28*** -0.10 0.04 0.0002 0.25** -0.12 -0.08 PORT BSF
F13 0.0028 0.5* -1.07 -0.72 0.0039* 0.41 -1.15 0.33 PORT BSR
F19 -0.0001 0.3 -0.62 -0.49 0.0002 0.35* -0.66 -0.56 HACK BSO
F22 0.0071** 0.16 0.20 0.73 0.0075** 0.06 0.14 0.56 DISC BSO
F25 0.0028 -0.49* -1.22 -0.97 0.0042* -0.39 -1.23 0.63 HACK BSR
F27 -0.0011 0.17 0.06 -0.07 -0.0012 0.2* 0.06 -0.08 CARD BSR
F31 -0.0006 -0.23* -0.81* -0.88 -0.0003 -0.21 -0.81* -0.29 PORT BSO
F33 0.0002 0.41* -0.04 -0.16 -0.0002 0.43* 0.01 -0.06 HACK BSR
2014
F1 0.0010 -0.31** -0.49 -0.03 0.0007 -0.26* -0.2 -0.1 PORT BSO
F4 -0.002* 0.00 0.20 0.00 -0.002* 0.14 0.16 -0.01 INSD BSO
F7 0.0027 -1.17** -0.19 0.17 0.0019 -1.31** 1.01 0.79 HACK BSR
F9 0.0016 0.46* -0.29 -0.07 0.0019 0.45* -0.29 -0.01 HACK BSO
F11 -0.0005 1.12* 0.47** 4.66 -0.0008 1.21* 0.49 0.48 HACK BSR
F13 -0.0015* 0.07 -0.24 -0.41 -0.0013 0.09 -0.22 -0.36 HACK BSF
F15 -0.0011 0.09 -0.73* -0.90 -0.0008 0 -0.24 -0.32 CARD BSF
F16 -0.0011 -0.84* 0.76 0.65 -0.0008 -0.59 -0.79 -0.97 HACK BSO
F17 0.0001 -0.10 -0.48 -0.47 -0.0002 -0.04 -0.46* -0.48 HACK BSO
F19 0.0019 0.14 0.50 0.76 0.0032** 0.09 -0.09 0.24 DISC BSR
F20 -0.0014 0.61** -0.32 -0.21 -0.0008 0.55** 0.02 0.05 HACK BSO
F24 0.0019** -0.07 -0.16 0.00 0.0015 0 -0.04 0.1 DISC BSF
F26 0.0013 -0.35** 0.66 0.76 0.0017 -0.32* -0.24 -0.08 HACK BSO
F27 0.0015 -0.26* 0.62 0.75 0.0006 -0.18 0.07 0.13 HACK BSO
F33 0.0026 -0.72** -0.69 -0.74 0.0024 -0.78** 0.08 0.28 HACK BSO
F35 -0.0014 -1.32 2.97 2.23 0.0009 -1.47* 0.09 -0.1 HACK BSO
F38 0.0011 0.24 -1.37*** -1.24 0.0017 0.32** 0.1 0.3 HACK BSR
F40 0.0013 -0.04 -1.74** -1.61 0.0024 -0.04 -0.18 0.06 HACK BSF
F41 0.0019 -1.39** -0.26 -0.07 0.0033 -1.39** -0.3 0.25 PORT BSO
F43 0.0067 -0.04 -2.66 -1.93 0.0054 -0.93 1.97** 2.52 HACK BSR
F51 -0.0013 0.51** -0.86 -0.92 -0.0014 0.48** 0.01 -0.12 HACK BSO
2018
F2 0.0016 -1.56* 5.68*** 5.46 0.0017 -1.67* 0.51 0.23 UNKN BSR
F8 -0.0005 -0.13 0.07 -0.11 -0.0012 0.17 -0.42* -0.58 DISC BSF
F11 -0.0038*** -0.15 -1.16* -1.58 -0.0033** 0.02 -0.09 -0.42 HACK BSR
F14 -0.0012 -0.23 -0.63 -0.84 -0.0008 -0.17 -0.75** -0.84 DISC BSR
F17 0.0019 0.38** 0.65 0.68 0.0016 0.22 0.08 0.18 HACK BSO
F18 0.0035** -0.18 -0.04 0.34 0.0041** -0.31 0.59** 1.04 UNKN BSO
F19 -0.0023 0.08 -0.17 -0.45 -0.0031 0.13 0.73** 0.39 UNKN BSO
F21 0.0014 -0.37** -0.15 0.08 -0.0004 -0.06 0.03 0.00 UNKN BSF
F24 -0.0006 -0.11 2.74*** 2.73 -0.0006 -0.18 0.40* 0.33 UNKN BSF
F30 -0.0005 0.43*** -0.65 -0.73 -0.001 0.44*** 0.16 0.13 UNKN BSF
F37 -0.0031** -0.12 -0.64 -0.94 -0.0034** -0.11 -0.44 -0.81 UNKN BSF
F40 0.0001 -0.18 -0.44 -0.38 -0.0006 -0.27* -0.01 -0.08 UNKN BSF
F42 0.0017 -0.31** 0.49 0.63 0.0016 -0.29** -0.22 -0.10 UNKN BSO
F44 -0.0017 0.44*** -0.06 -0.03 -0.0029* 0.46*** 0.15 -0.09 UNKN BSO
F45 0.0001 0.38** 0.57 0.51 -0.0001 0.28* 0.1 0.11 HACK BSF
F47 -0.0007 0.1 -1.22** -1.32 -0.0003 0.07 -0.25 -0.28 HACK BSR
F48 -0.0011 0.26 -0.05 -0.19 -0.001 0.27* -0.11 -0.18 UNKN BSF
F49 0.0001 0.69* -3.91*** -3.95 -0.0001 0.65** -0.94* -1.07 UNKN BSR
F53 -0.0014 -0.08 -3.77*** 3.61 -0.002 0.2 0.64 0.42 UNKN BSR
F55 0.0028 0.05 0.69 0.96 0.0032* 0.04 -0.08 0.24 UNKN BSF
F56 0.0013 0.11 -1.42* -1.23 0.002 0 -0.12 0.08 HACK BSR
F57 0.0011 -0.15 -1.75** -1.72 0.0013 -0.15 -0.59** -0.42 HACK BSF
F59 -0.0021 -0.33 -5.78*** -5.36 -0.0013 -0.2 -0.4 -0.44 UNKN BSF
F61 -0.0019 -0.05 -5.13*** -5.27 -0.0031 0.27 0.94 0.47 UNKN BSR
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
13
Note:
* ,
** , and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% level of significance, respectively
Fig. 6. Abnormal returns using AMM and MM.
Table 8
A final comparison of results for AMM and MM
3-day event window 21-day event window
AAR (%) NR PR Rsq AAR (%) NR PR Rsq
BSF BSR BSO Total BSF BSR BSO Total
2012
AMM -0.38 -0.41 0.11 -0.25 25 18 0.38 0.04 -0.10 -0.04 -0.04 22 21 0.39
MM -0.40 -0.20 0.04 -0.20 23 20 0.43 0.01 -0.03 -0.04 -0.02 22 21 0.44
2013
AMM -0.08 -0.16 -0.18 -0.15 24 13 0.29 -0.07 -0.17 -0.20 -0.15 23 14 0.29
MM -0.10 -0.09 -0.10 -0.10 23 14 0.30 -0.11 0.15 -0.10 0.00 17 20 0.29
2014
AMM -0.34 0.01 -0.01 -0.08 30 21 0.28 0.12 0.33 -0.04 0.09 21 30 0.28
MM -0.36 0.15 0.00 -0.05 29 22 0.25 0.10 0.40 -0.01 0.11 19 32 0.25
2018
AMM -0.08 -0.34 0.35 -0.07 32 30 0.30 -0.05 -0.07 0.12 -0.02 35 27 0.30
MM -0.08 -0.36 0.42 -0.06 32 30 0.27 -0.07 -0.08 0.13 -0.02 28 34 0.26
Abbreviations: NR: Firms having negative returns, PR: Firms having positive returns, Rsq: R-squared
Table 9
Number of firms having correlated errors
F1 F2 F3 F4 F5 F6 F7 F8 F9 F10 F11 F12 F13 F14 F15 F16 F17
2012 7 4 4 8 5 2 2 6 6 4 5 5 2 10 4 4 5
2013 5 5 5 2 4 5 2 2 3 1 1 4 1 5 5 3 1
2014 2 6 7 5 8 4 11 6 4 9 6 4 5 5 6 4 6
2018 8 6 9 10 6 7 3 11 13 8 7 3 4 5 7 5 6
F18 F19 F20 F21 F22 F23 F24 F25 F26 F27 F28 F29 F30 F31 F32 F33 F34
2012 2 7 2 4 3 1 5 4 4 3 3 5 5 2 5 3 4
2013 3 2 3 1 1 3 2 4 3 5 6 8 6 5 4 6 1
2014 6 7 6 5 5 2 7 5 4 13 2 3 4 6 6 7 4
2018 5 6 5 7 3 2 6 9 12 5 5 6 5 8 5 7 4
F35 F36 F37 F38 F39 F40 F41 F42 F43 F44 F45 F46 F47 F48 F49 F50 F51
2012 6 4 9 3 3 4 1 5 4
2013 2 4 3
2014 4 6 5 2 9 7 8 3 4 5 6 6 7 3 3 9 5
2018 5 6 7 3 6 5 3 3 7 4 7 4 2 4 8 9 7
F52 F53 F54 F55 F56 F57 F58 F59 F60 F61 F62
2018 4 11 3 7 4 6 5 6 9 6 5
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
14
Table 10
Change in market model parameters and abnormal returns using AMM-SUR
3-day event window 21-day event window Attack
type
Firm
Firm α’ β’ γ (%) -AAR type
(AMM-SUR)
γ (%) -AAR
(AMM)
AAR (%)
(MM)
α’ β’ γ (%) - AAR
(AMM-SUR)
γ (%) -AAR
(AMM)
AAR (%)
(MM)
2012
F5 0.0002 -0.26* -0.79 -0.81 -0.57 0.0009 -0.12 -0.15 -0.15 -0.27 HACK BSO
F6 -0.0017 0.18* -0.21 -0.21 -0.37 -0.0018 0.28*** -0.1 -0.1 -0.23 HACK BSF
F8 0.0015* 0.11 -0.08 -0.08 0.08 0.0012 0.11 -0.04 -0.04 0.08 PORT BSR
F10 -0.0015 0.05 -1.36*** -1.36*** 0.46 -0.0009 -0.01 -0.24 -0.24 -0.29 INSD BSR
F12 -0.0005 -0.42*** 0.25 0.25 0.07 0.0001 -0.36** 0.17 0.17 0.15 INSD BSF
F13 -0.0007 -0.05 -4.92** -4.92*** -5.01 -0.0011 -0.07 -0.62** -0.61** -0.72 CARD BSF
F14 -0.0003 -0.27** -0.3 -0.3 -0.16 -0.0007 -0.07 0.17 0.17 0.1 PORT BSF
F16 -0.0012 0.28** 1.15** 1.15** 1.04 -0.0013 0.29*** 0.08 0.08 -0.05 INSD BSR
F17 -0.0004 -0.18 -1.59* -1.63** -1.79 -0.0008 -0.2 -0.35 -0.34 -0.42 PHYS BSR
F20 0.001 -0.38** -0.52 -0.54 -0.13 0.0015 -0.28* -0.44 -0.44 -0.21 HACK BSR
F24 0.0049 -0.92*** 0.3 0.3 0.76 0.0042 -0.95*** -0.35 -0.36 0.15 INSD BSR
F26 -0.0017 0.68* -0.4 -0.31 0.03 -0.0032 0.41 0.19 0.2 -0.07 HACK BSO
F29 -0.0013 -0.25** 0.05 0.05 -0.15 -0.0013 -0.22* 0 0.01 -0.18 CARD BSF
F31 0.0043** 0.15 -0.6 -0.57 -0.06 0.0034 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.43 INSD BSR
F32 0.001 -0.26* -0.1 -0.1 0 0.0007 -0.3** -0.15 -0.15 -0.1 PHYS BSF
F33 -0.006** 0.4 0.63 0.64 0.08 -0.0061*** 0.42 0.66 0.66 0.1 HACK BSR
F35 -0.0003 -0.45*** 0.27 0.25 0.44 -0.0005 -0.33*** 0.16 0.16 0.14 PORT BSF
F37 0.0025 -0.61** -0.8 -0.8 -0.66 0.0015 -0.55** -0.58 -0.57 -0.36 HACK BSO
F39 0.0004 -0.27 0.7 0.7 0.71 0.0004 -0.35* 0.16 0.2 0.3 HACK BSO
F40 0.0016 -0.45*** 0.32 0.39 0.82 0.0008 -0.34** -0.08 -0.07 0 HACK BSO
F43 0.0009 0.24* -0.19 -0.19 -0.16 0.0009 0.21 0.12 0.13 0.28 PHYS BSO
2013
F1 0.0013 -0.39* -0.28 -0.28 -0.23 0.0019 -0.49** -0.26 -0.26 -0.05 INSD BSR
F4 -0.0014 -0.12 -0.04 -0.04 -0.19 -0.0017* -0.12 -0.01 -0.01 0.05 CARD BSF
F8 0.0035 -0.89*** -1.13 -1.13 -0.6 0.0036 -0.97*** -1.22 -1.21 0.01 HACK BSR
F9 0.002 -0.38* -0.3 -0.27 0.08 0.0021 -0.24 -0.27 -0.24 0.16 HACK BSR
F12 -0.0001 0.27*** -0.09 -0.1 0.04 0.0002 0.23** -0.12 -0.12 -0.08 PORT BSF
F13 0.0029 0.39 -1.07 -1.07 -0.72 0.0039** 0.28 -1.14 -1.15 0.33 PORT BSR
F19 -0.0002 0.39** -0.64 -0.62 -0.49 0.0002 0.41** -0.68 -0.66 -0.56 HACK BSO
F22 0.0069* 0.39 0.39 0.2 0.73 0.0073** 0.22 0.28 0.14 0.56 DISC BSO
F25 0.0028 -0.45* -1.22 -1.22 -0.97 0.0043* -0.42 -1.23 -1.23 0.63 HACK BSR
F27 -0.0012 0.21* 0.06 0.06 -0.07 -0.0012 0.23** 0.06 0.06 -0.08 CARD BSR
F31 -0.0006 -0.27** -0.81* -0.81* -0.88 -0.0003 -0.22* -0.81* -0.81* -0.29 PORT BSO
F33 0.0003 0.39* -0.04 -0.04 -0.16 -0.0003 0.45** 0.02 0.01 -0.06 HACK BSR
2014
F1 0.001 -0.31** -0.5 -0.49 -0.03 0.0007 -0.23* -0.2 -0.2 -0.10 PORT BSO
F4 -0.002* 0 0.17 0.2 0.00 -0.002* 0.17 0.16 0.16 -0.01 INSD BSO
F7 0.0027 -1.09** -0.18 -0.19 0.17 0.0019 -1.2** 0.98 1.01 0.79 HACK BSR
F9 0.0016 0.46* -0.29 -0.29 -0.07 0.0019 0.45* -0.28 -0.29 -0.01 HACK BSO
F11 -0.0005 1.03* 4.69** 0.47** 4.66 -0.0007 1.08* 0.49 0.49 0.48 HACK BSR
F13 -0.0015* 0.12 -0.24 -0.24 -0.41 -0.0014 0.1 -0.22 -0.22 -0.36 HACK BSF
F15 -0.001 0 -0.77* -00.73* -0.90 -0.0008 -0.05 -0.24 -0.24 -0.32 CARD BSF
F17 0 -0.04 -0.49 -0.48 -0.47 -0.0003 0.03 -0.46* -0.46* -0.48 HACK BSO
F19 0.0018 0.21 0.48 0.5 0.76 0.0031** 0.15 -0.09 -0.09 0.24 DISC BSR
F20 -0.0014 0.7*** -0.31 -0.32 -0.21 -0.0009 0.68*** 0.03 0.02 0.05 HACK BSO
F22 0.0001 -0.16 -0.16 -0.15 -0.15 -0.0006 -0.27** 0.01 0 -0.08 INSD BSR
F24 0.0019** -0.06 -0.18 -0.16 0.00 0.0015 0 -0.04 -0.04 0.10 DISC BSF
F26 0.0013 -0.34** 0.66 0.66 0.76 0.0017 -0.31** -0.24 -0.24 -0.08 HACK BSO
F27 0.0016 -0.37*** 0.62 0.62 0.75 0.0007 -0.26** 0.07 0.07 0.13 HACK BSO
F33 0.0025 -0.58** -0.74 -0.69 -0.74 0.0023 -0.63** 0.08 0.08 0.28 HACK BSO
F35 -0.0015 -1.04 2.98 2.97 2.23 0.0009 -1.45* 0.1 0.09 -0.10 HACK BSO
F37 -0.0006 0.35* 0.18 0.18 0.14 -0.0004 0.33* -0.03 -0.03 -0.04 HACK BSO
F38 0.0011 0.21 -1.37*** -1.37*** -1.24 0.0017 0.3** 0.1 0.1 0.30 HACK BSR
F39 0.0022 -0.56* 0.06 0.07 0.32 0.003 -0.53* 0.1 0.09 0.36 HACK BSO
F40 0.0012 0.01 -1.76** -1.74** -1.61 0.0023 0.05 -0.2 -0.18 0.06 HACK BSF
F41 0.002 -1.52*** -0.26 -0.26 -0.07 0.0034 -1.64*** -0.32 -0.3 0.25 PORT BSO
F42 -0.0005 0.14 0.55 0.54 0.49 -0.0008 0.3** 0.14 0.13 0.00 INSD BSR
F43 0.0068 -0.24 -2.8 -2.66 -1.93 0.0054 -0.96 1.97** 1.97** 2.52 HACK BSR
F51 -0.0013 0.52*** -0.86 -0.86 -0.92 -0.0014 0.52*** 0.01 0.01 -0.12 HACK BSO
2018
F2 0.002 0.002 -2.07*** 5.69** 5.68*** 0.0021 -2.28*** 0.54 0.51 0.23 UNKN BSR
F4 -0.0015 -0.0015 0.1 1.23* 1.11 -0.0015 -0.04 0 -0.01 -0.14 UNKN BSF
F6 0.0001 0.0001 0.01 0.13 0.15 -0.0004 0.36* 0.15 0.15 0.07 UNKN BSF
F8 -0.0005 -0.0005 -0.15 0.07 0.07 -0.0011 0.06 -0.42* -0.42* -0.58 DISC BSF
F11 -0.0038*** -0.0038*** -0.07 -1.17** -1.16* -0.0032** -0.07 -0.09 -0.09 -0.42 HACK BSR
F14 -0.0011 -0.0011 -0.38* -0.63 -0.63 -0.0007 -0.32 -0.75** -0.75** -0.84 DISC BSR
F17 0.0018 0.0018 0.46*** 0.66 0.65 0.0015 0.37** 0.09 0.08 0.18 HACK BSO
F18 0.0035** 0.0035** -0.11 -0.03 -0.04 0.0041** -0.34* 0.59** 0.59** 1.04 UNKN BSO
F19 -0.0022 -0.0022 -0.03 -0.22 -0.17 -0.003 0.03 0.72** 0.73** 0.39 UNKN BSO
F21 0.0014 0.0014 -0.31** -0.15 -0.15 -0.0003 -0.09 0.01 0.03 0.00 UNKN BSF
F23 -0.0004 -0.0004 -0.11 -0.11 -0.07 0.0003 -0.4** 0.35 0.35 0.39 UNKN BSO
(continued on next page)
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
15
(SUR) is less negative than AAR from AMM consistently for all the years.
The results illustrate that the abnormal returns (AAR from AAM(SUR))
get inflated after incorporating the error correction factor in the model.
The amount of inflation is due to the event clustering problem [25]. AAR
from AMM-SUR is 1%, 7%, 3%, and 8% less negative than AAR from
AMM in 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2018, respectively. AAR from AMM-SUR
is less negative than AAR from AAM because AMM-SUR accounts for the
error correction factor that eliminates the negative effect caused by
nearby events on abnormal returns of the firm. It is evident from
Table 11 that the BSF firms have consistently reported negative
abnormal returns for all the years for the 3-day event window.
6.3. Impact of firm-specific and attack-specific characteristics on firm
performance
The various firm-specific and attack-specific characteristics may
have an impact on the firm performance. We have run the model
mentioned in Eq. 4 to understand this relationship. We have taken the
size of the firm as the natural logarithm of the market capitalization (in
billion dollars) and DP as the natural logarithm of the total number of
records breached. We have considered the negative abnormal returns of
the event of all the years obtained from the AMM-SUR model as the
dependent variable. We have done the analysis for different types of
firms (BSF, BSR, and BSO) and various types of data breaches (HACK,
CARD, DISC, INSD, PHYS, and PORT). We have included only those
privacy breaches for which we could get the DP data.
The following Table 12 represents the results of the regression model
mentioned in Eq. 4. It is evident that the coefficients of SIZE, CARD, BSR,
and Intercept are found significant. The coefficients of CARD and BSR
are negative, which suggests CARD attacks have a significant negative
impact on the abnormal returns of the firms, and BSR firms are negatively impacted by the data breaches. Interestingly, the coefficient of
Table 10 (continued )
3-day event window 21-day event window Attack
type
Firm
Firm α’ β’ γ (%) -AAR type
(AMM-SUR)
γ (%) -AAR
(AMM)
AAR (%)
(MM)
α’ β’ γ (%) - AAR
(AMM-SUR)
γ (%) -AAR
(AMM)
AAR (%)
(MM)
F24 -0.0007 -0.0007 0.11 2.82*** 2.74*** -0.0007 -0.02 0.4 0.40* 0.33 UNKN BSF
F28 0.0008 0.0008 -0.47* -0.43 -0.47 0.0004 -0.52* -0.31 -0.33 -0.32 UNKN BSR
F30 -0.0004 -0.0004 0.33** -0.65 -0.65 -0.001 0.38*** 0.16 0.16 0.13 UNKN BSF
F37 -0.0031** -0.0031** -0.2* -0.64 -0.64 -0.0034** -0.2* -0.44 -0.44 -0.81 UNKN BSF
F39 -0.0012 -0.0012 -0.2* 0.17 0.16 -0.0001 -0.2* -0.09 0.04 -0.11 UNKN BSO
F41 -0.0009 -0.0009 -0.2* 0.28 0.25 -0.0012 -0.1 -0.23 -0.23 -0.36 DISC BSO
F42 0.0017 0.0017 -0.32*** 0.5 0.49 0.0016 -0.33*** -0.22 -0.22 -0.10 UNKN BSO
F44 -0.0017 -0.0017 0.4*** -0.05 -0.06 -0.0028* 0.4*** 0.15 0.15 -0.09 UNKN BSO
F45 0.0002 0.0002 0.32** 0.57 0.57 -0.0001 0.21 0.11 0.1 0.11 HACK BSF
F47 -0.0007 -0.0007 0.2* -1.22** -1.22** -0.0003 0.16 -0.25 -0.25 -0.28 HACK BSR
F49 0.0001 0.0001 0.87*** -3.91*** -3.91*** -0.0002 0.8*** -0.93* -0.94* -1.07 UNKN BSR
F53 -0.0014 -0.0014 0.05 3.76*** -3.77*** -0.0021 0.49* 0.65 0.64 0.42 UNKN BSR
F55 0.0028 0.0028 0.08 0.7 0.69 0.0032* 0.04 -0.09 -0.08 0.24 UNKN BSF
F56 0.0013 0.0013 0.12 -1.44* -1.42* 0.002 -0.05 -0.11 -0.12 0.08 HACK BSR
F57 0.0011 0.0011 -0.1 -1.72** -1.75** 0.0013 -0.15 -0.62** -0.59 -0.42 HACK BSF
F59 -0.0022 -0.0022 -0.19 -5.54*** -5.78*** -0.0013 -0.1 -0.39 -0.4 -0.44 UNKN BSF
F61 -0.0019 -0.0019 -0.19 -5.16*** -5.13*** -0.0032 0.15 0.94 0.94 0.47 UNKN BSR
Note:
* ,
** , and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% level of significance, respectively
Fig. 7. Abnormal returns using AMM (SUR), AMM, and MM.
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
16
SIZE is positive and significant, which suggests SIZE increases the
abnormal return or reduces the negative value of abnormal returns. That
provides an interesting insight that the larger firms are less negatively
affected by privacy breaches than the smaller firms. The coefficients of
CARD, DISC, PHYS, BSF, BSR, DP, and Intercept are found to be negative, suggesting these factors negatively impact the abnormal returns of
the firms. For example, the negative coefficient of DP represents that the
data breaches having a high number of records compromised have a
more negative impact on the value of the firms.
6.4. Average financial loss (in USD)
The results of the present study demonstrate that the privacy breach
announcement negatively affects the market value of the firm. To
quantify the impact of the privacy breach on firms, we have calculated
the average market capitalization loss (in USD) per incident in our data
set for the years 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2018. We have taken the average
market capitalization of breached firms (in USD) times the average CAR
over the event window as the average market capitalization loss (in
USD) per incident. Fig. 8 explains the process of calculating average
financial loss (in USD) due to a privacy breach event.
We have reported the average value of CAR (in %) for all three
models, i.e., AMM-SUR, AMM, and MM, for 2012, 2013, 2014, and
2018. In 2012, the average value of CAR of the firms is -0.74%, -0.76%,
and -0.6 % for AMM-SUR, AMM, and MM for 3-day event window of the
privacy breach events. The average market capitalization of the firms in
our data set for 2012 is $ 38 billion. This equals $ 283 million, $ 288
million, and $ 229 million loss per privacy breach event calculated by
AMM-SUR, AMM, and MM, respectively, for 2012. Similarly, we have
calculated the average market loss derived from these models for 2013,
2014, and 2018. Detailed results are shown in Table 13.
Table 11
A final comparison of results for AMM (SUR), AMM, and MM
3-day event window 21-day event window
AAR (%) NR PR Rsq AAR (%) NR PR Rsq
BSF BSR BSO Total BSF BSR BSO Total
2012
AMM (SUR) -0.38 -0.40 0.11 -0.24 25 18 0.38 0.04 -0.10 -0.03 -0.03 22 21 0.39
AMM -0.38 -0.41 0.11 -0.25 25 18 0.38 0.04 -0.10 -0.04 -0.04 22 21 0.39
MM -0.40 -0.20 0.04 -0.20 23 20 0.43 0.01 -0.03 -0.04 -0.02 22 21 0.44
2013
AMM (SUR) -0.08 -0.16 -0.16 -0.14 24 13 0.29 -0.07 -0.16 -0.18 -0.14 23 14 0.29
AMM -0.08 -0.16 -0.18 -0.15 24 13 0.29 -0.07 -0.17 -0.20 -0.15 23 14 0.29
MM -0.10 -0.09 -0.10 -0.10 23 14 0.30 -0.11 0.15 -0.10 0.00 17 20 0.29
2014
AMM (SUR) -0.35 0.03 -0.01 -0.08 30 21 0.27 0.13 0.33 -0.04 0.09 22 29 0.28
AMM -0.34 0.01 -0.01 -0.08 30 21 0.28 0.12 0.33 -0.04 0.09 21 30 0.28
MM -0.36 0.15 0.00 -0.05 29 22 0.25 0.10 0.40 -0.01 0.11 19 32 0.25
2018
AMM (SUR) -0.06 -0.34 0.34 -0.06 32 30 0.30 -0.05 -0.06 0.12 -0.01 33 29 0.30
AMM -0.08 -0.34 0.35 -0.07 32 30 0.30 -0.05 -0.07 0.12 -0.02 35 27 0.30
MM -0.08 -0.36 0.42 -0.06 32 30 0.27 -0.07 -0.08 0.13 -0.02 28 34 0.26
Abbreviations: NR: Firms having negative returns, PR: Firms having positive returns, Rsq: R-squared
Table 12
Impact of firm-specific and attack-specific parameters on the value of the firms
Coefficients Standard error t Stat P-value
Intercept -1.09** 0.52 -2.09 0.04
Size 0.24** 0.11 2.24 0.03
HACK 0.17 0.46 0.38 0.71
CARD -1.64* 0.99 -1.66 0.10
DISC -0.20 0.63 -0.32 0.75
INSD 0.27 0.74 0.36 0.72
PHYS -0.12 0.81 -0.14 0.89
PORT 0.07 0.76 0.10 0.92
BSF -0.32 0.44 -0.74 0.46
BSR -0.69* 0.40 -1.72 0.09
DP -0.02 0.04 -0.42 0.68
Note:
* ,
** , and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% level of significance, respectively
Fig. 8. Average financial loss (in USD) due to a privacy breach event.
Table 13
Loss in market cap. per privacy breach event reported by three models
Model Average
CAR 3-day
(%)
Average market
capitalization (in
billion dollars)
Corresponding loss in market
capitalization (due to per
privacy breach event) (in
million dollars)
2012
AMMSUR
-0.74 38 283
AMM -0.76 38 288
MM -0.60 38 229
2013
AMMSUR
-0.41 86 357
AMM -0.45 86 386
MM -0.28 86 241
2014
AMMSUR
-0.24 72 172
AMM -0.25 72 177
MM -0.15 72 108
2018
AMMSUR
-0.19 67 205
AMM -0.21 67 227
MM -0.18 67 194
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
17
7. Discussion and implications
This study extends the standard MM approach and uses an AMM
approach. In the AMM approach, we incorporate the changes in MM
parameters by the privacy breach event itself. We have found differences
in the abnormal returns obtained by the MM and AMM. Further, we have
observed that AMM reports more negative abnormal returns than MM
for all the years consistently. We have also included the event clustering
observation in our study. In our data sample, events are happening very
close to each other, and we have further found that errors corresponding
to every regression equation of the firms are not independent. Instead,
the error coefficients are correlated with each other. Hence, we have
also evaluated AMM-SUR. Abnormal returns reported by AMM are
slightly more negative than the AMM-SUR consistently for all the years.
Table 13 reports the average loss in the firm’s market capital due to a
privacy breach event for all the years by all the models. It is evident from
the table that the average loss in market capitalization reported by AMM
and AMM-SUR is more than that of MM. The obvious reason for this is
that MM does not account for the changes in MM parameters by the
event itself while calculating the abnormal returns. In our analysis, some
firms have observed positive abnormal returns due to the privacy
breach. The possible explanation is that sometimes investors believe that
the breached firms will start investing in privacy technology after the
privacy breach event. These sentiments led to the rise of stock prices of
the breached firms. The investors further believe that the privacy
breaches act as a stimulator for these firms and provide a strong reason
to invest in privacy technologies.
The study examines the impact of the privacy breach on firm performance. The results suggest that firms incur a significant financial loss
due to the privacy breach. The results of the study reestablish the fact
that top management of the firm should carefully focus on the privacy of
data of customers, employees, and other stakeholders. It further highlights the importance of investments in various IT security tools, security
policies, and training of personnel to mitigate the impact of privacy
breaches. Any external hacker or disgruntled internal employee may
exploit the vulnerabilities of the security system, which may lead to
serious business implications, such as significant loss of revenue and
reputation. Various financial and retail firms (i.e., BSF and BSR firms in
our study), which mainly rely on the Internet for doing business, should
ensure the proper confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) of
customers’ data. One interesting finding of the study suggests that
correlated privacy breach events significantly impact the market value
of the firms. Hence, managers and executives should always be aware of
similar events in the industry to protect themselves against these
breaches by patching their systems in advance, as correlated breaches
are common. Researchers have studied the correlated risk of breaching
together in the literature[74,98]. These studies have demonstrated that
correlated failures arise as a result of software vulnerabilities shared
across organizations [96]. Firms often share correlated risks because
correlated privacy breaches exploit common vulnerabilities due to the
usage of common security technologies and the connectivity of computer networks [72]. However, the financial impact of a privacy breach
on a firm that may be affected by other close-by privacy breach events
has not been studied by previous studies. Our study helps managers and
executives to take proactive action to mitigate the impact of correlated
privacy breaches in advance. From a practical viewpoint, firms can always learn from the failure of other firms. For example, a firm can take
proactive measures in securing its resources if a similar firm has been
breached recently. The managers can opt for cybersecurity insurance to
minimize the losses due to correlated privacy breaches [97]. The
cybersecurity insurance community in the literature has widely studied
the impact of correlated breaches [95,98,99]. This study examines the
financial impact of correlated breaches; therefore, it will help cybersecurity insurers design effective insurance products and premiums for the
firms with the possibility of correlated breaches.
The results of the study suggest that large firms are less adversely
affected by privacy breaches than smaller firms. Large firms can absorb
the negative market reaction of data breaches more easily than small
firms due to enough resources required to mitigate the impact of data
breaches[8,17]. Therefore, managers and executives of small firms have
to be extra cautious about privacy breaches. The managers of small firms
should not be misguided by the argument, “we are a small firm, and
attackers will not target us.” They must understand the consequences of
privacy breaches and view the privacy mechanism as the key to survival.
The possible suggestions for the managers of smaller firms could be that
they can create a diversified product portfolio with different levels of
risk and yields for better management of risk associated with privacy
breaches. They should create multiple sources of income and invest in
the training of employees and adopt a proactive mechanism to deal with
privacy breaches. The results of the study provide an interesting
observation that the BSF firms consistently observe negative abnormal
returns due to privacy breaches, as reported by all the models for all the
years. The results are consistent with the 2019 financial breach report, i.
e., The Financial Matrix by Bitglass [100]. The possible explanation
could be that financial services firms handle highly valuable and PII;
therefore, they are an attractive target for privacy breaches. The possible
recommendations for the managers could be that they can focus on
reducing the risk of privacy breaches through a well-planned, well-defined, and adequately implemented privacy policy. They can identify
and classify sensitive information and scale down the accessibility of the
sensitive information using various data monitoring and access management solutions. They should have a clear data disposal policy in
place.
The study contributes to the academic literature in the following
ways. This study specifically focuses on privacy breaches as against the
various previous studies that focus on the impact of cybersecurity
breaches on the market value of the firm [17]. Previous studies have
primarily used a simple MM to quantify the impact of the cybersecurity
breach. However, this study uses a multivariate regression approach, i.
e., the AMM that takes the effect of event-induced variance change in the
returns, which in turn affects the MM parameters. It is evident that if the
event is significant, it may induce changes in the variance of stock
returns, which, in turn, changes the MM parameters [27]. Thus, taking
them as a constant can result in biased returns. The AMM contributes to
the risk management theory and presents how the privacy breach can
affect the components of the risk, i.e., systematic and unsystematic risk
by studying the changes in MM parameters. We have used the other
variant of the AMM, where we have taken the effect of the event clustering problem. It is essential to take into account the event clustering
phenomena when events are happening very close to each other. The
impact of a privacy breach on a firm may get affected by other close-by
privacy breach events. This study evaluates the financial loss due to a
privacy breach, emphasizing the importance of adequate investments in
information privacy mechanisms. Focusing on the specific context of
privacy breach announcements, this study provides a theoretical basis
for understanding the effects of the privacy breach and how these effects
vary with firm and attack-specific characteristics. This study also provides individual firm-level insights about firms that are significantly
affected by the privacy breach. This study draws the motivation and
nicely complements the prior work by [8] that explicitly focuses on
privacy breaches. This study extends their work [8] to simultaneously
handle event clustering, event-induced variance change, and changes in
MM parameters.
8. Conclusion
Previous studies have mainly focused on information security
breaches and their impact on the market value of the firms. Privacy
breaches and their impact on firms’ performance are less explored. This
study examines whether a threat to an individual’s personal information
can impact the overall firm performance. We have extended the MM to
use the AMM. AMM takes the pre-and post-event data to incorporate
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
18
both the event-induced variance change and changes in MM parameters.
In addition to this, we have also considered the event clustering of privacy breaches using SUR. This is a novel mechanism for studying the
impact of the privacy breach on firm performance.
There are a few limitations to our research. We have used the event
study methodology to find the impact of announcements of the privacy
breach on the market value of the firms. The event study methodology
assumes investors to be rational and markets to be efficient. However,
real markets differ from the efficient markets approach. Due to the
limitation of the event study methodology, the study may not have fully
accounted for periods of acute market instability during the time period
of our data. Another limitation of our study is that we have taken firm
value (stock market returns) as a measure for evaluating the impact of a
privacy breach. The obvious reason for that is the availability of the
stock market data for publicly traded firms. However, the firm value is
not the correct measure to evaluate the impact of the privacy breach in
every case. For example, a privacy breach at company A may compromise customer information that may then negatively impact company B,
even though company B had no privacy breach. The firm value may not
be correctly measuring the loss of trust and confidence of stakeholders
arising due to a privacy breach that is necessary to build a long-term
relationship with the customers and partners. Apart from firm value as
a measure, future studies may explore other measures to evaluate the
impact of the privacy breach. We have taken stock market returns as a
measure of firm performance in the study. However, future studies may
consider Tobin’s q and various accounting measures such as ROA, ROE,
and ROS as a measure of firm performance. Another limitation of our
research is that though we have tried to remove the known confounding
privacy breaches from the sample, and an effort has been made to
eliminate other confounding events; yet, some unknown factors may
also affect the market value of the firm during the event window, which
may result in a biased estimate of abnormal returns. However, we have
used a short-horizon event window that limits the possibility of confounding events [16]. We have taken one short window, i.e., 3-day event
window [-1, +1], and one relatively long window, i.e., 21-day event
window [-10, +10]. Future studies may try other combinations such as a
two-day or a five-day event window. In this study, we have taken three
types of firms, i.e., BSF (financial firms), BSR (retail firms), and BSO
(other firms). Future studies may increase the categorization and get
additional insights regarding other types of firms. We have taken US
firms for our study, which limits the generalization of the results to other
countries. Future researchers can perform similar studies in other
countries to get better insights. Due to data constraints, we could only
take the data of publicly traded firms of the USA, which also limits the
generalizability of our results to non-publicly traded firms. We have
done this study for four years (i.e., 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2018) separately. Future researchers may include other years in their research.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Manas Tripathi: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal
analysis, Writing – original draft. Arunabha Mukhopadhyay: Supervision, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of Competing Interest
None.
Appendix 1. Seemingly unrelated regression (SUR)
We have used a multivariate regression model in AMM. We have adjusted our AMM for event clustering using Zellner’s seemingly unrelated
regression (SUR). SUR is applied to the entire system of returns equation for each firm i in a sample of size N.
In SUR, residuals are not considered independent. Instead, SUR incorporates the effect of error correlation into the estimation of the regression
coefficients.
We can represent the above system of returns equation in matrix form as follows:
R = Xw + ε
where R is K X 1 dimension matrix for values of stock returns of a firm. X is K X J dimension matrix of independent variables. w is J X 1 dimension
matrix of estimated coefficients. ε is K X 1 dimension matrix of residuals.
The variance-covariance matrix of ε is v. In SUR, coefficients are estimated using generalized least square (GLS) by incorporating v in the estimation of coefficients. A best linear unbiased estimator (BLUE) of w is as follows: w* ¼ (X’v¡1
X)¡1 X’ v¡1
R
Appendix 2. Assumptions of OLS and SUR
We have checked for various OLS and SUR assumptions for our study. Following are the information regarding those assumptions:
1 The expected value of the error term is zero: In our analysis, the expected value of the error term is zero, i.e., errors on an average are zero. We have
tested the expected value of the error term for all 193 firms in our study and found the expected value of the error term as zero.
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
19
2 No multicollinearity: In our study, there is only one independent variable, i.e., market returns. Therefore, the case of multicollinearity is not possible
in our case.
3 Stationarity assumption of time series data: We have taken the first-order difference of stock price data and calculated the stock returns for all 193
firms to make the data stationary for time series analysis.
4 Contemporaneous correlation of residuals across equations: In SUR, residuals are not considered independent. They are correlated across equations
[91,92]. We have observed a significant contemporaneous correlation of residuals across various firms for the years 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2018 in
our data (please refer to Table 9 for the detail) that justifies the importance of consideration of event clustering in our data. Therefore, we have
estimated our multivariate regression model AMM using SUR for contemporaneous correlation of market model residuals across firms to account
for the event clustering phenomenon.
5 Feasible estimate under feasible generalized least square method: Feasible generalized least square estimation method (FGLS) is applied to SUR. It is
required that N<T for producing feasible estimates under GLS estimation [122] that means the data should be long (large T) but not wide (small N).
Here, N is the number of cross-sections (entities) in the panel data, and T is the time period. In our study, we have taken 243 daily observations (T)
for the 3-day event window and 261 daily observations (T) for the 21-day event window that is greater than the number of firms in 2012 (43
breaches), 2013 (37 breaches), 2014 (51 breaches), and 2018 (62 breaches).
6 No serial autocorrelation: We have checked for serial autocorrelation for residuals value for all 193 firms and found an insignificant correlation.
Appendix 3. Privacy breach events in the year 2012
Firm Symbol Event date Entity Breach
T-Mobile F1 16-01-12 BSR HACK
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company F2 24-01-12 BSF DISC
Windstream F3 27-01-12 BSR INSD
Staples F4 02-02-12 BSR INSD
Verisign Inc. F5 02-02-12 BSO HACK
Intel Inc. F6 10-02-12 BSF HACK
China East F7 21-02-12 BSR INSD
Coca Cola Company Family Federal Credit Union F8 22-02-12 BSR PORT
Kelly Services F9 09-03-12 BSO INSD
McDonald F10 09-03-12 BSR INSD
Citibank F11 13-03-12 BSF HACK
HR Block F12 23-03-12 BSF INSD
Global Payments Inc. F13 30-03-12 BSF CARD
Experian F14 05-04-12 BSF PORT
Cisco Systems Inc. F15 09-04-12 BSF PORT
The Home Depot F16 13-04-12 BSR INSD
Rent-A-Center Inc. F17 25-04-12 BSR PHYS
Rackspace Inc. F18 02-05-12 BSO HACK
Emerson F19 04-05-12 BSR HACK
Ford Motor Company F20 05-05-12 BSR HACK
Key Bank F21 09-05-12 BSF INSD
United Healthcare F22 18-05-12 BSO INSD
Comcast F23 20-05-12 BSO HACK
General Communication Inc. F24 24-05-12 BSR INSD
Direct TV F25 26-05-12 BSR HACK
LinkedIn Corporation F26 06-06-12 BSO HACK
Groupon F27 02-07-12 BSR DISC
Yahoo Voice F28 12-07-12 BSO HACK
American Express Travel Related Services Company F29 13-07-12 BSF CARD
Nvidia F30 13-07-12 BSR HACK
General Motors Co. F31 03-08-12 BSR INSD
First Republic Bank F32 14-08-12 BSF PHYS
Apple F33 04-09-12 BSR HACK
Lincoln Financial Securities Corporation F34 16-09-12 BSF HACK
TD Bank F35 08-10-12 BSF PORT
Equifax F36 10-10-12 BSF DISC
Korn Ferry International F37 12-10-12 BSO HACK
Barnes & Noble Inc. F38 24-10-12 BSR CARD
Symantec F39 04-11-12 BSO HACK
Adobe F40 14-11-12 BSO HACK
Pulaski Bank F41 27-11-12 BSF PHYS
Sourcefire F42 27-11-12 BSO PORT
CVS Caremark F43 04-12-12 BSO PHYS
Appendix 4. Privacy breach events in the year 2013
Firm Symbol Event date Entity Breach
Nvidia F1 13-01-13 BSR INSD
The New York Times F2 30-01-13 BSO HACK
McDonald F3 07-02-13 BSR INSD
JPMorgan Chase F4 12-02-13 BSF CARD
(continued on next page)
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
20
(continued )
Firm Symbol Event date Entity Breach
Walgreens F5 15-02-13 BSR INSD
Facebook F6 15-02-13 BSO HACK
Express Scripts F7 18-02-13 BSF DISC
Apple F8 19-02-13 BSR HACK
Microsoft F9 22-02-13 BSR HACK
Information Handling Services F10 27-02-13 BSO HACK
Bank of Hawaii F11 01-03-13 BSR HACK
TD Bank F12 04-03-13 BSF PORT
The Finish Line F13 26-03-13 BSR PORT
Rollins F14 27-03-13 BSO DISC
Citi F15 28-03-13 BSF DISC
JPMorgan Chase F16 28-03-13 BSF HACK
American Express F17 29-03-13 BSF HACK
Macy F18 23-04-13 BSR DISC
Adobe F19 13-05-13 BSO HACK
Goldman Sachs F20 18-05-13 BSO DISC
comScore F21 12-06-13 BSR DISC
Facebook F22 21-06-13 BSO DISC
Citigroup F23 17-07-13 BSF DISC
NASDAQ F24 18-07-13 BSO HACK
Apple F25 22-07-13 BSR HACK
NASDAQ F26 26-07-13 BSF INSD
Walmart F27 29-07-13 BSR CARD
McKesson F28 30-07-13 BSO DISC
Exelixis F29 16-08-13 BSR PORT
The New York Times F30 27-08-13 BSO HACK
Republic Services F31 29-08-13 BSO PORT
Dun & Bradstreet Inc. F32 26-09-13 BSO HACK
Adobe F33 04-10-13 BSR HACK
Nordstrom F34 10-10-13 BSR CARD
DaVita F35 07-11-13 BSO PORT
JPMorgan Chase F36 05-12-13 BSF HACK
Target Corporation F37 13-12-13 BSR HACK
Appendix 5. Privacy breach events in the year 2014
Firm Symbol Event date Entity Breach
Coca Cola Company F1 24-01-14 BSO PORT
The Timken Company F2 30-01-14 BSO HACK
Boston Scientific F3 08-02-14 BSO HACK
Nielsen F4 10-02-14 BSO INSD
Federal National Mortgage Association F5 14-02-14 BSF HACK
Experian F6 14-02-14 BSF HACK
Alaska Communications F7 20-02-14 BSR HACK
Discover Financial Services F8 21-02-14 BSF CARD
Apple F9 26-02-14 BSO HACK
Entercom F10 28-02-14 BSO HACK
Sears F11 28-02-14 BSR HACK
Capital One F12 04-03-14 BSF INSD
American Express F13 25-03-14 BSF HACK
Monsanto Company F14 27-03-14 BSO HACK
American Express Company F15 07-04-14 BSF CARD
AOL F16 28-04-14 BSO HACK
Iberia Bank Corporation F17 06-05-14 BSO HACK
Ebay F18 21-05-14 BSO HACK
Lowes Corporation F19 22-05-14 BSR DISC
AutoNation F20 26-05-14 BSO HACK
Walgreens F21 07-06-14 BSR INSD
AT&T Mobility F22 10-06-14 BSR INSD
Netflix F23 15-06-14 BSO HACK
Goldman Sachs F24 02-07-14 BSF DISC
Aecom F25 08-07-14 BSO HACK
Boeing F26 11-07-14 BSO HACK
Lockheed Martin F27 11-07-14 BSO HACK
CNET F28 14-07-14 BSO HACK
Bank of America F29 17-07-14 BSF DISC
Northern Trust Company F30 29-07-14 BSO DISC
CVS Caremark F31 30-07-14 BSR DISC
Rite Aid Pharmacy F32 30-07-14 BSR PHYS
Yahoo Inc. F33 11-08-14 BSO HACK
Community Health Systems Inc. F34 18-08-14 BSO HACK
MeetMe Inc. F35 18-08-14 BSO HACK
(continued on next page)
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
21
(continued )
Firm Symbol Event date Entity Breach
JPMorgan Chase F36 28-08-14 BSF HACK
Apple F37 01-09-14 BSO HACK
The Home Depot F38 02-09-14 BSR HACK
Salesforce F39 03-09-14 BSO HACK
Pulte Mortgage F40 20-09-14 BSF HACK
Pacific Bio Sciences of California Inc. F41 25-09-14 BSO PORT
AT&T Inc. F42 06-10-14 BSR INSD
Kmart Sears Holding Company F43 10-10-14 BSR HACK
Staples Inc. F44 20-10-14 BSR HACK
Anthem Blue Cross F45 10-11-14 BSF HACK
Shutterfly Tiny Prints F46 26-11-14 BSO HACK
Bebe Retail F47 05-12-14 BSR HACK
Wells Fargo F48 07-12-14 BSF HACK
Nvidia F49 01-12-14 BSO HACK
Sony Corporation F50 26-12-14 BSO HACK
Microsoft Corporation F51 26-12-14 BSO HACK
Appendix 6. Privacy breach events in the year 2018
Firm Symbol Event date Entity Breach
Lincoln Financial Group F1 05-01-2018 BSF UNKN
Rite Aid Corporation F2 10-01-2018 BSR UNKN
Morgan Stanley Smith Barney Llc F3 02-02-2018 BSF UNKN
The Lincoln National Life Insurance Company F4 04-02-2018 BSF UNKN
Xpo Logistics Inc F5 04-02-2018 BSO UNKN
American Express Travel Related Services Company Inc F6 08-02-2018 BSF UNKN
Bed Bath & Beyond Inc F7 13-02-2018 BSR INSD
Principal Life Insurance Company F8 13-02-2018 BSF DISC
Dollar General Corporation F9 15-02-2018 BSR DISC
Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company F10 15-02-2018 BSF HACK
Marriott International Inc F11 16-02-2018 BSR HACK
Navistar Inc F12 16-02-2018 BSR DISC
Onemain Financial F13 20-02-2018 BSF PHYS
Walmart Inc F14 22-02-2018 BSR DISC
Macys Inc F15 07-03-2018 BSR UNKN
Principal Life Insurance Company F16 14-03-2018 BSF UNKN
The Ups Store F17 14-03-2018 BSO HACK
Umh Properties Inc F18 15-03-2018 BSO UNKN
Dana Incorporated F19 23-03-2018 BSO UNKN
Walmart Inc F20 26-03-2018 BSR DISC
First Merchants Bank F21 28-03-2018 BSF UNKN
Under Armour F22 30-03-2018 BSR HACK
Humana Inc F23 06-04-2018 BSO UNKN
Pershing Llc F24 20-04-2018 BSF UNKN
Tempur Sealy International Inc F25 25-04-2018 BSO UNKN
One Main Financial F26 27-04-2018 BSF UNKN
Five Below Inc F27 10-05-2018 BSR UNKN
Nordstrom Inc F28 11-05-2018 BSR UNKN
Principal Life Insurance Company F29 11-05-2018 BSF UNKN
Intuit Inc F30 15-05-2018 BSF UNKN
Tmobile F31 24-05-2018 BSR DISC
American National Insurance Company F32 25-05-2018 BSF UNKN
The Vanguard Group Inc F33 03-06-2018 BSF UNKN
Delta Air Lines Inc F34 04-06-2018 BSR HACK
Coty Inc F35 07-06-2018 BSO UNKN
One Main Financial F36 17-07-2018 BSF UNKN
Cbiz Mhm Llc F37 19-07-2018 BSF UNKN
Cvs Health F38 27-07-2018 BSO UNKN
Delta Steel Inc F39 27-07-2018 BSO UNKN
Bankof Hope F40 30-07-2018 BSF UNKN
Alphabet Inc F41 10-08-2018 BSO DISC
Mondelez Global Llc F42 16-08-2018 BSO UNKN
Chipotle Mexican Grill Inc F43 22-08-2018 BSR UNKN
Humana Inc F44 28-08-2018 BSO UNKN
Intuit Inc F45 02-09-2018 BSF HACK
Onemain Financial F46 02-09-2018 BSF HACK
Dollar Shave Club Inc F47 05-09-2018 BSR HACK
Fidelity National Financial F48 07-09-2018 BSF UNKN
Chegg Inc F49 26-09-2018 BSR UNKN
Facebook Inc F50 28-09-2018 BSO HACK
Lpl Financial Llc F51 04-10-2018 BSF UNKN
JPMorgan Chase Bank F52 08-10-2018 BSF UNKN
(continued on next page)
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
22
(continued )
Firm Symbol Event date Entity Breach
Brinker International Inc F53 05-11-2018 BSR UNKN
Old Second National Bank F54 06-11-2018 BSF UNKN
Lpl Financial Llc F55 17-11-2018 BSF UNKN
Marriott International F56 30-11-2018 BSR HACK
Goldman Sachs & Co Llc F57 02-12-2018 BSF HACK
Facebook Inc F58 06-12-2018 BSR DISC
Health Equity Inc F59 06-12-2018 BSF UNKN
Nuance Communications F60 06-12-2018 BSO INSD
Liquidity Services F61 10-12-2018 BSR UNKN
Humana Inc F62 31-12-2018 BSO PHYS
References
[1] J. Johnson, U.S. data breaches and exposed records 2020, Statista (2021).
https://www.statista.com/statistics/273550/data-breaches-recorded-in-th
e-united-states-by-number-of-breaches-and-records-exposed/(accessed. April 16,
2021).
[2] Reuters, Yahoo shares fall after latest security breach, Reuters (2016). https
://www.reuters.com/article/us-yahoo-stocks-idUSKBN144238. accessed April
16, 2021.
[3] K. Kelleher, Facebook loses around $13 billion in value after data breach affects
50 million of its users, Fortune (2018). https://fortune.
com/2018/09/28/facebook-stock-falls-after-security-breach/(accessed. April 16,
2021).
[4] KrebsOnSecurity, NY charges first american financial for massive data leak, Krebs
on Security (2020). https://krebsonsecurity.com/2020/07/ny-ch
arges-first-american-financial-for-massive-data-leak/(accessed. April 16, 2021).
[5] S. Klebnikov, Companies with security fails don’t see their stocks drop as much,
according to report, Forbes (2019). https://www.forbes.
com/sites/sergeiklebnikov/2019/11/06/companies-with
-security-fails-dont-see-their-stocks-drop-as-much-according-to-report/(accessed.
April 16, 2021).
[6] R. Islam, The impact of data breaches on stock performance, (2020).
[7] C. Osborne, This is the impact of a data breach on enterprise share prices, ZDNet
(2019). https://www.zdnet.com/article/this-is-how-a-data-breach
-at-your-company-can-hit-share-prices/(accessed. April 16, 2021).
[8] A. Acquisti, A. Friedman, R. Telang, Is there a cost to privacy breaches? An event
study. ICIS 2006 Proc, 2006, p. 94.
[9] Ramsey Solutions, How a data breach can impact you, Ramsey Solut. (2021). htt
ps://www.ramseysolutions.com/insurance/data-breach-impacts. accessed April
20, 2021.
[10] A.T. Tunggal, The 52 biggest data breaches, (2021). https://www.upguard.
com/blog/biggest-data-breaches (accessed April 16, 2021).
[11] Chronology of Data Breaches, Priv, Rights Clgh. (2016). https://www.privacyrigh
ts.org/data-breach/new. accessed August 8, 2016.
[12] D.J. Solove, A taxonomy of privacy, U Pa Rev. 154 (2005) 477.
[13] E.F. Stone, H.G. Gueutal, D.G. Gardner, S. McClure, A field experiment comparing
information-privacy values, beliefs, and attitudes across several types of
organizations, J. Appl. Psychol. 68 (1983) 459–468, https://doi.org/10.1037/
0021-9010.68.3.459.
[14] S.G. Davies, Re-engineering the right to privacy: how privacy has been
transformed from a right to a commodity, Technol. Priv., MIT Press (1997)
143–165. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=275289. accessed August 6, 2016.
[15] H.J. Smith, T. Dinev, H. Xu, Information privacy research: an interdisciplinary
review, MIS Q. 35 (2011) 980. A27.
[16] K. Campbell, L.A. Gordon, M.P. Loeb, L. Zhou, The economic cost of publicly
announced information security breaches: empirical evidence from the stock
market, J. Comput. Secur. 11 (2003) 431–448.
[17] H. Cavusoglu, B. Mishra, S. Raghunathan, The effect of internet security breach
announcements on market value: capital market reactions for breached firms and
internet security developers, Int. J. Electron. Commer. 9 (2004) 70–104.
[18] A. Hovav, J. D’Arcy, The impact of denial-of-service attack announcements on the
market value of firms, Risk Manag. Insur. Rev. 6 (2003) 97–121.
[19] A. Leung, I. Bose, Indirect financial loss of phishing to global market, ICIS 2008
Proc. (2008) 5.
[20] G. Spanos, L. Angelis, The impact of information security events to the stock
market: a systematic literature review, Comput. Secur. 58 (2016) 216–229,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2015.12.006.
[21] R. Telang, S. Wattal, Impact of software vulnerability announcements on the
market value of software vendors-an empirical investigation, Available SSRN
677427 (2005). http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=677427.
accessed June 2, 2016.
[22] D. Johns, Difference between data breach & security incident, ASI Solut. (2018).
https://www.asi.com.au/blog/difference-data-breach
-security-incident/(accessed. July 3, 2021).
[23] S.P. Kothari, J.B. Warner, Econometrics of event studies, Handb. Empir. Corp.
Finance, Elsevier (2007) 3–36.
[24] E. Boehmer, J. Masumeci, A.B. Poulsen, Event-study methodology under
conditions of event-induced variance, J. Financ. Econ. 30 (1991) 253–272.
[25] S. Dewan, F. Ren, Risk and return of information technology initiatives: evidence
from electronic commerce announcements, Inf. Syst. Res. 18 (2007) 370–394.
[26] A.C. MacKinlay, Event studies in economics and finance, J. Econ. Lit. 35 (1997)
13–39.
[27] G.V. Henderson Jr, Problems and solutions in conducting event studies, J. Risk
Insur. (1990) 282–306.
[28] L. Loh, N. Venkatraman, Stock market reaction to information technology
outsourcing, An Event Study (1992). http://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/
48992. accessed August 7, 2016.
[29] B.L. Dos Santos, K. Peffers, D.C. Mauer, The impact of information technology
investment announcements on the market value of the firm, Inf. Syst. Res. 4
(1993) 1–23.
[30] J. Hunton, J. Reck, D. Hayes, The market’s reaction to information systems
outsourcing announcements, AMCIS 1999 Proc. (1999) 283.
[31] M. Subramani, E. Walden, The impact of e-commerce announcements on the
market value of firms, Inf. Syst. Res. 12 (2001) 135–154.
[32] D.C. Hayes, J.E. Hunton, J.L. Reck, Market reaction to ERP implementation
announcements, J. Inf. Syst. 15 (2001) 3–18, https://doi.org/10.2308/
jis.2001.15.1.3.
[33] D. Chatterjee, V.J. Richardson, R.W. Zmud, Examining the shareholder wealth
effects of announcements of newly created CIO positions, Mis Q (2001) 43–70.
[34] J.L.L. Chong, L.N.K. Duong, Understanding IT governance effectiveness in asia: an
event study, Pac. Asia J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. (2017) 9. https://journal.ecrc.nsysu.edu.
tw/index.php/pajais/article/view/397. accessed October 8, 2019.
[35] M.C. Arcuri, M. Brogi, G. Gandolfi, The effect of information security breaches on
stock returns: Is the cyber crime a threat to firms? Citeseer (2014). http://citesee
rx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.587.9991&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
accessed June 2, 2016.
[36] A. Hovav, F.K. Andoh-Baidoo, G. Dhillon, Classification of security breaches and
their impact on the market value of firms, in: Proc. 6th Annu. Secur. Conf, 2007.
http://www.isy.vcu.edu/~gdhillon/Old2/secconf/secconf07/PDFs/14.pdf.
accessed June 2, 2016.
[37] A. Hovav, J. D’Arcy, The impact of virus attack announcements on the market
value of firms, Inf. Syst. Secur. 13 (2004) 32–40.
[38] M.L. DeFond, Y. Konchitchki, J.L. McMullin, D.E. O’Leary, Does superior
knowledge management increase shareholder value, Am. Account. Assoc. Annu.
Meet. San Franc. (2010). https://msbfile03.usc.edu/digitalmeasures/def
ond/intellcont/KM%20paper%20SSRN%20version-1.pdf. accessed August 21,
2016.
[39] J.H. Triche, E. Walden, The use of impression management strategies to manage
stock market reactions to IT failures, J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 19 (2018) 1.
[40] M. Gupta, R. Sharman, Determinants of data breaches: a categorization-based
empirical investigation, J. Appl. Secur. Res. 7 (2012) 375–395.
[41] S. Goel, H.A. Shawky, Estimating the market impact of security breach
announcements on firm values, Inf. Manag. 46 (2009) 404–410, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.im.2009.06.005.
[42] E.F. Fama, K.R. French, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,
J. Financ. Econ. 33 (1993) 3–56.
[43] L.A. Gordon, M.P. Loeb, W. Lucyshyn, Sharing information on computer systems
security: An economic analysis, J. Account. Public Policy. 22 (2003) 461–485.
[44] M. Ishiguro, H. Tanaka, K. Matsuura, I. Murase, The effect of information security
incidents on corporate values in the Japanese stock market, in: Int. Workshop
Econ. Secur. Inf. Infrastruct. WESII, Citeseer (2006). http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/
viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.212.4556&rep=rep1&type=pdf. accessed June
2, 2016.
[45] M. Gupta, R. Sharman, H.R. Rao, Timing of corporate crisis response to security
breaches: impact on market valuation, in: Workshop Inf. Syst. Secur. WISP-2010,
St. Louis, 2010.
[46] N.V. Vasishta, M. Gupta, S.K. Misra, P. Mulgund, R. Sharman, Optimizing
cybersecurity program—evidence from data breaches in healthcare, in: 13th
Annu. Symp. Inf. Assur. ASIA’ 18, 2018.
[47] K.M. Gatzlaff, K.A. McCullough, The effect of data breaches on shareholder
wealth, Risk Manag. Insur. Rev. 13 (2010) 61–83, https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1540-6296.2010.01178.x.
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
23
[48] L.A. Gordon, M.P. Loeb, L. Zhou, The impact of information security breaches: has
there been a downward shift in costs? J. Comput. Secur. 19 (2011) 33–56.
[49] X. Chen, I. Bose, A.C.M. Leung, C. Guo, Assessing the severity of phishing attacks:
a hybrid data mining approach, Decis. Support Syst. 50 (2011) 662–672, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2010.08.020.
[50] B. Indranil, A.C.M. Leung, Adoption of identity theft countermeasures and its
short- and long-term impact on firm value, MIS Q. 43 (2019) 313–327, https://
doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/2019/14192.
[51] K.D. Martin, A. Borah, R.W. Palmatier, Data privacy: effects on customer and firm
performance, J. Mark. 81 (2017) 36–58, https://doi.org/10.1509/jm.15.0497.
[52] C.Y. Jeong, S.-Y.T. Lee, J.-H. Lim, Information security breaches and IT security
investments: impacts on competitors, Inf. Manag. 56 (2019) 681–695.
[53] A. Acquisti, C. Taylor, L. Wagman, The economics of privacy, J. Econ. Lit. 54
(2016) 442–492.
[54] K.D. Martin, P.E. Murphy, The role of data privacy in marketing, J. Acad. Mark.
Sci. 45 (2017) 135–155.
[55] R. Janakiraman, J.H. Lim, R. Rishika, The effect of a data breach announcement
on customer behavior: Evidence from a multichannel retailer, J. Mark. 82 (2018)
85–105.
[56] R. Sen, A. Verma, G.R. Heim, Impact of cyberattacks by malicious hackers on the
competition in software markets, J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 37 (2020) 191–216, https://
doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2019.1705511.
[57] E.F. Fama, Efficient capital markets: a review of theory and empirical work,
J. Finance. 25 (1970) 383–417.
[58] E.F. Fama, Efficient capital markets: II, J. Financ. 46 (1991) 1575–1617.
[59] Y. Konchitchki, D.E. O’Leary, Event study methodologies in information systems
research, Int. J. Account. Inf. Syst. 12 (2011) 99–115.
[60] L.J. Camp, Designing for trust, in: R. Falcone, S. Barber, L. Korba, M. Singh (Eds.),
Trust Reput. Secur. Theor. Pract., Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2003, pp. 15–29,
https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-36609-1_3.
[61] M. Rhee, P.R. Haunschild, The liability of good reputation: a study of product
recalls in the US automobile industry, Organ. Sci. 17 (2006) 101–117.
[62] L. Ponemon, What does a data breach cost companies, Ponemon Inst. LLC. (2005).
[63] W. Hong, J.Y. Thong, Internet Privacy Concerns: An Integrated Conceptualization
and Four Empirical Studies, Mis Q, 2013, pp. 275–298.
[64] J. Pfeffer, G.R. Salancik, The External Control of Organizations: A Resource
Dependence Perspective, Stanford University Press, 2003.
[65] R.M. Emerson, Power-dependence relations, Am. Sociol. Rev. (1962) 31–41.
[66] M. Kolotylo-Kulkarni, W. Xia, G. Dhillon, Information disclosure in e-commerce: a
systematic review and agenda for future research, J. Bus. Res. 126 (2021)
221–238.
[67] G. Dhillon, K. Smith, I. Dissanayaka, Information systems security research
agenda: exploring the gap between research and practice, J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 30
(2021), 101693, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2021.101693.
[68] IBM Security, Cost of a data breach report 2020, IBM (2020). https://www.ibm.
com/security/digital-assets/cost-data-breach-report/(accessed. May 31, 2021).
[69] A.T. Tunggal, What is the cost of a data breach in 2021? UpGuard (2021).
https://www.upguard.com/blog/cost-of-data-breach. accessed May 31, 2021.
[70] J. Aharony, C.P. Jones, I. Swary, An analysis of risk and return characteristics of
corporate bankruptcy using capital market data, J. Financ. 35 (1980) 1001–1016.
[71] A. Nicholas-Donald, J. Matus, S. Ryu, A. Mahmood, The economic effect of
privacy breach announcements on stocks: a comprehensive empirical
investigation, in: AMCIS 2011 Proc. - Submiss, 2011. https://aisel.aisnet.
org/amcis2011_submissions/341.
[72] P. Chen, G. Kataria, R. Krishnan, Correlated Failures, Diversification, and
Information Security Risk Management, MIS Q, 2011, pp. 397–422.
[73] E. Gal-Or, A. Ghose, The economic incentives for sharing security information,
Inf. Syst. Res. 16 (2005) 186–208, https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1050.0053.
[74] R. Dwivedi, S.P. Nerur, J. Wang, Breaching together: a data science approach on
firms’ correlated risk in information security, in: Proc. 2018 Pre-ICIS SIGDSA
Symp, 2018, p. 11.
[75] Z. Shi, G.M. Lee, A.B. Whinston, Toward a better measure of business proximity,
MIS Q. 40 (2016) 1035–1056.
[76] O. Hinz, M. Nofer, D. Schiereck, J. Trillig, The influence of data theft on the share
prices and systematic risk of consumer electronics companies, Inf. Manag. 52
(2015) 337–347, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2014.12.006.
[77] H. Zafar, M. Ko, K.-M. Osei-Bryson, Financial impact of information security
breaches on breached firms and their non-breached competitors, Inf. Resour.
Manag. J. IRMJ 25 (2012) 21–37, https://doi.org/10.4018/irmj.2012010102.
[78] R. Johnson III, 60 percent of small companies close within 6 months of being
hacked, Cybercrime Mag (2018). https://cybersecurityventures.
com/60-percent-of-small-companies-close-within-6-months-of-being-h
acked/(accessed. June 1, 2021).
[79] EKRAN, 5 Industries most at risk of data breaches, (2019). https://www.ekra
nsystem.com/en/blog/5-industries-most-risk-of-data-breaches (accessed June 1,
2021).
[80] L.M. Hitt, E. Brynjolfsson, Productivity, business profitability, and consumer
surplus: three different measures of information technology value, MIS Q. 20
(1996) 121–142, https://doi.org/10.2307/249475.
[81] A.S. Bharadwaj, S.G. Bharadwaj, B.R. Konsynski, Information technology effects
on firm performance as measured by Tobin’s q, Manag. Sci. 45 (1999)
1008–1024.
[82] P.H. Dybvig, M. Warachka, Tobin’s Q does not measure firm performance: theory,
empirics, and alternative measures, SSRN ELibrary Httppapers Ssrn
Comsol3papers Cfm (2012).
[83] A. McWilliams, D. Siegel, Event studies in management research: theoretical and
empirical issues, Acad. Manag. J. 40 (1997) 626–657.
[84] G.J. Benston, Accounting numbers and economic values, Antitrust Bull. 27 (1982)
161.
[85] S.J. Brown, J.B. Warner, Using daily stock returns: the case of event studies,
J. Financ. Econ. 14 (1985) 3–31.
[86] M. Ryngaert, J. Netter, Shareholder wealth effects of the 1986 Ohio antitakeover
law revisited: its real effects, JL Econ. Org. 6 (1990) 253.
[87] D.K. Oler, J.S. Harrison, M.R. Allen, The danger of misinterpreting short-window
event study findings in strategic management research: an empirical illustration
using horizontal acquisitions, Strateg. Organ. 6 (2008) 151–184.
[88] J.J. Binder, On the use of the multivariate regression model in event studies,
J. Account. Res. (1985) 370–383.
[89] J. Aharony, I. Swary, Effects of the 1970 bank holding company act: evidence
from capital markets, J. Financ. 36 (1981) 841–853.
[90] R. Bhargava, D.R. Fraser, On the wealth and risk effects of commercial bank
expansion into securities underwriting: an analysis of Section 20 subsidiaries,
J. Bank. Financ. 22 (1998) 447–465.
[91] D. Conniffe, Testing the assumptions of seemingly unrelated regressions, Rev.
Econ. Stat. (1982) 172–174.
[92] A. Zellner, An efficient method of estimating seemingly unrelated regressions and
tests for aggregation bias, J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 57 (1962) 348–368.
[93] B. Dehning, V.J. Richardson, A. Urbaczewski, J.D. Wells, Reexamining the value
relevance of e-commerce initiatives, J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 21 (2004) 55–82.
[94] D.E. O’Leary, Gartner’s hype cycle and information system research issues, Int. J.
Account. Inf. Syst. 9 (2008) 240–252.
[95] A. Mukhopadhyay, S. Chatterjee, D. Saha, A. Mahanti, S.K. Sadhukhan, Cyber-risk
decision models: to insure IT or not? Decis. Support Syst. 56 (2013) 11–26.
[96] H. O¨güt, ˘ S. Raghunathan, N. Menon, Cyber security risk management: public
policy implications of correlated risk, imperfect ability to prove loss, and
observability of self-protection, Risk Anal. 31 (2011) 497–512.
[97] P. Prakash, Risk-based valuation of investments in information security-a
combination approach, J. Inf. Syst. Secur. 8 (2012).
[98] R. Bohme, ¨ G. Kataria, Models and Measures for Correlation in Cyber-Insurance,
WEIS, 2006. http://sec2013.crysys.hu/~mfelegyhazi/courses/EconSec/readings
/09_BohmeK2005insurance_correlation.pdf. accessed September 28, 2015.
[99] R. Bohme, ¨ G. Schwartz, Modeling Cyber-Insurance: Towards a Unifying
Framework, WEIS, 2010. http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/pubs/networking/
modelingcyber10.pdf. accessed September 28, 2015.
[100] securitymagazine, More than 60% of all leaked records exposed by financial
services firms, (2019). https://www.securitymagazine.com/articles/91412-more
-than-60-of-all-leaked-records-exposed-by-financial-services-firms?v=preview
(accessed June 27, 2021).
[101] K.S. Im, K.E. Dow, V. Grover, Research report: A reexamination of IT investment
and the market value of the firm—an event study methodology, Inf. Syst. Res. 12
(2001) 103–117.
[102] D. Chatterjee, V.S. Carl Pacini, The shareholder-wealth and trading-volume
effects of information-technology infrastructure investments, J. Manag. Inf. Syst.
19 (2002) 7–42.
[103] B. Dehning, V.J. Richardson, R.W. Zmud, The Value Relevance of Announcements
of Transformational Information Technology Investments, MIS Q, 2003,
pp. 637–656.
[104] S.D. Hunter, Information technology, organizational learning, and the market
value of the firm, J. Inf. Technol. Theory Appl. 5 (2003). http://papers.ssrn.co
m/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=427585. accessed August 21, 2016.
[105] F. Nagm, K. Kautz, The market value impact of it investment announcements - an
event study, JITTA J. Inf. Technol. Theory Appl. 9 (2008) 61–79.
[106] W. Oh, J.W. Ki m, V.J. Richardson, The moderating effect of context on the
market reaction to IT investments, J. Inf. Syst. 20 (2006) 19–44, https://doi.org/
10.2308/jis.2006.20.1.19.
[107] M.L. Ettredge, V.J. Richardson, Information transfer among internet firms: the
case of hacker attacks, J. Inf. Syst. 17 (2003) 71–82, https://doi.org/10.2308/
jis.2003.17.2.71.
[108] A. Garg, J. Curtis, H. Halper, Quantifying the financial impact of IT security
breaches, Inf. Manag. Comput. Secur. 11 (2003) 74–83, https://doi.org/10.1108/
09685220310468646.
[109] A. Hovav, J. D’Arcy, Capital market reaction to defective IT products: the case of
computer viruses, Comput. Secur. 24 (2005) 409–424, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cose.2005.02.003.
[110] K. Kannan, J. Rees, S. Sridhar, Market reactions to information security breach
announcements: an empirical analysis, Int. J. Electron. Commer. 12 (2007)
69–91.
[111] D.C. Hayes, J.E. Hunton, J.L. Reck, Information systems outsourcing
announcements: investigating the impact on the market value of contractgranting firms, J. Inf. Syst. 14 (2000) 109–125.
[112] J. Florin, M. Bradford, D. Pagach, Information technology outsourcing and
organizational restructuring: an explanation of their effects on firm value, J. High
Technol. Manag. Res. 16 (2005) 241–253, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
hitech.2005.10.007.
[113] M. Agrawal, R. Kishore, H.R. Rao, Market reactions to E-business outsourcing
announcements: an event study, Inf. Manag. 43 (2006) 861–873, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.im.2006.08.002.
[114] W. Oh, M.J. Gallivan, J.W. Kim, The market’s perception of the transactional risks
of information technology outsourcing announcements, J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 22
(2006) 271–303.
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 
Information & Management 59 (2022) 103707
24
[115] C. Koh, S. Ang, G. Yeo, Does IT outsourcing create firm value?, in: Proc. 2007
ACM SIGMIS CPR Conf. Comput. Pers. Res. Glob. Inf. Technol. Workforce, ACM,
2007, pp. 87–91. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1235020. accessed August
7, 2016.
[116] E. Daniel, D. Kodwani, S. Datta, The impact of ICT-enabled offshoring
announcements on share prices, J. Enterp. Inf. Manag. 22 (2009) 241–256,
https://doi.org/10.1108/17410390910949706.
[117] M. Dardan, A. Stylianou, S. Dardan, The valuation of ecommerce announcements
during fluctuating financial markets, J. Electron. Commer. Res. 6 (2005)
312–326.
[118] C. Ferguson, F. Finn, J. Hall, Electronic commerce investments, the resourcebased view of the firm, and firm market value, Int. J. Account. Inf. Syst. 6 (2005)
5–29, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2004.08.001.
[119] C. Ranganathan, C.V. Brown, ERP investments and the market value of firms:
toward an understanding of influential ERP project variables, Inf. Syst. Res. 17
(2006) 145–161.
[120] A. Khallaf, T.R. Skantz, The effects of information technology expertise on the
market value of a firm, J. Inf. Syst. 21 (2007) 83–105, https://doi.org/10.2308/
jis.2007.21.1.83.
[121] S. Das, A. Mukhopadhyay, M. Anand, Stock market response to information
security breach: a study using firm and attack characteristics, J. Inf. Priv. Secur. 8
(2012) 27–55, https://doi.org/10.1080/15536548.2012.10845665.
[122] O. Torres-Reyna, Panel data analysis fixed and random effects using Stata (v. 4.2),
Data Stat. Serv. Priceton Univ. 112 (2007).
Manas Tripathi: Dr. Manas Tripathi works as an Assistant Professor in the area of Management Information Systems at the Indian Institute of Management (IIM) Rohtak, India.
Prior to joining IIM Rohtak, he has worked as an Assistant Professor in the Information
Systems area at Jindal Global Business School, Sonipat, Haryana. He has worked as a
Software Engineer in a software product-based company. He is a Fellow in Management
(Doctoral level program) of Indian Institute of Management Lucknow in the Information
Technology & Systems area. He has obtained a Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech.) degree in
Information Technology from Harcourt Butler Technological Institute (HBTI) Kanpur. He
has published articles in journals and conferences of international repute. His research
interests include; business value of IT, business-focused predictive analytics, IT risk and IT
governance, IT strategy, and ICT in emerging economies.
Arunabha Mukhopadhyay: Dr. Arunabha Mukhopadhyay, is a Professor of Information
Technology & Systems Area at Indian Institute of Management Lucknow (IIM Lucknow).
He has obtained his Ph.D. and Post Graduate Diploma in Business Management (PGDBM)
from the Indian Institute of Management Calcutta (IIM Calcutta), in the area of Management Information Systems. He was awarded the Infosys scholarship during his Ph.D. He
has published in various referred journals and conferences including Decision Support
Systems (DSS) Information Systems Frontier (ISF), Journal of Global Information Technology Management (JGITM), JIPS, International Journal of Information Systems and
Change Management (IJISCM), Decision, IIMB Review, Computer Society of
India–Conference (CSI-C), Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS),
Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS), Pre- International Conference On
Information Systems (ICIS) workshops, Global Information Technology Management Association (GITMA), Conference of Information Systems and Technology Management
(CISTM), International Conference on E-Governance (ICEG) etc. He is the recipient of the
Best Teacher in Information Technology Management in 2013 and 2011, by Star-DNA
group B-School Award and 19th Dewang Mehta Business School Award, in India respectively. He is also the recipient of the IT & Systems elective for 2017-18 from the student’s
council of IIM Lucknow. He is a Member of IEEE, AIS, ISACA, DSI, ITS, IFIP WG 11.1 and a
Life Member of Computer Society of India (CSI), Telemedicine Society of India (TSI), Indian Insurance Institute (III), Actuarial Society of India (ASI), All India Management Association (AIMA), System Dynamics Society of India (SDSI) and, Operations Research
Society of India (ORSI).
M. Tripathi and A. Mukhopadhyay 