computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/CLSR
THE liability for cybersecurity breaches of
connected and autonomous vehicles✩
Matthew Channonb
, James Marsona,∗
a Sheffield Hallam University, Collegiate Campus, Heart of the Campus Building, Sheffield, S10 2BQ, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
b University of Exeter, Amory Building, Rennes Drive, Exeter, EX4 4RJ, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland United Kingdom
a r t i c l e i n f o
Keywords:
Connected and autonomous
vehicles
Insurance regime
Mass hacking
Motor insurers’ bureau
National compensatory body
a b s t r a c t
Connected and autonomous vehicle (CAV) use, having been tested in various cities around
the world and adopted in many areas through public transport, is being prepared for private
sector use. The connected dimension of CAV provides for the vehicle to communicate with
other vehicles and local infrastructure to operate in a safe manner. Yet, it is this communication of data and operation through software which causes potential problems in the
event of the software suffering from unlawful modification (hacking). The consequences of
a CAV being hacked could result in its features being compromised resulting in accidents,
damage, financial loss, deaths and personal injury. It is also likely that hacking will affect
fleets of vehicles operating on the same software version rather than individual vehicles.
In this paper we argue there is a need for a strategy to determine how responsibility for
the damage and loss caused following the mass hacking of CAVs is to be apportioned. This
discussion is presently missing in the evolving literature on CAV maturity and we conclude
that a national compensatory body offering a guarantee fund from which victims may seek
redress would provide the most appropriate solution for all stakeholders.
1. Introduction
Cybersecurity for CAVs is not a novel topic either in the legal sphere or from an engineering standpoint. Discussion has
taken place internationally concerning how to make a vehicle
more secure and the role of manufacturers in this process.1
✩ The authors would like to thank Rob Merkin and Matthew White
for comments on previous drafts. Errors remain our own. ∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: M.Channon2@exeter.ac.uk (M. Channon),
J.Marson@shu.ac.uk (J. Marson). 1 Charlotte Ducuing, ‘Towards an Obligation to Secure Connected and Automated Vehicles “By Design”?’in Anton Vedder, Jessica Schroers, Charlotte Ducuing and Peggy Valcke (eds) ‘Security
and Law Legal and Ethical Aspects of Public Security, Cyber Security and Critical Infrastructure Security’ (2019 Intersentia).
Liability for CAVs more generally is also certainly not a new
topic,2 however, there has been limited examination of liability for cybersecurity breaches of CAVs.3 Some discussion has
2 There are dozens of articles which address liability of CAVs. For
example, Walker-Smith provides a long list of articles in the US in
his article. See Bryant Walker-Smith, ‘Automated Driving and Product Liability’ (2017) 1 Michigan State Law Review. Also see Kenneth
S. Abraham & Robert L. Rabin, ‘Automated Vehicles and Manufacturer Responsibility for Accidents: A New Legal Regime for a New
Era’ (2019) 105 Virginia Law Review 127. 3 See for example, written evidence submitted to the Public Bill
Committee House of Commons by Matthew Channon, Aysegul Bugra, Kyriaki Noussia and Professor Rob Merkin QC on the Automated and Electric Vehicles Bill (AEVB 10) October 2017, the written evidence stated at paragraph 11, ‘There are a number of potential solutions to the mass-risk issues with regards to hacking,
involving separate policies or funds which could compensate in
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2021.105628
2 computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628
taken place in the US already on who is liable in the US if a
CAV is hacked.4 While this may be useful to examine, its application to the UK is limited due to differing regulation of CAVs,
with the UK having introduced the Automated and Electric Vehicles Act (AEVA) 2018.
We begin our study by examining the challenges associated
with the hacking of CAVs, on both practical and legal bases,
before exploring the regulatory regime and the current issues
regarding apportioning responsibility for the consequences of
injury and loss associated with a hacked vehicle. We finally
present two recommendations for reform to the insurance
system of CAVs to ensure that victims are provided with necessary compensation.
2. Challenges with the hacking of CAVs
It is recognised that computers are capable of being hacked
with potential for privacy breaches and data loss. CAVs establish attractive targets to hackers due to the information which
can be accessed and, for example, sold to third parties or otherwise accessed and thereby used for other criminal activities
(for example trafficking drugs or inflicting harm).5 The introduction of Artificial Intelligence (AI) into society has exacerbated the potential, well documented, risks of hacking.6 While
the extent of any vulnerabilities is not yet clear, due to the
these scenarios’. Also the ‘Law and Autonomous Vehicles’ book
(Chapter 5) contained a brief discussion on who is and should be
liable for CAV hacking, the book also briefly noted the potential
extension of reinsurance funds although as noted in the book this
was an area that needed further research. This article aims to undertake such research. See Matthew Channon, Lucy McCormick
and Kyriaki Noussia, The Law and Autonomous Vehicles (2019, Informa) Chapter 5. Also see work by Joshua Prior who examined
liability for cyber security breaches, the paper recommended a
new central fund for mass-hacking although noted that more research was needed. However, our paper considers the context of
the UK and EU’s motor insurance regimes in further detail and recommends solutions based on expansion of current regimes. Our
paper further considers reinsurance pools in detail as a potential
solution. See Joshua Prior, ‘Connected and Autonomous Vehicles,
Cyber Threats and the UK Motor Insurance Framework. Is the Automated and Electric Vehicles Act 2018 Fit for Purpose?’ (2021) 46
Exeter Law Review 126. 4 Zev Winkelman, Maya Buenaventura, James M. Anderson, Nahom M. Beyene, Pavan Katkar, Gregory Cyril Baumann, ‘When Autonomous Vehicles are Hacked, Who is Liable?’ (2019) Rand Corporation. Available at https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/
RR2654.html. 5 Chasel Lee, ‘Grabbing the Wheel Early: Moving Forward on Cybersecurity and Privacy Protections for Driverless Cars’ (2017) 69
Federal Communications Law 25. 6 Of course, CAVs are not the only AI which is prone to hacking which could cause property damage and personal injury. For
example, drones could also be hacked and could also cause significant damage. Also see in relation to cyber risk for autonomous
ships, Feng Wang, ‘The Warranty of Seaworthiness and Cyber Risk
of Unmanned Ships’ (2020) 4 Journal of Business Law 311. For Cyber
Risk and Drones see, Julie-Anne Tarr, Maurice Thompson and Anthony Tarr, ‘Regulation, Risk and Insurance of Drones: An Urgent
Global Accountability Imperative’ (2019) 8 Journal of Business Law
559.
technology still developing;7 CAVs, compared to many other
forms of AI, have the added risk of causing both physical injury and property damage.8 Whereas vehicles with no connectivity require physical access to a vehicle, the connected nature of CAVs adds greater risk, with hacking potentially taking place over wireless networks9 and therefore with CAVs
potentially ‘more easily compromised and weaponised to infect other vehicles’.10 Hacking therefore can cause substantial damage and ‘represents a significant caveat to the projections that the proliferation of autonomous vehicles will significantly reduce the frequency of accidents’.11 The potential for
major damage12 resulting from cybersecurity breaches are of
international concern, with jurisdictions such as the UK, the
EU, Australia, and the US looking at ways to ensure that CAVs
can be secure.
The EU introduced Regulation 2019/2144 which provided
for some measures to secure against cyber-attacks.13 The
United Nations Economic and Social Council has also examined this area with the Working Party on Automated Vehicles introducing cybersecurity proposals.14 So far no legislation has been introduced in the UK which regulates the hacking of CAVs. Moreover, the Law Commission has determined
that hacking is outside of its terms of reference for its consul7 Simon Parkinson, Paul Ward, Kyle Wilson, and Jonathan Miller,
‘Cyber Threats Facing Autonomous and Connected Vehicles: Future Challenge’ (2017) 18 (11) IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems 2898. 8 See Parkinson (n 7). 9 Lee (n 5). 10 Caleb Kennedy, ‘New Threats to Vehicle Safety: How Cyber Security Policy will Shape the Future of Autonomous Vehicles’ (2017)
23(2) Michigan Telecom and Technology Law Review 343. 11 Donald G Gifford, ‘Technological Triggers to Tort Revolutions:
Steam Locomotives, Autonomous Vehicles, and Accident Compensation’ (2018) 11 (1) Journal of Tort Law 132. 12 Research presented by Derrick Dominic, Sumeet Chhawri,
Ryan. M. Eustice, Di Ma, and Andre Weimerskirch, ‘Risk Assessment for Cooperative Automated Driving’ CPS-SPC’16, October
28 2016, Vienna, Austria. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2994487.
2994499 has demonstrated the serious accidents that can result
from a hacked vehicle. 13 See for example Article 4 (5) (d) Regulation (EU) 2019/2144 of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 27 November 2019 on
type-approval requirements for motor vehicles and their trailers,
and systems, components and separate technical units intended
for such vehicles, as regards their general safety and the protection of vehicle occupants and vulnerable road users, amending Regulation (EU) 2018/858 of the European Parliament and of
the Council and repealing Regulations (EC) No 78/2009, (EC) No
79/2009 and (EC) No 661/2009 of the European Parliament and of
the Council and Commission Regulations (EC) No 631/2009, (EU) No
406/2010, (EU) No 672/2010, (EU) No 1003/2010, (EU) No 1005/2010,
(EU) No 1008/2010, (EU) No 1009/2010, (EU) No 19/2011, (EU) No
109/2011, (EU) No 458/2011, (EU) No 65/2012, (EU) No 130/2012,
(EU) No 347/2012, (EU) No 351/2012, (EU) No 1230/2012 and (EU)
2015/166).
14 Proposal for a new UN Regulation on uniform provisions
concerning the approval of vehicles with regards to cyber security
and cyber security management system: Submitted by the Working Party on Automated/autonomous and Connected Vehicles’
(23rd June 2020) <http://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/trans/
doc/2020/wp29grva/ECE-TRANS-WP29-2020-079-Revised.pdf>.
Note that UN Regulations are binding in the EU.
computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628 3
tation on AVs, despite noting that cybersecurity was an area
of ‘major concern’.15 However, work has been undertaken by
the Department for Transport in order to provide guidance on
cybersecurity to manufacturers through the Key Principles of
Cyber Security for Autonomous Vehicles.16 Guidance includes
ensuring security throughout the lifetime of the product, particularly concerning vehicles of different ages which will be
on the road at the same time. The guidance also explains the
need to ensure that the technology is resilient in light of any
cyber-attack. Of course, due to the international nature of the
challenge, recommendations have been made at an international level. For example, the United Nations introduced recommendations concerning over-the-air software updates.17
3. Responsibility of insurers to compensate
for accidents involving motor vehicles
The liability regime applicable to conventional motor vehicles
is well established. In the UK,the Road Traffic Act (RTA) 1988 is
the legislative instrument which places obligations on owners
of vehicles to maintain, as a minimum, third-party insurance
for vehicles used in a public place (subject to, whilst it applies,
the Vnuk18 and Lewis19 extension to private land too).20 This
statutory measure is complemented through extra-statutory
sources in the event that an innocent third-party victim suffers loss due to the actions of an uninsured or untraced driver.
These agreements,the Uninsured Drivers’ Agreement (UDA)21
and the Untraced Drivers’ Agreement (UtDA)22 are established
between the Secretary of State for Transport and the Motor Insurers’ Bureau (MIB) and had been governed by the EU through
15 UK and Scottish Law Commissions ‘A Joint Preliminary Consultation Paper on Automated Vehicles’ (2018) Law Commission
Consultation Paper 240 [1-21]. 16 While we discuss the key principles here in limited depth, you
can find more detailed analysis in Channon (n 3). 17 UN Task Force on Cyber Security and Over-the-Air Issues,
Draft Recommendation, UNECE WP.29 GRVA, 20 September
2018, at <https://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/trans/doc/2018/
wp29grva/GRVA-01-17.pdf>. 18 Case C-162/13 Damijan Vnuk v Zavarovalnica Triglav [2014] EUECJ
C-162/13. [2016] RTR 10. 19 MIB v Lewis [2019] EWCA Civ 909. 20 Section 143 of the RTA 1988. For commentary on the evolution of the case law here see James Marson and Katy Ferris, ‘For
the Want of Certainty: Vnuk, Juliana and Andrade and the Obligation to Insure’ (2019) 82(6) Modern Law Review 1132; James Marson
and Katy Ferris, ‘The Compatibility of English Law with the Motor
Vehicle Insurance Directives: The Courts Giveth… but will Brexit
Taketh Away?’ (2020) 136 Law Quarterly Review 35; and James Marson and Katy Ferris, ‘Too Little, Too Late? Brexit Day, Transitional
Periods and the Implications of MIB v Lewis’ (2020) 3 European Law
Review 415. 21 In the event of accident being caused, or contributed to by, a
driver who was uninsured at the time (holding no valid policy of
insurance), but who, by the nature of the event is identified, the
MIB will consider dealing with the claim for compensation from
the victim. 22 This applies to victims of an accident where the driver deemed
responsible for the accident leaves the scene without identifying
him/herself and cannot be traced. The MIB will consider claims
of compensation in respect of damages to property and personal
injury.
a series of expansive directives.23 The MIB, a private company
limited by guarantee, operates to reduce the negative consequences for victims of road traffic accidents caused by uninsured or untraced drivers in the UK (and of foreign drivers
through the ‘green card scheme’).24 To provide this function
to the national motor vehicle insurance scheme it acts as an
insurer of last resort for victims who would otherwise be left
without a remedy to access compensatory redress.25 The MIB
funds this guarantee reserve through a levy imposed on the
insurance companies who operate in the UK, each of whom
must be a member of the Bureau.26
Further, and before examining potential responsibility being applied to insurers to compensate for vehicle hacking, it
is important to put into context the insurance regime for purposeful damage caused by conventional vehicles, due to the
similarity of the objectives of both conventional and automated vehicle regimes, to protect third-parties. Moreover, the
relevant statutory wording is similar in both the AEVA 2018
and RTA 1988. For example, both the conventional vehicle and
CAV statutes use the word ‘accident’ which is, prima facie, a
challenge for the applicability of laws to purposeful damage.
Importantly, the RTA 1988 provides that the user must insure
against ‘accidents caused by or arising out of their use of the
vehicle’.27 The overriding objective of protecting third-party
victims means that where the insured commits damage purposefully, the injured victim must still be compensated. As
noted by the Court of Appeal in Hardy v Motor Insurers’ Bureau:
23 (The First Directive) Council Directive 72/166/EEC on the approximation of the laws of Member States relating to insurance
against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles, and
to the enforcement of the obligation to insure against such liability [1972] OJ L103/1; (The) Second Council Directive 84/5/EEC on
the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to
insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles [1984] OJ LL8/17; (The) Third Council Directive 90/232/EEC
on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating
to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor
vehicles [1990] OJ L129/33; Directive 2000/26/EC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to insurance against
civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles and amending
Council Directives 73/239/EEC and 88/357/EEC (The Fourth Motor
Insurance Directive) [2000] OJ L181/65; (The Fifth Directive) Directive 2005/14/EC amending Council Directives 72/166/EEC, 84/5/EEC,
88/357/EEC and 90/232/EEC and Directive 2000/26/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council relating to insurance against
civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles [2005] OJ
L149/14; and (The Sixth Directive) Directive 2009/103/EC relating
to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor
vehicles, and the enforcement of the obligation to insure against
such liability [2009] OJ L263/11. 24 The ‘green card scheme’ applies to accidents caused through
the negligent driving of foreign motorists. Here the MIB may deal
with the victim’s claim for damages to property or personal injury
rather than require them to seek communication from the foreign
insurer.
25 Memorandum and Articles of Association (1946, as
amended by special resolution passed on 7 June 2012)
Motor Insurers’ Bureau; see http://www.mib.org.uk/NR/
rdonlyres/32A4AB2C-5B4A-43A8-8610-1A629B7A933B/830/
ArticlesofAssociation070612.pdf, pp.2-4. 26 See ss. 95, 143 and 145(2) of the RTA 1988. 27 Section 145 of the RTA 1988.
4 computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628
The policy of insurance which a motorist is required by
statute to take out must cover any liability which may be incurred by him arising out of the use of the vehicle by him. It
must, I think, be wide enough to cover, in general terms, any
use by him of the vehicle, be it an innocent use or a criminal
use, or be it a murderous use or a playful use.28
The protective policy of conventional motor insurance is
seen in the Court of Appeal judgment, albeit obiter, in Charlton v Fisher29 determined that the policy of safeguarding third
party protection effectively overrides the ordinary interpretation ofthe legislation in a third-party context.30 Moreover, Bristol Alliance v Williams31 provides that where purposeful damage is not covered by the policy, the victim must be compensated, although under the UDA.32 The application of policy
therefore to purposeful damage from conventional vehicles
is a potential direction for CAVs. As we will see in part 5, the
AEVA 2018 has been drafted with such protective purpose, and
this could signal an approach which establishes the insurers’
cover for purposeful damage from CAV use. The next section
examines product liability and whether this could provide an
answer.
4. Product liability
The previous section outlined the applicability of the insurance market in providing protection to road users in the event
of accidents, including the mass hacking of CAVs and resultant damage. Thus, during the implementation phases of CAV
use and its development along the SAE scale33 towards full
28 Hardy v Motor Insurers’ Bureau [1964] 2 QB 745, 760. 29 [2001] 3 WLR 1435. 30 Note the author discussed the term ‘accident’ and Charlton v
Fisher in Matthew Channon (n 3), noting that the courts should
interpret the term purposely for the AEVA 2018 to include deliberately caused damage. 31 [2012] EWCA Civ 1267. 32 Motor Insurers’ Bureau ‘Uninsured Drivers’ Agreement’
(2015). <https://www.mib.org.uk/media/166917/2015-uninsureddrivers-agreement-england-scotland-wales.pdf>. It is important
to note that under Article 75 of the MIB’s articles of association the
insurer is required to compensate as an agent of the MIB, although
compensation is paid under the MIB Agreement rather than the
insurance policy. It is notable that the MIB Uninsured Drivers’
Agreement had previously excluded compensation for Acts of
Terrorism in Article 9 although this was later removed by the
MIB in its Uninsured Drivers Supplementary Agreement. Motor
Insurers Bureau ‘Articles of Association’ <https://www.mib.org.
uk/media/462763/2019-mib-articles-of-association-030719.pdf>.
See Motor Insurers’ Bureau, ‘Supplementary Uninsured Drivers’
Agreement 2017’ <https://www.mib.org.uk/media/350345/
2017-supplementary-uninsured-drivers-agreement-englandscotland-and-wales.pdf>. 33 The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) International Standard J3016 which identifies the levels of automation of vehicles. At
level 0, the driver controls all aspects of driving. Level 1 includes
steering and acceleration/deceleration assistance systems aiding
the driver. At level 2, partial automation provides steering and acceleration/deceleration using information from the driving environment. The driver is expected to intervene and respond when
requested at Level 3, but all other aspects of driving is taken by
the CAV. Level 4 denotes high automation where the automated
system takes all aspects of driving. Level 5 is used to describe an
self-driving modes, and until the point where persons behind
the wheel are considered passengers rather than drivers,34 the
current system of compulsory motor vehicle insurance will
continue. This includes provision for the recovery of damages
for both accidental and intentional damage by the innocent
third-party. We now consider whether and to what extent the
vehicle manufacturer may be subject to responsibility for defects in software (which will fundamentally operate the CAV)
where these have been modified by an unauthorised external actor (rather than through bugs and errors during ‘normal’ software update roll-outs). This is most likely achievable
through recourse to protections available through product liability law.
4.1. Product liability as applied to software
Under s. 5 of the AEVA 2018 (we discuss the AEVA 2018 in more
detail in part 5) insurers have a right of recourse against the
person responsible for the motor accident. This is likely to be
the manufacturer of the vehicle in product liability35 under
the Consumer Protection Act 1987 (CPA 1987), although claims
could involve the fleet operator of the vehicle in negligence.36
Product liability, compared to negligence, does not require
proof of fault, but rather proof that the product is defective (s.
2 CPA 1987, as discussed in respect of the interpretation of defectiveness, below) although notably only applies to products,
a potentially significant challenge in terms of claims from
hacked vehicles. If not, the insurer would be unable to claim
against the manufacturer under product liability for cybersecurity breaches due to software defects, and instead would
need to pursue a claim in negligence as the manufacturer is
deemed to owe a duty of care to the end consumer.37 The definition of product has been addressed significantly in literaautomated driving system where all tasks in all roadway and environmental conditions are taken by the system. This refers to a
full automation system. 34 James Marson and Katy Ferris, ‘The Lexicon of Self-Driving
Vehicles and the Fuliginous Obscurity of ‘Autonomous’ Vehicles’
(2021) Statute Law Review https://doi.org/10.1093/slr/hmab016. 35 Note that the CPA 1987 extends not just to the ‘producer of the
product’ (s. 2(2)(a) of the CPA 1987) but also under s. 2(2)(b) ‘any
person who, by putting his name on the product or using a trade
mark or other distinguishing mark in relation to the product, has
held himself out to be the producer of the product; (c) any person
who has imported the product into a member State from a place
outside the member States in order, in the course of any business
of his, to supply it to another’. For discussion see Channon, McCormick and Noussia (n 3). 36 See Ducuing (n 1) [6.1] who noted the importance of the fleet
operator and particularly their role in testing of CAVs who may be
required to intervene. 37 See Donoghue v Stevenson [1932] AC 562. However, a negligence
claim may be difficult due to the requirement of fault, i.e. that the
manufacturer acted below the standard of care required of them,
so they acted as a reasonable manufacturer would have done in
that same situation. The difficulty, therefore, in terms of cyber security is that the manufacturer may have acted appropriately in
the circumstances and could not have avoided a hacking incident.
Negligence may prove a popular route to take particularly in economic loss cases which are not covered under product liability.
computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628 5
ture38 but requires clarity. The UK Law Commission has been
consulting on whether the definition of software should be
clarified, noting that this issue should be reviewed, albeit ‘not
simply for AVs’.39 Currently any software provided in physical form such as a disk would likely be deemed a product,
whereas software over the air is a debatable entity.40 Moreover,
if software is produced by the manufacturer and not a separate component manufacturer, it is likely to be a product. The
likelihood, however, is that the software and hardware would
be produced by different component manufacturers. Deeming
software a product (with the AEVA 2018 applied rather than
a more difficult negligence claim) would likely mean significant additional claims and financial burdens against component manufacturers (particularly those who produce software,
and could therefore pose a chilling effect on innovation).41
Much depends on whether the vehicle manufacturer has a
contract with the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) to
recover compensation paid under the Act. There are also further complicated scenarios around who would be deemed the
‘producer’ of a product, with potential attribution to individual distributors and individual physical and software component manufacturers.42 A discussion determining the issue of
product liability as applied to software is not the central aim
of this paper, but it is arguable that where software is an essential component of a product, and updates are installed by
a manufacturer (such as with Tesla) or at mandatory car service/maintenance intervals, the software could be considered
a tangible product and be covered by product liability.
4.2. Product liability: safety and security
If software is a product, the claimant would need to prove
that the software was defective, with the product not meeting
the consumer’s expectation of safety. As noted by Schellekens,
‘“safety” is not the same as security, but in this context, the
two are not unrelated either. A security vulnerability has the
potential to become a safety issue. For example, security vulnerability may mean that a hacker can enter the systems of
38 The discussion around product liability and software is not a
new one. See for example, Diane Rowland, ‘Liability for Defective
Software’ (1991) 22 Cambrian Law Review 78. Also, the rationale
behind not treating software as a product was explored in Maurice Jamieson, ‘Liability for Defective Software’ (2001) May Journal of the Law Society of Scotland. More recent discussion can be
found in Matthew Channon et al (n 3); and Matthew Channon, ‘Automated and Electric Vehicles Act: An Evaluation in Light of Proactive Law and Regulatory Disconnect’ (2019) 10(2) European Journal
of Law and Technology. Also see Joshua Prior (n 3) 151. 39 See UK and Scottish Law Commissions ‘Automated Vehicles: Summary of Responses to Consultation Paper 3
and Next Steps’ (2021) https://s3-eu-west-2.amazonaws.
com/lawcom-prod-storage-11jsxou24uy7q/uploads/2021/07/
Summary-of-the-responses-to-CP3-and-next-steps-1.pdf 24 40 See for example Stephen Saxby, ‘Encyclopaedia of Information
Technology Law’ (Sweet and Maxwell) 7.132. 41 Maurice Schellekens, ‘No-fault Compensation Schemes for
Self-driving Vehicles’ (2018) 10(2) Law, Innovation and Technology.
314. DOI: 10.1080/17579961.2018.1527477. 42 See Saxby (n 40) which highlights potential scenarios concerning producers.
a car’.43 This is an important point. Yet, as we noted above,
the determination of safety is difficult and further difficulties
exist in terms of defectiveness. In some circumstances, defectiveness may be easy to spot, as noted by Rand, ‘Although
locating the vulnerability in the AV system may require significant expertise and expenditure, it will likely be possible—
at least in some instances—to locate specific flaws in specific
components or software’.44 However, in many other circumstances defectiveness may be harder to evidence. As noted
in a European Parliament report, ‘Product defects would be
very difficult to prove. Moreover, it would be even more difficult to attribute liability if all necessary software was installed
but cybercrime nevertheless occurred’.45 The requirement of
defectiveness in the CPA 1987, while stringent, is not one
of perfection.46 Nor just because a vehicle was hacked, and
caused damage does it necessarily mean that the vehicle is
defective. The authors in Clerk and Lindsell importantly note
that, ‘merely because some cars have special safety features
such as anti-lock brakes, this does not necessarily mean that
cheaper models without such features are therefore defective’.47 Likewise the absence of security features of more advanced models may not necessarily result in a ‘defective product’. The reasonable expectations test is therefore cost-benefit
with ‘safety… traded off against cost and convenience’.48 The
courts will examine several factors with each case being determined on its own facts.49 This can include, for example,
whether the vehicle has regulatory approval, the benefits of
introducing the vehicle and the cost of remedying any defect. As was noted previously, the first of these is an impor43 Maurice Schellekens, ‘Car Hacking: Navigating the Regulatory
Landscape’ (2016) 32 Computer Law and Security Review 307, 313. 44 Winkelman et al. (n 4). 45 See European Parliamentary Research Service, ‘A Common
EU Approach to Liability Rules and Insurance for Connected
and Autonomous Vehicles: European Added Value Assessment’
(2018) <https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/
2018/615635/EPRS_STU(2018)615635_EN.pdf> 26.Also see Ryan J
Duplechin, ‘The Emerging Intersection of Product Liability, Cyber
Security and Autonomous Vehicles’ (2017) 805 Tennessee Law
Review 803 which noted that defects ‘may become apparent but
unrecognisable’.
46 As was noted in by Michael Jones, Anthony Dugdale and Mark
Simpson,Clerk and Lindsell on Torts (2017 Sweet and Maxwell 22nd
edition). Also see Donal Nolan, ‘Strict Products Liability for Design
Defects’ [2018] 134 (Apr) Law Quarterly Review 176. 47 Jones et al. (n 46). 48 As noted by Donal Nolan (n 46), 178. 49 See Robert Veal and Henrik Ringbom, ‘Unmanned Ships and
the International Regulatory Framework’ (2017) 23(2) Journal of
International Maritime Law 100, 113. The authors in this article
discuss product liability for Unmanned Ships and note the lack
of case law in terms of product liability and defect. There are
some similarities here with CAVs. For example, the authors note
in terms of unmanned ships that, ‘The range of different types
of technical issues is broad. The division of liability between the
shipowner and, for instance, the shipbuilder or the manufacturer
of an individual component is not always easy to draw’. The division of liability here is comparable to questions around the division of liability between the CAV owner and the manufacturer,
with technical issues undoubtedly broad and the division of liability between the vehicle owner or manufacturer not always easy to
draw.
6 computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628
tant factor and could have a significant link to the AEVA 2018,
as if a vehicle is listed as an ‘automated vehicle’ under the
AEVA 2018 (s. 1(1)), a product liability claim is likely to be
more challenging.50 It is evident, therefore, that the definition
of ‘safety’ within the AEVA 2018 will be significant when determining a cybersecurity claim. However, this, of course, is
not the only factor to be taken into account. The difficulty is
that the ‘courts must simply weigh competing factors intuitively’.51 Moreover, the disparity in case law concerning ‘defective product’ means that ‘producers have little guidance
on when they can expect their products to be deemed defective’.52 These are important points and with significant applicability challenges for new technologies. Further, while the
outcome of a case is likely to be fact specific due to the multi
factorial approach, the absence of case law concerning how
such an approach would be applied in a CAV context adds to
the difficulty. The absence of legislative clarity in the AEVA
2018 and what is deemed to be safe in a cybersecurity context
also adds to the struggle.
Such confusion could therefore mean difficulty in resolving the outcome of disputes between insurer and manufacturer. Disputes were envisaged by the legislature,hence the requirement that third parties are compensated under strict liability. Moreover, manufacturers may attempt to use defences
against insurers. For example, manufacturers may argue that
the ten-year time limit on claims from the introduction of
the product had ended. The ten-year defence could be complicated for software and it is uncertain as to whether a CAV
would be deemed a new product once updates have been provided. If so, new software updates could restrict the defence
significantly for the overall vehicle.53 Nevertheless, even with
such defence restricted and the likelihood of vehicles lasting
significantly longer than ten years, the defence could cause
a ‘liability vacuum’.54 Probably the most complicated defence
concerning software is the state-of-the-art defence.55 That the
state-of-the-art at the time was not such that the fault could
be discovered. This particular defence and its application to
CAVs and software has been a point of unease for manufacturers, with the Society of Motor Manufacturers noting, ‘While
vehicle manufacturers have to meet state-of-the-art criteria
for the whole vehicle when introducing it to the market, software developments are constantly and fast evolving. What is
deemed state-of-the-art for software today may no longer be
state-of-the art tomorrow’.56 Determining software’s state-ofthe-art poses a challenge for both courts and manufacturers,
the shifting cybersecurity risk provides that manufacturers
50 Wilkes v De Puy International Ltd [2016] EWHC 3096. 51 Jacob Eisler, ‘One Step Forward and Two Steps Back in Product Liability: The Search for Clarity in the Identification of Defects’
(2017) 76(2) Cambridge Law Journal 230, 235. 52 Eisler (n 51). 53 See Jan De Bruyne and Jarich Werbrouck, ‘Merging Self-driving
Cars with the Law’ (2018) 34 (5) Computer and Security Law Review
1150, 1153. 54 De Bruyne and Werbrouck (n 53). 55 Also known as the Development Risk Defence. 56 Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, ‘Connected and Autonomous Vehicles: Position Paper’ (February
2017) <https://www.smmt.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/
SMMT-CAV-position-paper-final.pdf>.
will need to be constantly aware of changes in risk and security. Evidently while manufacturers are in favour of the stateof-the-art defence, there is an alternative view as to whether
the defence should be maintained for new technologies. As
noted by the Report from the EU Expert Group on Liability and
New Technologies, ‘the producer should be strictly liable for
defects in emerging digital technologies even if said defects
appear after the product was put into circulation, as long as
the producer was still in control of updates to, or upgrades
on, the technology. A development risk defence should not
apply’.57 The control of software through updates allows the
manufacturer to remedy defects when known. Of course, it
would be difficult to provide such a defence where software
could be made more secure by the manufacturer with the
potential of disincentivising the manufacturer in producing
updates. However, such a defence is particularly relevant in
terms of fast-moving cybersecurity standards.
4.3. Product liability and the problem for third-party
victims
A user in these circumstances would not, typically, find themselves liable in negligence for the consequences of resultant
damage. However, it is clear that product liability protects
users of the product and it is uncommon for third-party losses
to be experienced in the use of products mainly of a consumer variety. CAVs will be used for personal and commercial purposes, they will have much greater access to the public and users beyond the typical consumer products envisaged under the existing statutory scheme. If the system to be
adopted for the consequences of digital problems with the vehicle was left to the individual driver to be responsible, tortious liability would be ineffective due to the general problem
of a lack of resources to satisfy such claims. This would, potentially, expose victims to an inability to secure compensation and thus their access to justice would be compromised.
Further, without a recognised compensatory scheme in place,
public trust in the use of CAVs could be placed in jeopardy.
The system would therefore need replacing through insurance
cover which would enable the protection of third-party victims. However, a concern exists with a model of insurance
which involves the consequences of hacking. As has been
demonstrated, the consequences of hacking of a CAV can be
to affect the fundamental safety and functionality of a motor
vehicle. This, save for the driver disregarding software critical
updates or disabling/modifying the software operating the vehicle, would have nothing to do with the driver and it would be
unlikely that such a driver would even be able to ascertain if
a software compromising situation had taken place. It is also
problematic given that, unlike a mechanical failure, hacking
may involve a third-party taking active control over the vehicle.Thus, in this example,the vehicle is being manipulated beyond the control of the driver and/or any other person within
57 Report from the Expert Group on Liability and New Technologies, ‘Liability for Artificial Intelligence and Other Emerging Digital
Technology’ (European Commission 2019) [14]. Also see Francesco
Paolo Patti, ‘The European Road to Autonomous Vehicles’ (2019) 43
(1) Fordham International Law Journal 125 who was also in favour
of abolishing the development risk defence.
computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628 7
the vehicle for which the driver would, under the RTA 1988, be
held responsible. This creates a lacuna in the compensatory
protection of all involved in the use of CAVs. Hacking also, of
course, raises other issues which are beyond the scope of this
paper to adequately discuss. By its nature, hacking can lead to
an unauthorised third-party taking control of the software operating the vehicle hardware, leading to an accident-causing
loss. It can also, as noted earlier, lead to data breaches and
the theft of information and data held in the vehicle and its
communications with external infrastructure which could ultimately result in fundamental rights violations.58
4.4. Apportioning responsibility between insurers and
manufacturer
The above, therefore, highlights potential disputes between
the manufacturer and insurer. However, disputes are likely
to be costly and therefore, manufacturers and insurers are
likely to have commercial agreements to determine liability.59 This is unlikely to remove the need for the investigation of defects, as manufacturers will have agreements with
OEM’s to recover compensation,dependant on the parts which
have caused the damage. Manufacturers may also obtain additional insurance to cover themselves for any reclaim by insurers, meaning potential disputes between insurers. Cybersecurity breaches may cause further difficulties due to the potential costs damage, particularly for mass hacking incidents.
Whether the agreement between the manufacturer and insurer would cover for this is uncertain. It seems that insurers are against coverage for mass hacking, even where such
cost could potentially be recovered from the manufacturer.60
This is likely due to the potential costs involved if a fleet of
vehicles were hacked and caused significant physical damage.
Nevertheless, there are undoubtedly considerations concerning claims by insurers and defence of claims by manufacturers, such as an insurer’s refusal to provide cover.61 This is pertinent in a cybersecurity context with substantial mass hacking costs, with insurers potentially unwilling to take this on.62
However, if manufacturers are required to pick up the burden
of compensating victims of mass-hacking, major disruptions
to innovation would be likely.63 Furthermore, for both manufacturer and insurer, disputes could result in litigation costs.64
58 See, for example, James Marson, Matthew White and Katy Ferris ‘The Investigatory Powers Act 2016 and Connected Vehicles: A
New Form of Panspectric Veillance Looming’ (2022) forthcoming. 59 As was noted in the Departmentfor Transport(DfT) ‘Pathway to
Driverless Cars: Consultation on Proposals to Support Advanced
Driver Assistance Systems and Automated Vehicles Government Response’ (2017) <https://assets.publishing.service.gov.
uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/
581577/pathway-to-driverless-cars-consultation-response.pdf>
[3-14].
60 ibid, 18, 61 ibid [3-14]. 62 See previous scepticism from insurers concerning mass hacking risks. 63 See Channon (n 38) which cites Maurice Schellekens (n 43) on
the ‘chilling effect’ of liability law on manufacturers. 64 As we noted above,there is potential significant expenditure in
finding defects.
Of course, it is difficult to envisage whether either the manufacturer or insurer of the CAV would be willing to accept the
cost of large scale claims or this may lead to very complex disputes.
The above sections have attempted to briefly explore the
problems present in the tortious and insurance sectors as they
apply to CAV introduction on roads in the UK. Indeed, it might
be argued that at this stage it is unclear where responsibility
for compensation for hacking or mass hacking of CAVs would
arise.65 Given these concerns, we continue by assessing the
effectiveness of the legislative instrument developed to facilitate the introduction of CAVs through its regulation of insurance and the protections available for CAV users and thirdparties.
5. The AEVA 2018
The AEVA 201866 provides a route to compensation for the victim against an insurer where a CAV causes an accident whilst
‘driving itself’. Proof of fault is not required, nor is proof of defectiveness.67 Once the victim is compensated, the insurer is
able to recover from the responsible party. It can be assumed
that the basis of this aspect of the AVEA 2018, was likely to be
a claim against the manufacturer under the laws of product liability (the CPA 1987) for defects relating to software updates
which lead to the accident. Importantly, the AEVA 2018 only
applies to an ‘automated vehicle’, a vehicle which is ‘capable of driving itself safely’ (s. 1(1) AEVA 2018), and the challenges surrounding the definition of an automated vehicle,
particularly concerning ‘safely’, have been discussed in the literature.68 However, further challenges exist including the extent that a CAV must be cybersecure for it to be deemed ‘safe’.
While there are approaches to determine whether measures
have taken place to ensure cybersecurity,69 any potential software vulnerabilities will often only be found when a vehicle
is hacked. Consequently, vehicles with significant cyber vulnerability could originally be deemed safe, with vulnerabilities noticed when a cyber-attack has already occurred. Further, it may not always be possible to secure a vehicle against
65 See Channon (n 39). 66 For further analysis of the Automated and Electric Vehicles
Act 2018 see Channon et al (n 3); Felix Boon, ‘Two Bites of a Peculiar Cherry? Res judicata, Time Bar and Illiquid Debts: Insurer
Recoveries under the Automated and Electric Vehicles Act 2018’
(2020) British Insurance Law Association Journal; and James Marson, Katy Ferris and Jill Dickinson, ‘The Automated and Electric Vehicles Act 2018 Part 1 and Beyond: A Critical Review’ (2019) Statute
Law Review, hmz021, https://doi.org/10.1093/slr/hmz021. 67 If the vehicle is being manually driven then coverage would be
provided by the insurer as per insurance for conventional vehicles
under the RTA 1988. 68 See Marson and Ferris (n 34). 69 Such as whether the manufacturer has followed the Key Principles of Cyber Security as well as the PAS 1885:2018 ‘The fundamental
principles of automotive cyber security’. Centre for Connected and
Autonomous Vehicles, ‘Key Principles of Vehicle Cyber Security
for Connected and Autonomous Vehicles’ (2017) https://www.gov.
uk/government/publications/principles-of-cyber-security-forconnected-and-automated-vehicles/the-key-principles-ofvehicle-cyber-security-for-connected-and-automated-vehicles.
8 computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628
cyber-attacks as vulnerabilities will be present in any system.
In fact, even in product liability claims against the manufacturer under the CPA 1987, the insurer does not need to prove
absolute safety70 but rather that the, ‘safety of the product is
such as persons generally are entitled to expect’.71 As will be
noted, safety in the CPA 1987 and the AEVA 2018 are likely to
be linked, with product liability claims, at least in part, based
on whether the standards in the legislation have been met.72
‘Driving itself’ is a key term within the AEVA 2018, used
both in its definition of ‘automated vehicle’ and in the core
provision which sets out the insurers’ requirement to compensate the victim (s. 2(1) AEVA 2018). As noted in s. 8 AEVA
2018, ‘a vehicle is “driving itself” if it is operating in a mode
in which it is not being controlled, and does not need to be
monitored, by an individual.’ This, prima facie, excludes vehicles which are being hacked, as vehicles are unlikely to be
under the control of the individual / person behind the wheel
(and the legislation clearly could not be construed at present
to include reference to a hacker in these circumstances).73
The Centre for Connected and Autonomous Vehicles in its August 2020 Consultation on Automatic Lane Keeping Systems
(ALKS) provided a suggestion for the interpretation of control
noting that, ‘A vehicle is not being ‘controlled’ by an individual if the individual controls none of the following: 1 Longitudinal dynamics (speed, acceleration, braking, gear selection); 2 Lateral dynamics (steering)’.74 Interestingly the Consultation’s application of this to ALKS stated, ‘The activated
system (ALKS) shall perform the DDT (Dynamic Driving Task)
shall manage all situations including failures, and shall be free
of unreasonable risks for the vehicle occupants or any other
road users’.75 This would limit the potential for vehicles with
significant cyber vulnerabilities from being included within
‘controlled’. Nevertheless, even if prone vehicles were encompassed within this, the future definition of ‘safety’ may well
preclude these vehicles. However, ‘unreasonable’ clearly connotes that ‘reasonable risks’ would be acceptable. This is required due to the overall risk, yet the extent that these risks
become ‘unreasonable’ is uncertain. If the Key Principles of
Cyber Security and other UN regulations are followed, this
may provide an example of a reasonable risk. Of course, while
a vehicle with significant known cyber vulnerabilities may not
be listed as an automated vehicle under the AEVA 2018, vehicles which later are hacked may be classed as ‘driving itself’
for the purpose of the Act, resulting in contrasting interpretations within the Act. However, there is clear legislative in70 See Nolan (n 46) who also quotes Hickinbottom J in Wilkes v
De Puy International Ltd [2016] EWHC 3096 (HC) [65], who provided
‘inherently and necessarily a relative concept.’ 71 Section 3 of the CPA 1987. 72 Wilkes v De Puy International Ltd [2016] EWHC 3096 (HC). 73 See also discussion from Prior (n 3) in terms of internal and
external control. 74 Centre for Connected and Autonomous Vehicles,
‘Safe Use of Automated Lane Keeping System (ALKS)
Call for Evidence: Moving Britain Ahead’ (August 2020)
<https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/911016/
safe-use-of-automated-lane-keeping-system-alks-call-forevidence.pdf> [3.14]. 75 ibid (Annex A).
tent that victims of hacked vehicles would be encompassed
within the Act. In the consultation pre-AEVA 2018 the government envisaged that hacked CAVs would be covered,76 a
position taken in the House of Commons Public Bill Committee Debates.77 While neither of these establish binding authority, they could be useful to a court when determining whether
hacked vehicles would be encompassed within the Act. Moreover, the policy rationale, to protect third-party victims, provides a strong justification to ensure wide interpretation. The
alternative to the AEVA 2018, the need to claim from the manufacturer directly in negligence or product liability, would unlikely fulfil this policy rationale.
Notably, the AEVA 2018 attempts to fulfil the policy rationale of victim protection and seemingly affords greater protection than the regime for conventional vehicles. For example, the AEVA 2018 greatly restricts the contractual freedom
between insurers and policyholders, as insurers are unable to
utilise policy exclusions78 against third-parties. The only exception being under s. 4,79 with insurers able to exclude liability to, or recover compensation from,80 the ‘insured person’
in case of a failure to update software which the ‘insured person’ ‘knows or ought to know is safety critical’ (s. 4(1)(b) AEVA
2018) or if software is introduced without permission (s. 4(1)(a)
AEVA 2018).81 Updates are deemed ‘safety critical’ if it would
be unsafe to use the vehicle without the software being installed (s. 4(6)(b) AEVA 2018). This is relevant to vehicle hacking due to the cybersecurity risks resulting from outdated or
malicious software. The provision is intended to act as a deterrent to prevent ‘insured persons’ from installing prohibited
software, whilst also providing an incentive to update necessary software.Whether this will deter/incentivise is uncertain,
although the recovery of compensation from the ‘insured person’ is dependant on funds. However, putting the onus on the
insured person, who may have limited knowledge of the importance of a particular update, is difficult, and could lead to
unjust results. Manufacturers will need to provide adequate
notice and information to the insured person about the necessity of installing such updates. The absence of a warning
is likely to point to vehicle defectiveness.82 In fact even with
a warning, a potential product liability claim could be brought
against the manufacturer, diminishing the deterrent effect of
this provision. As noted in the Venturer Report: ‘In the case of a
76 See Department for Transport (n 59). 77 See John Hayes MP, House of Commons Public Bill Committee
p140.
78 Exclusion clauses are limited in third party conventional motor
insurance although not prohibited (see section 148(2) of the RTA
1988 for a list of prohibited exclusions). Also as noted above, where
a non-prohibited exclusion clause is used, the insurer would still
be required to compensate as an agent of the MIB. Compensation
would be paid in these circumstances under the MIB UDA 2015 and
not the insurance policy. 79 Section 2(6) Automated and Electric Vehicles Act 2018. Also see
the DfT Government Response to Consultation (n 59) [3.13]. 80 For recovering compensation see (s. 4(4)(a) of the AEVA 2018). 81 Where the insured person is notthe policy holder butis permitted to drive the vehicle, s. 4(2) provides the insured cannot exclude
liability unless they had known that the updates were prohibited
and s. 4(4) provides the same for insurer recovery of damage paid
to third parties. 82 See s. 3(2)(a) of the CPA 1987.
computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628 9
SAE Level 3 or Level 4 vehicle,83 there is an identifiable product
liability issue in respect of a connected AV which is permitted
by design to enter automated driving mode in full knowledge
that it is unsafe because it is in default of a safety-critical update’.84 Moreover, in the Report it was noted that where an
accident is caused by a vehicle as a result of it not having upto-date software installed, this would likely be a defect in the
product.85 These are both important points. Of course, vehicles should be aware of any faults to safety critical functions
according to the Key Principles of Cyber Security and should
be resilient and ‘fail safe’ in light of any safety critical faults.86
In the US, the SPY Car Act 2017 mandated vehicles to be able
to immediately identify, stop and report any attempts made
to seize control of the vehicle.87 The absence of such fail safe,
would not meet the reasonable expectations test, as a consumer would likely expect that the system was able to limit
or prevent damage. Notably where software is not updated,
a claim against the manufacturer is more likely than a claim
against the insured person, with the manufacturer likely to
have deeper pockets.88 Of course, much depends on whether
the software is deemed a product and any potential defences
the manufacturer has.
Overall it is evident that the AEVA 2018 is aimed at providing the victim with damages. Whether the AEVA 2018 covers
hacking requires clarification. Vehicle safety is likely to be a
very important part of the Act relating to hacking and again
needs clarity. In concluding this section, we wish to reiterate
our argumentthatto facilitate the adoption of CAVs on a broad
scale, public confidence requires a system of insurance to be
available in the event of hacking or mass hacking (which by its
nature would likely cause significantly greater damage than
individual error, software glitches on individual vehicles and
so on). Public confidence will be more likely achieved through
users and non-users knowing a system of insurance is available to be called upon in such an event. This currently exists
83 For the sake of clarity, the standards mentioned in this quote
refer to the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) International
Standard J3016 which identifies the levels of automation of vehicles. At level 0, the driver controls all aspects of driving. Level 1 includes steering and acceleration/deceleration assistance systems
aiding the driver. At level 2, partial automation provides steering
and acceleration/deceleration using information from the driving environment. The driver is expected to intervene and respond
when requested at Level 3, but all other aspects of driving is taken
by the CAV. Level 4 denotes high automation where the automated
system takes all aspects of driving. Level 5 is used to describe an
automated driving system where all tasks in all roadway and environmental conditions are taken by the system. This refers to a
full automation system. 84 Venturer Project, ‘Driverless Cars: Liability Frameworks and
Safety by Design’ (Venturer, Insurance and Legal Report 2018) 40.
<https://www.venturer-cars.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/
Year-3-Legal-and-Insurance-Report.pdf>. 85 Venturer Project (n 84), 41. 86 Key Principles for Cyber Security (n 70) Principle 8.2. 87 SPY Car Act (2017). S. 680, SPY car Act of 2017, 115th United
States Congress. https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/
senate-bill/680. 88 For discussion on the extent of deep pockets theory see Victor
E. Schwartz, Phil Goldberg and Christopher E. Appel, Deep Pocket
Jurisprudence, ‘Where Tort Law Should Draw the Line’ (2018) 70
Oklahoma Law Review 359.
with conventional vehicles where the vehicle which is responsible for an accident is uninsured or unidentified, the thirdparty victim has a central fund from which to claim compensation (the MIB). It also exists in a similar way to the pooling
of property insurance for flood susceptible areas where private insurers will either not provide cover, or the premiums
would be prohibitively expensive for individual policyholders.
In the next part, we examine the proposition of an alternative
insurance system for low cost hacking and the introduction of
a Maliciously Compromised Connected Vehicle Agreement.
6. Proposing an alternative insurance system
for low-cost hacks
One of the intended benefits of CAVs is the removal of drivererror which leads, or contributes to accidents.89 It will not
prevent accidents from taking place on public roads. Software will malfunction and accidents will still occur. The key
difference with regards to hacking is the unintended consequences of this activity. For the driver, warnings of software
changes, of malfunctioning systems, of critical problems in
the operation of the vehicle will likely be unnoticed. As such,
the driver may perhaps be unwilling to use CAVs unless either the insurance industry will take responsibility for such
consequences or until another system is in place. Systems of
compulsory insurance exist in most jurisdictions and, in the
EU for example, was regulated through the Motor Vehicle Insurance Directives (MVID)90 which sought to harmonise insurance cover, albeit not general civil liability, for incidents involving motor vehicles. The onus from the system of insurance was that the driver/owner of the vehicle (through their
insurers) would be liable for accidents caused by their vehicle and would, in many respects, enable a third-party victim
to bring their claim directly against the insurer. Thus, victim
protection was of paramount concern. This had already been
demonstrated throughout the case law, but perhaps exemplified in the judgment of Lord Denning and Salmon and Megaw
L.JJ, where, in respect of the necessity of compulsory insurance, they considered
Parliament requires every driver to be insured against third
party risks. The reason is so that a person injured by a motor
car should not be left to bear the loss on his own, but should
be compensated out of the insurance fund. The fund is better
able to bear it than he can. But the injured person is only able
to recover if the driver is liable in law. So the judges see to it
that he is liable, unless he can prove care and skill of a high
standard.91
Therefore, fault liability was seen to be moving to a system of the allocation of risk. Further, following the enact89 For instance, there are over 31 million vehicles on
Britain’s roads and around 93% of all crashes are attributed
to human error. See Ian Kemp, ‘Autonomy & Motor Insurance. What Happens Next?’ (2018) An RSA report into autonomous vehicles & experiences from the GATEway Project.
https://www.rsagroup.com/media/2830/rsa-report-autonomyand-motor-insurance-what-happens-next-16072018b.pdf. 90 See n 23. 91 Nettleship v Weston [1971] 2 QB 691 [699-700].
10 computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628
ment and subsequent transposition of the Second MVID,92
each EU Member State was required to establish a guarantee fund to satisfy claims on the basis of third-parties being injured and suffering loss due to the acts of uninsured
or untraced drivers. The UK established this guarantee fund
through agreements concluded between it (through the Secretary of State for Transport) and the MIB.The UK has withdrawn
its membership of the EU93 and therefore it is no longer bound
by the MVID or the jurisprudence of the Court of Justice of the
European Union (CJEU). Yet these are retained laws following
the withdrawal and continue to have effect in the UK. This is
also relevant because this is an area which the EU could seek
to regulate and this could limit the choices of reform for the
UK. Of course, the UK could seek to follow EU reform in this
area, however this is unlikely due to the fractious relationship
between the UK and EU in respect of the MVID and the UK’s
frequent misapplication and non-transposition of elements
of the MVID.94 Schellekens has discussed the insurance system for accidents involving autonomous vehicles.95 He concludes that a variant of the no-fault-compensation schemes
would be a feasible alternative to the liability schemes operating for conventional vehicle use. However, of course, this system is distinct from establishing a system of liability for masshacked CAVs given the nature of exposure to risk and the
responsibility on the manufacturers to protect against such
unauthorised access and modification.96
Establishing statutory compensation limits or minimum
levels of insurance cover is perhaps not suited to motor vehicle insurance given the prospect of mass hacking and the
potential consequences for an indeterminate set of claimants
and an indeterminate range of losses. The insurer in these
circumstances could face significant calls on them to satisfy
claims with no reasonable expectation of recovering these
payments from the tortfeasor (hacker). This is not to say that
insurance should not be seen as a means of offering redress
for the consequences of the hacking of CAVs. The MIB as a
body already exists and continues to do so following the UK’s
withdrawal from the EU. It will also continue to contract with
the Secretary of State in a similar vein to how it has done previously with the UDA and UtDA, albeit without the hindrance
(as we are sure they considered it) of having to adhere to the
iterations of the MVID and the jurisprudence of the CJEU. The
MIB had, since its inception in the 1940
s, been a source of redress, offering protection to the most vulnerable victims of
road traffic accidents and using it as a compensatory body
for the consequences of hacking and mass hacking of CAVs
would, again reposition it as the compensatory body (indeed,
92 (The) Second Council Directive 84/5/EEC on the approximation
of the laws of the Member States relating to insurance against civil
liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles [1984] OJ LL8/17. 93 European Union (Withdrawal Agreement) Act 2020. 94 See James Marson, Katy Ferris and Alex Nicholson, Irreconcilable Differences? The Road Traffic Act and the European Motor Vehicle Insurance Directives (2017) The Journal of Business Law 1, 51. 95 Schellekens (n 41). 96 Through the establishing of technical measures for protecting the integrity of the vehicles such as by appropriate cryptography, identity authentication and remote access to the vehicle via
telecommunications networks.
as envisioned in the MVID)97 and enable it to seize the opportunity to demonstrate its valuable existence and be able
to provide a competitive advantage to road users, pedestrians and indeed any third-party victim of a hacked CAV which
find themselves a victim of a motor vehicle accident caused
through hacking. Such positive positioning would offer reassurance to the public in the use of CAVs, to legislators to continue the compulsory insurance of autonomous vehicles and
(indeed extending) the agreements established between the
Secretary of State and the MIB, and with policymakers about
the advantages of the UK maintaining a system of compulsory insurance with the continuation of the MIB as a national
compensatory body.
As noted above, a system already exists for ensuring
victims of accidents from conventional vehicles causing
loss/damage in respect of the use of motor vehicles have access to compensation. Further, due to this membership a proportion of every insurance policy payment is levied to the MIB
which operates the guarantee fund. EU law requires that the
designated guarantee body will act as ‘insurer of last resort’
and provide compensation in the event that the driver of the
vehicle at fault has no valid policy of insurance or who cannot
be traced. The system is far from perfect,98 the MIB frequently
involves itself in claims where it is not needed,99 and in many
respects its close relationship with the insurers offering cover
creates a tension in who best serves the needs of third-party
victims.100 Yet, ultimately, this system works.101 It will now be
argued that such a system will work for damage caused by vehicle hacking up to a certain limit, but would be unfit for very
significant damage due to the burden placed on the insurance
industry, manufacturers and ultimately the consumer. While
we will distinguish the solution to the route to compensation
as hacking and mass hacking we recognise that the route to
compensation should not be based on whether an individual
vehicle was hacked or if hacking was of more than one. An individual hack which caused significant damage could be more
expensive than a fleet-based hack which applied the brakes of
a few vehicles. Hence, the route to recovery should be dependant on cost rather than number of vehicles hacked.
As previously discussed, each of the other forms of redress
currently available have their advantages and disadvantages
for victims of accidents involving CAVs. Ultimately, however, a
strategy is needed to create a system which is sustainable,fair,
offers a workable mechanism for victims to be compensated
in the event of injury or damage through the use of CAV, and
97 It was in the Second MVID (The Second Council Directive
84/5/EEC [1984] OJ LL8/17) that the requirement for Member States
to establish a national guarantee body (the MIB in the UK) was established.
98 For example, see Marson, Ferris and Nicholson (n 94). 99 Delaney v Secretary of State for Transport [2014] EWHC 1785 (QB). 100 Similarly, the application of insurance to be subsumed by the
manufacturer’s due to their ability to generate data on risks and
associated policy premiums may be disadvantageous when it
comes to defects in software and hardware under their control.
As has been evidenced in the popular press with accidents involving Tesla vehicles, the manufacturer has been quick to place the
blame on the person behind the wheel rather than the operation
of the software on the vehicle. 101 Channon (n 38).
computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628 11
one which also does not stifle or limit the continuing development and innovation of CAVs. Imposing liability on manufacturers for their breaches of contract, of creating defective or dangerous products is quite proper. There exist mechanisms102 to hold such bodies liable in law and these, naturally, should continue. The difference with these situations
and the consequences of hacking is for the third-party victim
and their right to adequate redress and access to justice. Contract law would be of no use due to privity, and remedies in
torts is problematic due to identifying the correct tortfeasor.
Thus, for a low cost hack the victim should have access to a
national compensatory scheme which underwrites the losses
and restores the victim, as far as money can, to their previous
position.
For low-cost accidents caused by hacking, we suggest that
a similar model to the existing agreements between the Secretary of State for Transport and the MIB should be followed.
Akin to the UDA and UtDA, a Maliciously Compromised Connected Vehicle Agreement (MCCVA), using Article 10 of the
MVID as its inspiration, could provide the protection required,
whilst also not placing a stifling burden on manufacturers or
on insurers (as per s. 2 of the AEVA 2018). EU Member States
were required, per Art. 10 of the MVID, to establish a body
which would manage a fund to ensure that monies would
be always available to meet unsatisfied judgments. In other
words, its main role was to ensure that victims of uninsured
or untraced drivers were compensated to the minimum levels of compensation to which they would be entitled to, had
the driver at fault been insured/traced and the claim brought
against their insurer. Stipulations and exceptions were provided for in the Directive, and being an EU Directive requiring
transposition into national law, there were misunderstandings and transgressions by some Member States in fulfilling
the requirements of Article 10, yet overall it provided protection to a group of victims who would otherwise find themselves without a tortfeasor from which to recover compensation. The EU model provided discretion to Member States in
the administration of the body (and to some extent the compensation levels applicable), but the Member States had to apply the principle of equivalence and effectiveness103 of EU law
when compensating victims under the MVID (or the aims of
the Directive would be undermined – even though the UDA
and UtDA both undermine these EU principles).104 In previous
articles one of the authors has criticised the UDA and UtDA,
questioning whether the schemes managed by the MIB offer
comparable compensation and access to protection as a claim
directly against the insurer on the terms found in the policy
of insurance.105 This was a criticism of a dual system of protection which essentially saw a victim of an uninsured or un102 For example, as we have discussed in terms of product liability
through the CPA 1987. 103 Case C-120/97 Upjohn Ltd v The Licensing Authority established by
the Medicines Act 1968 and Others [1999] ECLI:EU:C:1999:14 at [32].
104 See James Marson and Katy Ferris, ‘Motor Vehicle Insurance
Law: Ignoring the Lessons from King Rex’ (2017) 38(5) Business Law
Review 178 for commentary. 105 James Marson, Hasan Alissa and Katy Ferris, ‘Driving Towards
a More Therapeutic Future? The Untraced Drivers Agreement and
Conscious Contracting’ (2021) European Journal of Current Legal
Issues (in press).
traced driver have access to compensation to a lesser degree
than if they were injured by an insured and traced driver. Of
course, such a scenario would not apply in our suggested system as the UK is no longer a Member State of the EU and protection for the damage and loss sustained due to the effects
of a hacked vehicle would not give rise to a claim against the
driver (due to lack of fault) nor should it against the insurer
(given the problems with such a model as outlined above). Procedural rules could be imposed under the MCCVA so as not to
deprive innocent third-party victims of road traffic accidents
of their right to compensation and to ensure minimum levels of compensation are awarded. Thus, the effectiveness and
equivalence principle enshrined in EU law, would be followed
(simply to ensure fairness and as a benchmark to measure
this by) so as not to disadvantage victims and to enable the
claimant to be able to obtain the same award had they been injured by a non-hacked CAV and made an award by the insurer.
The MCCVA would require all CAV to be insured or the MIB
would, adopting the wording of cl 5 UDA, not be liable for any
claim ‘arising out of the use of a vehicle which is not required
to be covered by a contract of insurance106 unless the use is
in fact covered by a contract of insurance.’ This would still
allow certain groups of nationally funded vehicles to be exempt as these would have the funds to call upon in the event
of mass-hacking leading to damage caused by vehicles under
their control - the National Health Service and the police are
perhaps the most obvious examples.107
By establishing the MCCVA, insurers would continue to
take a proportion of premiums from policyholders to supplement this fund, and, as with Pool Re (see below), at the outset of the agreement between the state and the MIB, the state
would agree to underwrite compensation awards in the event
that the fund was deficient. This, we argue, would only be
a temporary measure and would likely not be needed to be
called upon.The MIB has operated the UDA and UtDA for years
through the premiums levied to it and has never been in a situation where compensation was not payable to an applicant
due to lack of resources. Procedural rules on eligibility and
awards would need to be established. It is beyond the scope
of this paper to discuss these, although the authors have discussed the matter of procedural rules in relation to the MIB
previously.108 It is a necessary scheme, however, as without
one in place it is unlikely that truly autonomous vehicles (SAE
4–5 vehicles) will be fit for use on the road. They would simply
expose the users to a liability which would be infeasible. In the
106 Per s. 144 of the RTA88. 107 The development of the MCCVA should also be seen as a
mechanism and opportunity to contract in good faith and to remove some of the more unfair and unnecessary procedural rules
adopted by the MIB which, it may appear at face value, to have
been included to limitthe claims being made to it. For instance,the
UtDA stipulates that an award is conditional on a claimant suffering personal injury from the accident in the claim, but that injury
must be ‘significant’ in order for the MIB to proceed the claim for
property damage. The result is that the value of any claims must
exceed £400. This, it appears, to operate at the expense of innocent victims of untraced drivers and it would be better for the MIB
to undertake a balanced assessment of its need to ensure against
fraudulent claims, and its duty towards the victims of accidents. 108 See Channon (n 38) and Marson, Alissa and Ferris (n 105).
12 computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628
next section we explore the future of insurance, and whether
this is best served through a public or private scheme.
7. The future of insurance
States which have already established systems of CAVs being used and tested on public roads have done so under,
typically, insurance-based schemes,109 through the introduction of strict liability of the keeper or insurer of the vehicle,110 or through exceptions granted under very strict circumstances.111 These are created on the basis of facilitating the
testing and limited application of CAVs on public roads, in a
form of preparedness for more advanced CAV use in the future. They are not, it must be remembered, models intended
as permanent solutions for more mainstream CAV use. Further, insurers could insure voluntarily for the hacking or mass
hacking of a CAV as an added extra (dependant on whether
this is covered under the AEVA 2018). The difficulty, however, with cybersecurity insurance, particularly cyber terrorism, is that this is an area where the risk is still very much
unknown. As noted by the Cambridge Centre for Risk Studies, ‘New methods for measuring cyber risk are continually
adjusted, applied, and evaluated for usefulness’.112 This is an
important point. With CAV’s introduction, there are a number
of unknowns which the insurance model may be ill equipped
to cater for. Insurance as an industry is based on actuary risk
assessment. Data is taken from the applicant for a policy, and
the insurer may then ascertain what premium must be paid
to insure against the risk. It is not uncommon for a market to
be so uncertain that a policy of insurance against the risk will
not be issued. Hacking, and indeed mass hacking of fleets of
vehicles operating the same software versions is an unknown
quantity and this level of risk is perhaps too great to impose on
the industry without a significant shift in premiums. If cybersecurity insurance is not required then increased premiums
would likely mean that purchase of such insurance would be
limited. If cybersecurity insurance was compulsory for vehicle
109 For example, the UK’s AEVA 2018; Article 19 of the Italian Decree of 28 February 2018 on the testing of connected and automated vehicles on public roads (18A02619, GU n° 90 of 18 April
2018); and Spain’s Directorate-General for Traffic circular of 13
November 2015 (Instrucción 15/V-113). 110 For example, § 7 of the German Road Traffic Act (Straßenverkehrsgesetz) provides and continues with CAV for strict liability of the keeper of the vehicle. The French Decree n° 2018-211
of 28 March 2018 on experimentation with automated vehicles
on public roads relies on the Loi Badinter of 5 July 1985 (n°85-677).
Section 2 of the AEVA 2018 provides that ‘the insurer is liable’ for
damage incurred by the insured or any other person in an accident
caused by an automated vehicle. In the event of the vehicle being
uninsured, the owner is held liable. 111 For commentary see Stefan Nicola, Elisabeth Behrmann and
Marie Mawad, ‘It’s a Good Thing Europe’s Autonomous Car Testing is Slow’ (2018) Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2018-03-20/it-s-a- good-thing-europe-s-autonomouscar-testing-is-slow.
112 Cambridge Centre for Risk Studies, Cyber Terrorism: Assessment of the Treat to Insurance (2017) 31. Available at
<https://www.jbs.cam.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/
pool-re-cyber-terrorism.pdf>
users then this could mean a limited uptake of this technology.113
7.1. Pool / flood Re type fund?
While an insurance fund based on premium income may be
a positive approach for individually hacked vehicles, with an
incentive maintained for both insurers and manufacturers
to ensure that vehicles are cybersecure, we submit this may
be problematic for vehicles which are mass hacked. This is
because the potential unaffordability of insurance for consumers and the potential for insurers to be unwilling to provide insurance for CAVs.114 However, a separate reinsurance
pool could be a potential solution to ensure that victims are
compensated and which could limit the burden on insurers
and consumers. There are a number of options here which
we can explore. The first being a reinsurance pool with added
state support. In this scenario insurers would provide cover
up to a certain amount, and compensation required over that
amount would be paid by the government (through way of a
loan). The introduction of such a reinsurance pool is not novel.
Pool Re,
115 was introduced in the UK for terrorism risks in 1993
after a series of terrorist attacks.116 Reinsurers left the terrorism insurance market and Pool Re was formed to ensure that
compensation could be provided through reinsurance and a
government guarantee. This cover only exists in relation to
commercial property damage and business interruption. Insurers cede their terrorism risk to Pool Re which then provides the necessary funds for victims. Currently, the majority
of insurers in the UK contribute financially to this pool and
which has built up substantial funds. Pool Re has a retrocession agreement with the government and pays a premium.117
If pool resources do not cover the loss, the government will
provide compensation, albeit as a loan which will be paid by
Pool Re. Originally Pool Re did not cover for cyber terrorism,
although this was later extended to cover such, although the
113 Studies have shown that price is potentially a significant barrier for CAV uptake. See for example Nadia Anan, Shahrina MD
Nordin, Mohamad Ariff bin Bahruddin, Murad Ali, ‘How Trust Can
Drive Forward the User Acceptance to the Technology? In-vehicle
Technology for Autonomous Vehicle’ (2018) 118 Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 819. Also see Zia Wadud, ‘Fully
Automated Vehicles: A Cost of Ownership Analysis to Inform Early
Adoption’ (2017) Transportation Part A: Policy and Practice 163. 114 This was noted by the DfT (n 59) in terms of insurers potentially
being unwilling to provide insurance if manufacturers also note
the scepticism ofthe insurance industry in compensating for mass
hacking.
115 More information on Pool Re can be found here <https://www.
poolre.co.uk>. 116 For a definition of Terrorism, Reinsurance (Acts of Terrorism)
1993 see s. 2(2) ‘In this section “acts of terrorism” means acts of
persons acting on behalf of, or in connection with, any organisation which carries out activities directed towards the overthrowing
or influencing, by force or violence, of Her Majesty’s government in
the United Kingdom or any other government de jure or de facto.’ 117 Hm Government, ‘Retrocession Agreement between Pool
Reinsurance Company Limited and The Lords Commissioners of Her Majesty’s Treasury’ (March 2015) <https:
//assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment_data/file/417146/Pool_Re_-_Retrocession_
Agreement.pdf>
computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628 13
limit to commercial property damage remains.118 This means
that commercial property damage caused by the hacking of
a CAV through terrorism is already covered, although noncommercial damage and personal injury are not, nor is nonterrorism related activity. There are benefits to using a reinsurance pool compared to, perhaps, an insurance fund such
as that operated through the MIB. Pool Re has funds available from itself and the government, meaning that compensation is guaranteed. The fact that insurers cover the loss, and
therefore would likely recover from the manufacturer,through
autonomous vehicle insurance would mean continued incentivisation of safety. However, it is worthwhile noting that the
cost of such a reinsurance pool may be much more substantial than on Pool Re with the added necessity of personal injury cover, as well as the potential for an entire fleet to be
hacked. This could be a much greater challenge for such a
pool, both in the short and long terms due to the cost of building up funds, and repayment of the government loan, should
the worst eventualities arise. In an area where the cost of insurance may already be greater at the beginning due to the
cost of insuring expensive parts,119 the added cost of such a
pool may be detrimental to the uptake of CAV’s due to this
potential premium increase.
A similar fund in existence which could serve as a model
for mass hacked CAVs, is that operated by Flood Re in respect
of flood damage. We acknowledge that there are clearly differences between a government-backed scheme for compensating victims as a consequence of natural disasters and one
which is established to cover harm following cyber breaches
and potential cyber insecurities. Indeed, it may be a criticism
levelled at the motor manufacturer industry that such harm is
caused by risks introduced by industry. It is beyond the scope
of this paper to detail the similarities and differences in this
regard, but it is sufficient to note that several consequences
of natural disasters, particularly flooding risks in the UK, have
at least been impacted through private sector house building
projects.120 Given the international standards being adopted
to prevent the incidents of cyber breaches, there is precedent
for the state to underwrite insurance services on the basis of
public and private partnerships, irrespective of potential culpability of industry, insofar as safety standards and governmental consent to the activity is provided. As the potential for
the breadth of loss as a consequence of mass hacked vehicles
may therefore be akin to disaster insurance,121 a reinsurance
model operational since 2016 by Flood Re might be similarly
established. Since 2000, a flood insurance partnership agreement has been in place between the Association of British In118 Pool Re, ‘Introduced Remote Digital (Cyber) Cover’ <https://
www.poolre.co.uk/history/introduced-remote-digital-cybercover/> 119 Of course, a vast reduction in accidents may reduce premiums
over the longer term, however, at the beginning where the risk of
CAVs is not known and the parts are expensive, it is likely that the
cost will be greater. 120 Damian Carrington ‘Rush to Build New Homes will
Increase Flooding, Experts Warn’ (2017) The Guardian,
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/feb/02/
rush-to-build-new-homes-will-increase-flooding-experts-warn. 121 See Stephane Hallegatte, Economic Resilience: Definition and
Measurement (2014, The World Bank).
surers and the UK government, being modified in 2007 and
2009,122 but most radically in 2016 through the creation of
Flood Re. Prior to Flood Re’s formation, it had been mooted that
the government may seek to begin a nationalised flood insurance system,123 and further that this may not be restricted to
flood insurance but extend to other aspects currently under
the domain of the private insurance sector. Accordingly began
the ‘Gentleman’s Agreement’,124 a cross-subsidy for at-risk
property owners from the premiums paid for them and the
risk-free (thus the risk was paid for by the insureds irrespective of the risk that they faced).125 For customers, the agreement allowed everyone to be covered by insurance – business
and private customers – and for the insurance sector, revenues
were collected in significant numbers.
Flood Re was formed in the aftermath of several major
flooding events in England and Wales which had affected
the insurance industry, leading to approximately £3 billion in
value of insurance claims.126 The insurance industry considered that such scenarios were likely to increase in frequency
and, consequently, the insuring against such risks would become financially unsustainable. This meant that the previous Statement of Principles,127 upon which the agreement
between the industry and government had existed, required
amendment, hence the creation of Flood Re. Flood Re was designed with the aim of broadening the scope and application of affordable insurance cover to the whole population,
through a process of subsidising the premiums payable by
the insured, and facilitating the transition from reinsurance
to the insurance sector providing cover to customers based
on their risk and circumstances. Such state and industry partnership models have been identified as being beneficial,128 to
ensuring continuity of insurance cover, and indeed essential
where markets may be unviable in their absence.129 Viaene
122 See Edmund C. Penning-Rowsell, ‘Flood Insurance in the UK: A
Critical Perspective’ (2015) 2 WIREs Water 601. 123 Swenja Surminski and Jillian Eldridge ‘Flood Insurance in
England— An Assessment of the Current and Newly Proposed Insurance Scheme in the Context of Rising Flood Risk’ (2015) 10 Journal of Flood Risk Management 415. 124 Edmund C Penning-Rowsell, Sally Priest and Clare Johnson,
‘The Evolution of UK Flood Insurance: Incremental Change Over
Six Decades’ (2014) 30 International Journal of Water Resources
Development 694. 125 See Penning-Rowsell (n 122), 602. 126 John Chatterton, Christophe Viavattene, Joe Morris, Edmund C
Penning-Rowsell and Sue Tapsell, ‘The Costs of the Summer 2007
Floods in England’ (Project: SC070039/R1) (2010, Bristol: Environment Agency). 127 Having replaced the Gentleman’s Agreement in 2008 to provide
for additional exclusions including the discouraging of new developments in high-risk areas by not covering such properties built
after 1 January 2009. 128 Indeed, the European Insurance industry has even identified
these types of arrangements as vital in the management of risk
transfer and development of prevention measures (CEA, ‘Reducing
the Social and Economic Impacts of Climate Change and Natural
Catastrophes’ (2007) vol. 46. CEA, Brussels). 129 Colin Green and Edmund C Penning-Rowsell, ‘Flood Insurance
and Government: “Parasitic” and “Symbiotic” Relations’ (2004)
29(3) Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance—Issues and Practice
518.
14 computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628
and Dedene130 extend this notion further when remarking
that the ‘… insurance industry has positioned itself as a basic pillar of our modern society.’ Yet these public-private arrangements need to be managed, as partnerships based on
cover for disaster-type events often evolve over time, and the
addition to and leaving of partners naturally affects the composition of the partnership and possibly has implications for
its aims too.131 For example, like many partnership models,
the partners may initially have similar understandings as to
the greater good that they collectively can produce, such as
disaster relief and the protection against uninsured individuals, however, these shared goals may change and ultimately,
the insurance sector constitutes for-profit companies which
must answer to their shareholders, thereby creating potential
challenges to the operation and ethos of such partnerships.132
How Flood Re operates in practice is through a reinsurance
understanding where the state establishes a pool from which
the insurance company, which provides cover to the insured,
may claim in the event that the insured is affected by a flooding event. The insurance company, a private institution, offers
an insurance premium to the homeowner but, as explained by
Penning-Rowsell, ‘if the flood risk element of the policy costs
more for the company to provide than the premium set under Flood Re, that insurer can cede the flood risk part of that
individual policy to Flood Re.’133 The pool is funded through a
levy134 on all the insurance companies in the market (set for
the first five years of its existence at £180 million but reviewed
thereafter) and, significantly for the purposes of our proposed
modelling of a similar structure against the mass hacking of
CAVs, it was established for a life of 25 years.135 During this
25-year term, alternatives to Flood Re would be put in place to
130 Stijn Viaene and Guido Dedene, ‘Insurance Fraud: Issues and
Challenges’ (2004) 29 The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance
313, 313. 131 Florence Crick, Katie Jenkins and Swenja Surminski, ‘Strengthening Insurance Partnerships in the Face of Climate Change – Insights from an Agent-based Model of Flood Insurance in the UK’
(2018) 636 Science of the Total Environment 192. 132 See Crick, Jenkins and Surminski (n 131); Coliin Armistead, Paul
Pettigrew and Sally Aves, ‘Exploring Leadership in Multi-sectoral
Partnerships’ (2007) 3 Leadership 211; Justine Chen, Ted Hsuan
Yun Chen, IIan Vertinsky, Lilia Yumagulova and Chansoo Park,
‘Public-Private Partnerships for the Development of Disaster Resilient Communities’ (2013) 21(3) Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management 130; and Swenja Surminski and Hayley Leck, ‘You
Never Adapt Alone – The Role of Multi-Sectoral Partnerships in Addressing Urban Climate Risks’ (2016) Centre for Climate Change
Economics and Policy Working Paper No. 262. Grantham Research
Institute on Climate Change and the Environment Working Paper
No. 232. London. 133 See Penning-Rowsell (n 123), 603-4. 134 Insurers pay an estimated £10.50 per policy (a highlydiscounted price available through Flood Re) which may be passed
on to policyholders (estimated to be £10.50 per policy (Aviva, ‘Half
Year 2016 Earnings Presentation – Final’ 2016). 135 Per Flood Re ‘Flood Re has been designed to provide temporary support to the insurance market for properties at high
risk of flooding. At the end of 25 years from the date the Water Act 2014 received Royal Assent (May 2014), Flood Re will have
been wound up and the subsidy provided through the scheme
removed.’ Flood Re. (2016) ‘Transitioning to an Affordable Market for Household Flood Insurance: The First Flood Re Transiremove the need for a central government fund (as insurer of
last resort)136 from which reinsurance could be purchased.137
Having briefly described the reinsurance models which we
propose as a solution to an impending threat to the safety and
viability of CAV use in the UK, it is important to examine the
criticisms that exist for such models so they can be addressed
from the outset and considered with the benefit of hindsight
and of having seen the operation of these schemes. Flood Re
is the focus here, for reasons explained above as to the symmetry between floods and hacked CAVs in respect of numbers
of affected parties (first and third-parties) and the ‘disaster’
potential for such events. We also feel this is a useful exercise
given that it would be reasonable to conclude that Flood Re’s
existence has been subject to strong criticism on a number of
bases.
Many ofthe academic and professional commentary in this
respect overlap, but if we begin with Penning-Rowsell,he identifies issues with the creation of Flood Re itself which is predicated on the perceived unfairness of the system as a mechanism for insurance against risk and the problem with reinsurance models. Insurance is purchased by individuals on the basis of perceived risk, who spread this risk across the payment
of premiums over a period of time rather than taking the risk
of suffering substantial losses due to episodic events. However, the nature of Flood Re involves the majority of insureds
paying premiums containing a levy which subsidizes those at
much greater risk and who are more likely to claim on their
insurance policy. This is problematic given that many individuals purchasing insurance will not be aware of the proportion
of their premium being used explicitly for the purpose of covering more ‘at risk’ policyholders. This is a point returned to
later, but it is sufficient at this point to remark that what is
evident from this model is that many individual persons and
businesses, due to their lack of understanding of the existence
and operation of the levy, will have no awareness or incentive to change their behaviour / make alternative provision
to reduce their future risk, in respect of the risk their current
circumstances place them in. It is important to note at this
stage the necessity of such reinsurance schemes to account
for shortcomings in the insurance sector which, save for the
existence of the reinsurance system, would expose too many
individuals to risks for which they are unable to insure against.
It is also important that this includes governmental backing
as, being explained by Green and Penning-Rowsell,138 stateinclusive partnerships are necessary to ensure public acceptance and confidence of such schemes. Yet this too creates
an important issue which requires consideration for future
schemes. The stakeholders (government, insurance industry,
property developers, property owners and so on) are involved
tion Plan’ http://www.floodre. co.uk/wp-content/uploads/FloodRe- Transition-Plan-Feb-2016-FINAL.pdf. 136 Michael Huber, ‘Insurability and Regulatory Reform: Is the English Flood Insurance Regime Able to Adapt to Climate Change’
(2004) 29 The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance 169. 137 Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
(Defra), ‘A Short Guide to Flood Re’ (2014, London: Defra)
https://consult.defra.gov.uk/ flooding/floodreinsurancescheme/
supporting_documents/ A%20short%20guide%20to%20Flood%
20Re.pdf.
138 Green and Penning-Rowsell (n 129).
computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628 15
and affected by the reinsurance arrangement having been established,139 yet several of these have no direct link or involvement in its running and/or strategic decision-making. Further
still, this insurance model cannot be maintained indefinitely
unless the underlying issues which led to its conception are
not addressed, and reinsurance models have been accused of,
potentially, actually working against the partnership’s higher
aims.140
State-backed reinsurance structures are also less able to diversify across different perils and are typically slower to adapt
to different scenarios, thus being seen as less flexible.141 Nor
does a reinsurance pool promote behavioural change or the
establishing of a portfolio of measures to encourage, for instance, risk-reducing behaviour.142 Indeed, for Winter,143 this
can institute instances of moral hazard and even situations
where property holders’ actions might increase the probability and size of their loss.144 Insurance has even been used,
claim some academics,145 as a disaster risk management tool
for the influence of policy-makers and planning authorities.
Studies, such as those just previously noted,146 have reported
that the purchasing of, extending even to merely the ability to purchase, insurance cover can influence the behaviour
of those subject to the risk. This has been witnessed positively147 through the development of preventative measures
139 Summarised as being ‘… not simply a question of engineering;
it is a rather complex area, with political, economic, social and environmental dimensions’. Swenja Surminski and Jillian Eldridge,
‘Flood Insurance in England – An Assessment of the Current and
Newly Proposed Insurance Scheme in the Context of Rising Flood
Risk’ (2017) 10(4) Journal of Flood Risk Management 415, 415. 140 Crick, Jenkins and Surminski (n 163), 194. 141 Penning-Rowsell (n 122), 606. 142 EP Evans, R Ashley, Jim Hall, Edmund C Penning-Rowsell, Paul
Sayers and CA Thorne, ‘Foresight Future Flooding: Scientific Summary. Volume I: Future Risks and Their Drivers’ (2004, Office of Science and Technology, London); and EP Evans, Jim Hall, Edmund C
Penning-Rowsell, A Saul, Paul Sayers, CR Thorne and AR Watkinson, ‘Drivers, Responses and Choices for Future Flood Risk Management’ In: Proceedings of ICE, Water Management 159, March
2006, 53. 143 Ralph Winter, 1992 ‘Moral Hazard and Insurance Contracts’ in
Georges Dionne (ed) Contributions to Insurance Economics (1992,
Huebner International Series on Risk, Insurance and Economic Security, Boston MA). 144 Howard Kunreuther, ‘The Role of Insurance in Managing Extreme Events: Implications for Terrorism Coverage Risk’ (2002) 22
Analysis 427; and Sally J Priest, Michael J Clark and Emma J Treby,
‘Flood Insurance: The Challenge of the Uninsured’ (2005) 37(3)
Area 295. 145 David Crichton, 2008. ‘Towards a Comparison of Public and Private Insurance Responses to Flooding Risks’ (2008) 24 International Journal of Water Resource Development 583; Swenja Surminski, ‘The Role of Insurance in Reducing Direct Risk - The Case
of Flood Insurance’ (2014) 7(3-4) International Review of Environmental and Resource Economics 241; and Swenja Surminski,
Jeroen Aerts, Wouter Botzen, Paul Hudson, Jaroslav Mysiak and
Carlos Perez-Blanco, ‘Reflections on the Current Debate on How to
Link Flood Insurance and Disaster Risk Reduction in the European
Union’ (2015) 79 Natural Hazards 1451. 146 ibid. 147 Although perhaps underutilized, see Jessica Lamond, David
Proverbs and Felix Hammond, ‘Accessibility of Flood Risk Insurance in the UK: Confusion, Competition and Complacency’ (2009)
as a means to reduce risk.148 However, it might also reduce
the government’s incentives to prevent and reduce the cause
of the risks in question given it reduces the governmental intervention needed following a major flooding event.149
Thus,this is not just about individuals managing their own
risk and adopting behaviours to mitigate against the worst effects, it is also about the industry itself preparing for the ending of the partnership. As noted above, when established in
2016, Flood Re was designed to exist for a 25-year period, the
end of which would see the insurance industry provide the
coverage for flood susceptible properties through actuary risk
assessment and management. Yet the current Flood Re partnership is opaque, does not clearly identify risk and reflect
this in the pricing of policies, and thus fails to establish the
forward-planning necessary for the consequences facing all
parties at the end of the partnership. At present, the main
beneficiaries to the Flood Re arrangement are the insurance
companies and their shareholders, along with property owners who would otherwise find themselves paying significant
premiums for cover against the substantial risk from flood
damage. There is seemingly no plan for the ending of the relationship and the transition to affordable, available and riskreflective insurance policy pricing.150 Nor are there specific
mechanisms in place to determine its efficiency, efficacy, fairness and advantages in promoting good behaviour.151
Certainly, some of the most critical points (and a very thorough review) of Flood Re has been provided by Christophers.152
The arguments he presents are particularly relevant considerations when seeking to prevent similar ‘problems’ being encountered with the creation of a ‘new’ reinsurance fund to
accommodate mass hacked CAVs. First, where a reinsurance
fund is created for a fixed time period (say 25 years – akin to
Flood Re), it should not be simply expected that the market will
naturally metamorphosize and develop a risk-based approach
which will be ready to take over the service offered through
the previously administered insurance guarantee fund. Such
12 Journal of Risk Research, 825; and Swenja Surminski and Paul
Hudson, ‘Investigating the Risk Reduction Potential of Disaster Insurance Across Europe’ (2016) 42 Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance - Issues and Practice 247. 148 Wouter Botzen and Jeroen van den Bergh, ‘Managing Natural Disaster Risks in a Changing Climate’ (2009) 8 Environmental Hazard 209; Howard Kunreuther and Erwann Michel-Kerjan,
2009. ‘Managing Catastrophes Through Insurance: Challenges and
Opportunities for Reducing Future Risks’ Working Paper 2009-
11-30. The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia; and Emma Treby, Michael Clark and Sally Priest, ‘Confronting
Flood Risk: Implications for Insurance and Risk Transfer’ (2006) 81
Journal of Environmental Management 351. 149 Huber (n 136). 150 Johanna Hjalmarsson and James Davey, ‘Flagship Plan to
Rescue Flood-hit Home Owners Already Looks Out of Its
Depth’ (2016) The Conversation http://theconversation.com/
flagship-plan-to-rescue-flood-hit-home-owners-already-looksout-of-its-depth-52791.
151 This being left to commentators – see, for instance, PenningRowsell (n 153), 601. 152 Brett Christophers, ‘The Allusive Market: Insurance of Flood
Risk in Neoliberal Britain’ (2019) 48(1) Economy and Society, 1.
16 computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628
a presumption153 that a market will automatically follow from
the reinsurance fund ‘… is merely symbolic, figurative. Alluded to rather than actively delineated… in sum, allusive.’154
Perhaps most damning is his contention that ‘insisting that
a market for flood insurance is possible, and alluding to its
future crystallization, serves to obviate the need for pursuing
in the here-and-now sustainable, non-transitory, non-marketbased approaches to flood risk management.’155 This criticism may be harsh, even too harsh, and there are distinctions
we can draw between Flood Re and a fund for mass hacked
CAVs, but it is a point worth noting and considering. There
is strong evidence of active and substantial work to (cyber)
secure vehicles, not just on a national level but internationally too. Further, these cybersecurity requirements (as noted
above) have also found their way into legislative instruments
and are being ‘baked into’ CAV software development. This
does not negate the argument for a central guarantee fund
being present, rather it seeks to explain how the government
in the UK is not obviating its role in seeking to prevent cyber
breaches, and is perhaps being more assertive in cybersecurity
for the introduction of CAVs than it might have been to manage regional flood defence systems and tackle the much more
significant issue and effects of climate change. A reinsurance
arrangement for the protection of all parties in the burgeoning CAV market would benefit the market itself and allow it
space to develop and understand the intricacies of changes to
vehicle use and the interactions between software, hardware
and end-user experience, with the wealth of data being generated which could be harnessed for actuary risk assessment
(as with Tesla’s tentative move into the insurance sector)156
until that market is ready to take over insurance cover.
This will mitigate against the argument levelled against
Flood Re by many academics and commentators that key actors are unlikely to be incentivised to change their behaviour
in respect of risks and the insurance landscape will remain
static and not seek to assess risk more accurately to accommodate the transition away from reinsurance systems. The
disconnect between the risk (here of flooding) and the management of insurance costs and claims outside of Flood Re, as
noted by Christophers,157 is less likely with a CAV reinsurance
model. A major criticism of Flood Re is that data is shared between the state and the insurers in the industry, and its existence and the temporality of this existence, was not shared
more broadly to individuals within the market. These can be
avoided with the sharing of information, and informing users
who can be proactive in managing their own risk over the, say
25 years, of the life of the CAV reinsurance scheme. This might
include their choosing manufacturers with good cybersecurity
systems, understanding the need for CAV software support
153 What Butler has referred to as ‘market presumption.’ Judith
Butler, ‘Performative Agency’ (2010) 3(2) Journal of Cultural Economy, 147. 154 Christophers (n 153), 2-3. 155 Christophers, (n 153), 4. 156 Alex Zarifis, ‘Why is Tesla Selling Insurance and What does
it Mean for Drivers?’ (31 January 2020) The Conversation https://
theconversation.com/why-is-tesla-selling-insurance-and-whatdoes-it-mean-for-drivers-130910. 157 Christophers (n 152), 19.
and considering the regularity of such safety updates,the reliability of on-board internet connectivity, understanding how
their data could be used to determine risk (given the previous models for car insurance will be largely redundant with
vehicles which drive without human interaction) and so on.
This information sharing had been requested by Lord Krebs in
2014 in respect of Flood Re,
158 but ultimately it was restricted
between the state and the insurers (perhaps a mistake, albeit
one which is not incapable of being rectified).
The above criticisms, albeit applied to Flood Re, are not,
ultimately, faults of its creation but rather of the system established by the government. The remit of Flood Re to facilitate a transition to a market-led structure of cover was ultimately hamstrung,for, as observed by Bek,159 ‘The fundamental tools to create an environment for risk reflective pricing lie
with the government and not with Flood Re.’160 This point was
also made by Christophers when he notes the ‘… fundamental mismatch between Flood Re’s powers on the one hand and
its responsibilities on the other. The government has simply
not given Flood Re the tools it would need to have any chance
of getting the long-term job done.’161 Indeed, such criticism is
not restricted to the academic community. In the Commons,
Barry Gardiner considered that the government had not issued Flood Re with responsibilities, instead it had abdicated
its responsibility.162
When accepting the criticism levied at the Flood Re partnership, there are notable successes and differences between
a reinsurance fund for flood risk areas, and the external factors, climate change not least of these, which exist which
would be less likely to affect mass-hacked CAVs. For example, the potential deficiencies raised by Christophers,163 Crick,
Jenkins and Surminski,164 Green and Penning-Rowsell,165 Surminski166 and others noted in our critique, of failures to incentivise flood risk management and risk reduction efforts
(through the subsidizing of premiums), of reducing the economic inefficiency of the Flood Re model, and so on, would
likely to be less applicable to CAV manufacturers given their
control of the environment in which these vehicles are manufactured and operate, and because of the control over the extent to which such extreme failures can spread between connected vehicles. In respect of Flood Re, it lacks a scheme for
building capacity for risk reduction; has no compulsory system of risk reduction; and has limited commitment from government to do more in reducing flood risks.167 The govern158 HL Deb 11 February 2014, c586. 159 Mateusz Bek, ‘Flood Re: Together, Though not all and not Forever’ (2015) In Johanna Hjalmarsson (ed) Future Directions of
Consumer Flood Insurance in the UK: Reflections upon the Creation of Flood Re https:// eprints.soton.ac.uk/380346/1/58175_ Report_v4_WEB.pdf.
160 Bek (n 159), 38. 161 Christophers (n 153), 22. 162 HC 27 October 2015, c7. 163 Christophers (n 152). 164 Crick, Jenkins and Surminski (n 163), 165 Green and Penning-Rowsell (n 129). 166 Swenja Surminski, ‘Fit for Purpose and Fit for the Future? An
Evaluation of the UK’s New Flood Reinsurance Pool’ (2018) 21(1)
Risk Management and Insurance Review 33. 167 Surminski (n 166), 53.
computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628 17
ment is committed to being a leading player in the design,
development and deployment of CAVs and therefore its various layers of governance appear to possess a cohesive aim in
shaping insurance (through compulsory cover, providing an
enabling infrastructure, through adherence to international
codes and risk reducing schemas and so on) to make viable
CAV use in the UK. Consequently, while similar broad arguments as above might have been levied against the stakeholders in the event of mass hacked CAVs, the CAV reinsurance scheme, insurers and the government would be able to
liaise with manufacturers to manage the risk factors whilst
Flood Re has little direct communication or influence to facilitate change with policyholders. Flood victims also need various stakeholder engagement (banks, local authorities, developers, architects and so on) for risk reduction which would not
apply in the context of CAVs. The transparency of premiums
needs to be managed so, whilst they may be approximately
similar across all CAV users, risk management must be a feature which enables an effective transition to when the government / insurance industry partnership against mass hacking
comes to an end. Part of this transition will require insurers
to, compulsorily, identify and reduce premiums where safety
systems are in place which actively reduce risk, irrespective of
the additional costs involved when investigating the risk circumstances of potential customers / car and software manufacturers. The powers provided to the Secretary of State for
granting the status of CAVs in the AEVA 2018 will also allow it
to manage certain data regarding accidents, software updates,
safety records and so on. These data will address much of the
information vacuum present in the Flood Re arrangement.
Ultimately, the model devised for Flood Re, whilst flawed,
does appear to work and benefits stakeholders in respect of
the overarching aims of its creation. As evidenced by Dubbelboer et al.168 through their analysis and modelling, Flood Re
has been shown to reduce premiums to accessible levels (halving the expected costs in premiums over a 30-year period),
whilst also changing developer practices of building on land
susceptible to surface water flooding to reduce risk and suggesting that the Flood Re model ‘… is capturing the main function of the scheme correctly.’169 Similar sentiments are offered
by Priest et al., who acknowledge the insurance protection offered through Flood Re’s creation, and continue that this alliance makes it probable that the partners would aim to reduce future vulnerabilities and the likelihood of it having to,
once again, provide financial assistance to the market.170
Thus, an alternative solution would be for the government
to take on much more of the risk, and fund perhaps a majority of the cost from mass-hacks. This could be through not requiring any government assistance to be paid back or simply
for the government to provide compensation through a separate fund. This solution therefore is essentially one of public v
private (or a mixture of both) i.e. whether the consumer (and
other insureds due to the loss spreading nature of insurance)
168 Jan Dubbelboer, Igor Nikolic, Katie Jenkins and Jim Hall, ‘An
Agent-Based Model of Flood Risk and Insurance’ (2017) 20(1) Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 6. 169 Para 4.5. 170 Sally J Priest, Michael J Clark and Emma J Treby, ‘Flood Insurance: The Challenge of the Uninsured’ (2005) 37(3) Area 295, 300.
or the taxpayer should have the ultimate burden of compensating. Whilst insurance is a loss spreading device,171 spreading the cost of mass hacking through taxpayers would spread
this much further and potentially to a wider pool of people.
Of course, in the most catastrophic of instances of damage,
government resources could be severely strained.172 It is likely
that given the uncertainties above, and the differences in compensation for damage through terrorism activities (relatively
small) compared with those involving the use of CAVs (injuries
involving motor vehicles being, comparatively at least, quite
commonplace), a governmental-backed guarantee fund may
be the more effective, known and easily-implemented model,
at least at the outset. Following an evaluation of CAV roll-out,
risk trends and loss events, the model could be subject to reevaluation and a fitness for purpose test.
8. Conclusion
CAVs have the potential to fundamentally affect public and
private forms of travel. The change that level 5 SAE vehicles
will bring will be unlike anything witnessed on public roads
before and has the potential to benefit and provide mobility
access to a range of stakeholders. The connected nature of the
vehicles is their strength and their weakness. The rolling out
of 5 G networks will ensure that the real-time information and
data sharing necessarily underpinning CAV infrastructure will
facilitate the communications and AI for their operationalisation. Software updates will be an essential component of
their deployment and use, these will happen over-the-air and
with regularity, and this will enable those with malicious intent to hack the software, with potentially catastrophic consequences. Without appropriate insurance systems, CAVs could
pose too great a danger to road users if the vehicles suffered
serious software defects or, as we focus on in this paper, were
subject to malicious hacking. We have outlined the currently
available liability systems to facilitate CAVs’ introduction onto
public roads and outlined their deficiencies or inapplicability
to vehicles which operate without a driver in control. There
exist two main methods to ensure third-party victims of accidents involving these vehicles have access to minimum standards of compensation and redress. The first noted operates
through a public guarantee fund. This, following a presently
established model operated in a series of agreements between
the state and the MIB, would protect the public and users of
CAV, remove a potentially onerous burden on manufacturers
and the insurance industry, and would enable the deployment
and advancement of CAVs in the UK. The second method is
more ‘private’ in nature where the government and the insurance industry operate a scheme similar to those in Pool Re and
Flood Re. Whichever model is chosen, and given that the UK
was the first state to introduce (prospective) legislation to regulate the insurance of CAVs, it would be fitting for the UK to
171 See Rob Merkin and Jenny Steel, Insurance and the Law of Obligations (2015 Oxford University Press) which analyses in detail the
role of insurance in loss spreading. 172 Anne Gron and Alan Sykes, ‘Terrorism and Insurance Markets:
A Role for the Government as Insurer?’ (2003) 36 Indiana Law Review 447.
18 computer law & security review 43 (2021) 105628
lead the way in establishing a guarantee fund to provide the
certainty to all parties on the placement and use of CAVs, and
thereby facilitating the advancement of the CAV industry.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.