Technological Forecasting & Social Change 172 (2021) 121039
Available online 28 July 2021
0040-1625/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Social media users’ online subjective well-being and fatigue: A network
heterogeneity perspective
Puneet Kaur a,f
, Nazrul Islam b
, Anushree Tandon c
, Amandeep Dhir d,e,f,*
a Department of Psychosocial Science, University of Bergen, Norway b Department of Science, Innovation, Technology and Entrepreneurship, University of Exeter Business School, England, UK c Turku School of Economics, University of Turku, Finland d Department of Management, School of Business & Law, University of Agder, Norway e The Norwegian School of Hotel Management, University of Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway f Optentia Research Focus Area, North-West University, Vanderbijlpark, South Africa
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Online subjective well-being
Social media fatigue
Social comparison
Privacy concerns
Network heterogeneity
Limited-capacity model
ABSTRACT
Scholars have drawn increasing attention to the implications of the dark side of social media for users’ online
subjective well-being (OSWB). We develop a research framework based on the limited-capacity model to
examine the relationship between OSWB and social media fatigue. Moreover, we explore the associations between specific aspects related to network heterogeneity and social media fatigue for social media users in the
United States of America (USA). Further, we examine the mediating effect of network heterogeneity on the
association between OSWB and social media fatigue. We utilised a cross-sectional research design to collect data
from Prolific Academic (N = 320) and analysed the data through structural equation modelling. The results
indicate that OSWB is positively correlated with the network heterogeneity aspect of self-disclosure and negatively correlated with social comparison. OSWB, moreover, is negatively correlated with fatigue, while privacy
concerns and self-disclosure are positively correlated with fatigue. Further, of the network heterogeneity aspects
we considered, only social comparison is a partial mediator for the relationship between OSWB and social media
fatigue. The findings provide insights into the pathways through which social media users’ OSWB and network
heterogeneity can induce social media fatigue, raising critical implications for theory and practice.
1. Introduction
Social media use entails dual implications for individuals. On the one
hand, social media platforms have helped people widen their social relationships, improve their self-esteem and life satisfaction and enjoy
ample opportunities for self-presentation (Malik et al., 2020; Talwar
et al., 2019). On the other hand, existing research has extensively discussed the negative consequences of social media usage for individuals’
well-being—for instance, the potential for being cyber stalked (Kaur
et al., 2020), the fear of missing out (FoMO; Tandon et al., 2021a), sleep
problems induced by social media use (Kaur et al., 2021; Dhir et al.,
2021) and social media use induced negative emotions, such as jealousy
(Tandon et al., 2021b) anxiety, depression (Tandon et al., 2020c; Swain
and Pati, 2019) and even fatigue (Malik et al., 2020; Dhir et al., 2019,
2018). Users’ online subjective well-being (OSWB) is among the issues
to which researchers have devoted increasing attention (Chang and
Hsu, 2016; Huang, 2016; Diener et al., 2015). Scholars have studied
OSWB extensively in real-life (i.e. offline) contexts as the user’s evaluation of his or her life as a whole, based on criteria determined by the
user him or herself (Fan et al., 2019; Diener et al., 2015). OSWB refers to
a broad spectrum of feelings and emotions, such as satisfaction, happiness and negative and positive affect, experienced by individuals using
the Internet and social media platforms (Fan et al., 2019; Verduyn et al.,
2017). In essence, OSWB may be understood as individuals’ happiness,
perceived social support and satisfaction with their digital or social
media lives (Huang, 2016).
Scholars argue that OSWB plays a crucial role in determining the
success of any online platform, including social media (Chang and Hsu,
2016). This may be attributed to the fact that social media platforms
facilitate users’ engagement in heterogeneous interactions and communications, also referred to as network heterogeneity (Kim and Kim,
2017), which produces benefits, such as increasing satisfaction with
* Corresponding author at: Department of Management, School of Business & Law, University of Agder, Norway
E-mail address: amandeep.dhir@uia.no (A. Dhir).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Technological Forecasting & Social Change
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/techfore
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2021.121039
Received 14 February 2021; Received in revised form 13 July 2021; Accepted 15 July 2021 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 172 (2021) 121039
2
social media communication (Munzel et al., 2018) and bridging and
building social capital (e.g. Roberts and David, 2020). Notably, multiple
studies have examined OSWB as a consequence of social media use (e.g.,
Wang et al., 2017) in terms of positive aspects, such as social capital (e.
g., Roberts and David, 2020; Chang and Hsu, 2016), self-disclosure (e.g.
Huang, 2016) and satisfaction with life (e.g. Chiu et al., 2013), as well as
negative aspects, such as problematic Internet use (e.g. Mei et al., 2016).
In comparison, scholars have rarely investigated the role of OSWB as an
antecedent of network heterogeneity and negative aspects of social
media use, i.e. the dark side of social media.
The past decade has produced increasing studies aimed at understanding the dark side of social media, which refers to the phenomena
associated with social media use that adversely influence users’ wellbeing, including social media fatigue (Dhir et al., 2019; Malik et al.,
2020) and FoMO (Tandon et al., 2020). For instance, Appel et al. (2020),
in a meta-analytic review, found a small yet significantly negative association between social media use and various aspects of well-being,
such as life satisfaction, loneliness and depression. In another study,
James et al. (2017) discussed both the positive (bright side) and negative
(dark side) aspects of digital media use for teenagers’ well-being. The
authors also called for more research to clarify the nuanced associations
among individual, technological and situational factors that produce
positive versus negative outcomes. Subsequently, we argue that it would
be beneficial to understand how OSWB affects users’ network heterogeneity and translates into negative consequences. We contend that
examining these relationships is especially important in the context of
the COVID-19 lockdown, which has caused many individuals to turn
towards social media as a primary channel of communication that enables them to maintain social connectedness.
We expect the OSWB of social media users to be associated with
individual differences in the network heterogeneity in which they
engage. In particular, we focus on three such aspects related to the dark
side of social media: (a) concerns about the privacy of shared information (or privacy concerns), (b) users’ inclinations towards social comparison and (c) self-disclosure. In short, privacy concerns relate to users’
apprehensions about their perceived control over the use of and potential misuse of the information they share on social media (Dhir et al.,
2019), whereas self-disclosure is the act of sharing information on social
media to seek relatedness. Moreover, social media users may engage in
social comparison to seek information about others and thereby improve
themselves or their self-perceptions. We posit that individuals’ OSWB
and engagement with these three aspects correlate with their experienced social media fatigue (or fatigue), representing the social, information or communication overloads resulting from excessive social
media use. The literature has shown that these individual-level aspects
of social media use, i.e. privacy concerns, social comparison and
self-disclosure, are associated with problematic social media use and,
subsequently, fatigue (e.g. Dhir et al., 2018, 2019). However, specific
gaps appear in our existing knowledge about these associations.
In particular, we delineate three critical gaps in the current literature
on OSWB. First, we have limited knowledge of whether OSWB, which
was initially considered a positive motivation for using social media, can
spiral towards the darker side of social media use due to individual
differences in network heterogeneity. Second, to the best of our
knowledge, little prior research has examined the relationship between
OSWB and the dark side of social media. Social media provides its users
with various gratifications, including opportunities for information
sharing and self-expression (Talwar et al., 2019). In turn, these gratifications may be related to OSWB, i.e. the satisfaction individuals derive
from their social media lives by building a positive self-image, social
connectedness, etc. Therefore, it is natural to assume that OSWB is one
of the key reasons for social media use. Whether it leads to a downward
spiral culminating in users’ experience of the dark side of social media,
however, remains a pertinent yet underexplored question. Third, the
literature suggests that individuals’ experiences with the dark side of
social media are influenced by intervening variables (e.g. Keles et al.,
2020; Chai et al., 2019), such as self-disclosure and social comparison,
which may be related to the nature of the activities or interactions in
which they engage on these platforms, i.e. network heterogeneity.
However, little research has studied the role of network heterogeneity as
an intervening variable for OSWB or its association with aspects of the
dark side of social media, such as fatigue.
To address these gaps, we raise and answer the following two
research questions: (a) What are the associations among OSWB, privacy
concerns, self-disclosure, social comparison and social media fatigue?
(b) Do privacy concerns, social comparison and self-disclosure exert an
intervening (mediating) effect on the association between OSWB and
social media fatigue? We utilise the theoretical lens of the limitedcapacity model (LCM; Lang, 2000) to understand how OSWB and individual differences in network heterogeneity-related aspects of privacy
concerns, social comparison and self-disclosure may lead to the adverse
outcome of fatigue. Using the theoretical lens of LCM, we also examine
how these network heterogeneity aspects mediate the association between OSWB and fatigue. We test the hypothesised associations by
analysing data on social media users based in the United States of
America (USA) collected through Prolific Academic.
Our study presents three contributions to the existing literature.
First, we study OSWB, which has been a lesser investigated construct in
social media research. Given that social media has become immensely
popular among people from varied demographic, geographic and cultural contexts (Dhir et al., 2021), examining the implications of its use
for individual well-being is imperative, especially in light of the
COVID-19 pandemic and its consequent lockdown. Second, we examine
a hitherto unexplored aspect of the relationship between positive and
negative aspects of social media use by proposing OSWB as an antecedent of individual differences in network heterogeneity (i.e. privacy
concerns, self-disclosure and social comparison) and fatigue. This is an
essential contribution because existing research has linked OSWB
(Chang andHsu, 2016) and fatigue (Malik et al., 2020; Dhir et al., 2019,
2018) to individuals’ usage and continuance intentions for social media
platforms. Our study offers information on how social media service
providers can enhance existing and prospective social media users’
OSWB and circumvent their experience of fatigue. Third, we study the
mediating role of individual differences in network heterogeneity for the
association between OSWB and fatigue, elucidating a pathway through
which social media use for a positive purpose (i.e. OSWB) can lead to a
negative outcome (i.e. fatigue). Increasing debate surrounds the dark
side of social media use (e.g. Talwar et al., 2019), which threatens users’
OSWB (e.g. Dhir et al., 2018). As such, insights about OSWB’s correlations with the dark side of social media are immensely valuable to
practitioners (e.g. educators and psychologists) who work with individuals experiencing indicators of diminished well-being and fatigue
due to social media use.
The remainder of the article is structured as follows. Section Two
outlines the theoretical grounding of our study and the arguments for
the hypothesised associations. Section Three explains the methodological approach of our research, and Section Four presents the results of
the data analysis. We discuss the findings in Section Five, while the
concluding remarks, implications and limitations of our study, along
with the scope for future research, appear in Section Six.
2. Theory and hypotheses development
2.1. Limited-capacity model (LCM)
We employ LCM to develop the research framework of our study. A
widely accepted theory, LCM makes two broad assumptions applicable
in the present context (Lang, 2000): (a) social media users are information processors and (b) social media users possess limited cognitive
capacity and mental resources (i.e. recognition memory, agility to
allocate, respond or even react) to process new information, such as
media content. Based on these assumptions, scholars argue that LCM is a
P. Kaur et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 172 (2021) 121039
3
suitable theoretical framework for explaining fatigue (Dhir et al., 2018,
2019), communication (Koltay, 2017) and social overload (Whelan
et al., 2020; Maier et al., 2015). According to Bright et al. (2015), social
media users process information in three steps: (a) receiving a stimulus
(e.g. exposure to online content), (b) analysing or encoding the information and (c) storing the information cognitively for retrieval at a later
time. However, the cycle of encoding, storage and retrieval is only
possible if the user has sufficient cognitive space available for processing
the information or content.
We utilise LCM as a basis for understanding how a positive motivation, such as OSWB, can translate into a negative aspect, such as fatigue,
from two perspectives. First, we use LCM to elucidate the association
among OSWB, aspects of network heterogeneity (privacy concerns, social comparison and self-disclosure) and fatigue. We posit that the
intrinsic desire to tap sources of well-being causes individuals to seek
relatedness via social media. Upon experiencing enhanced well-being,
social media users are initially motivated by perceived gratifications,
including improving their self-esteem or comparing themselves with
others. In pursuing such motives, which have been discussed extensively
in the extant research (e.g. Luo and Hancock, 2020), these individuals
may seek validation through excessive use of social media platforms,
which would then be associated with greater privacy concerns, social
comparison and self-disclosure.
Second, the propositions of LCM can also explain the association
between network heterogeneity and fatigue. We argue that the incessant
information and communication individuals receive due to the network
heterogeneity aspects of social media use can lead to overload and thus a
reduction in users’ cognitive capacity to process information (e.g. Dhir
et al., 2018, 2019). We expect OSWB to be associated with higher aspects of network heterogeneity, wherein each aspect contributes
uniquely to perceived overloads, both as antecedents and intervening
(mediating) variables. We argue that greater self-disclosure and social
comparison causes social media users to increase their content sharing
activities and review of others’ shared content, leading to information
and communication overload. Increased use of social media platforms
can also increase users’ concerns about the security and possible misuse
of their personal information available online (e.g. Dhir et al., 2019),
which may cause them to continually track their social media accounts
to alleviate these concerns and, once again, result in information overload. Based on LCM, we suggest that such overloads reduce users’ ability
to allocate sufficient cognitive resources to process the information
generated due to network heterogeneity aspects (i.e. messages and
content) and thus cause fatigue.
Based on the tenets of LCM, we propose that OSWB is associated with
the network heterogeneity aspects of privacy concerns, self-disclosure
and social comparison as well as with fatigue (Fig. 1). Drawing from
LCM and the existing research on the dark side of social media, we
examine whether, in addition to influencing fatigue directly, these
network heterogeneity aspects mediate the association of OSWB with
fatigue. Thus, we study how these aspects of network heterogeneity
interact with OSWB and fatigue as building blocks of the adverse consequences social media users experience.
2.2. Privacy concerns and fatigue
Although few studies have examined the correlates of fatigue (e.g.
Dhir et al., 2019), scholars have found that social media users’ privacy
concerns share a significant relationship with this outcome (e.g. Fan
et al., 2020; Zhu and Bao, 2018). For instance, Lee et al. (2019) suggested that users of social media platforms, such as Facebook, can
exhibit concerns about the impact of their disclosed information on their
reputation among digital social groups, which can also induce fatigue.
Dhir et al. (2019) determined further that privacy concerns positively
influence fatigue, not just on social media but also in mobile messaging
apps. Moreover, Lee and Hsieh (2013) observed that privacy concerns
are an integral component of fatigue, and they included privacy in their
fatigue measurement scale accordingly. Conversely, Malik et al. (2020)
found that privacy concerns did not influence fatigue for individuals
using mobile messaging apps, such as WhatsApp (a mobile-based social
media app). Prior findings on the influence of privacy concerns for fatigue thus exhibit some contradictions. However, Dhir et al. (2019)
suggested that fatigue results from social media users’ occupation with
Fig. 1. Hypothesised research framework.
P. Kaur et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 172 (2021) 121039
4
multiple concerns that consume their limited cognitive capacities.
Drawing from LCM, we concur with Dhir et al. (2019) and posit that
users’ limited cognitive space and information-processing ability may be
burdened due to increased concerns or anxiety about the privacy of their
shared content as well as personal information on social media, which
might translate into fatigue. Hence, we hypothesise as follows:
H1. Privacy concerns positively correlate with fatigue.
2.3. Online subjective well-being and privacy concerns
While multiple studies relate privacy concerns with the activity
levels of users on social media platforms (Malik et al., 2020; Dhir et al.,
2019), minimal research examines the direct association of privacy
concerns and OSWB. For example, Ye and Ho (2019) determined that
young Internet users’ privacy concerns influenced their privacy protection behaviours, which in turn, along with the time spent on the
Internet, negatively impacted their subjective well-being. Dhir et al.
(2019) discussed the active debate surrounding privacy concerns in the
context of social media use, especially because social media platforms
are designed to induce users to create and share content actively. On the
one hand, such active content generation and sharing can produce
positive benefits, such as building social capital and fulfilling individuals’ needs for belongingness or relatedness (e.g. Bano et al.,
2019). On the other hand, scholars also assert that increased engagement with online media can also lead users to experience privacy concerns due to increasing data breaches (Choi et al., 2018) and specific
affordances of social media platforms (Choi and Sung, 2018). For
instance, Piwek and Joinson (2016) found that some users preferred
Snapchat due to their perceived satisfaction with its affordances for
preserving the privacy of shared content, notifying users of content
duplication (e.g. notices of a screenshot being captured) and allowing
persistence content.
Further, existing research has also explored—albeit in a limited
manner—the influence of emotions and feelings concerning social
media and other new media platforms on users’ privacy concerns and
resultant behaviour (e.g. Choi et al., 2018; Cho et al., 2020). For
example, Li et al. (2017) found that cognitive appraisals and emotions
towards an online website predominantly determined users’ online
privacy behaviours. In another study, Choi et al. (2018) reported that
emotional exhaustion and cynicism related to privacy (which the authors termed ‘privacy fatigue’) positively predicted users’ intention to
disclose personal information on and disengage from online platforms.
Users’ satisfaction with their social media platforms’ affordances and
the positive emotions (e.g. perceived security) associated with their use
of these platforms may be related to the level of their experienced privacy concerns. To the best of our knowledge, however, no evidence
exists for the influence of OSWB on users’ privacy concerns. Moreover,
most existing studies exploring the role of privacy concerns for social
media use behaviour and associated experiences, including OSWB, have
utilised cross-sectional surveys (e.g. Malik et al., 2020; Dhir et al., 2019).
Such surveys do not allow us to determine the causality and directionality of the association between privacy concern and OSWB. However,
extrapolating from the findings mentioned above, we argue that users
driven by greater OSWB (e.g. satisfaction with their online lives, emotions and social media platform affordances) to actively use social media
and participate in network heterogeneity also have greater concerns for
the privacy of their shared content. Thus, we contend that when a social
media user decides to share content to derive OSWB-related benefits,
they are concurrently concerned about preserving OSWB by ensuring
the privacy of their shared content. Thus, we hypothesise the following:
H2. OSWB positively correlates with privacy concerns.
2.4. Social comparison and fatigue
Social comparison can be understood as the natural tendency of users
to compare themselves to others if they are unable to formulate opinions
of their own abilities (Talwar et al., 2019; Festinger, 1954). Social
comparison usually aims towards self-improvement and enhancing
one’s own perceptions, for example, in terms of self-esteem and
impression management (Talwar et al., 2019). In the absence of a specific reference point for comparison, however, individuals are inclined
to compare themselves to those they consider superior, especially on
social media (Festinger, 1954). This social comparison can engender
negative emotions, such as envy (Malik et al., 2020; Talwar et al., 2019).
Moreover, we argue that social media users who are inclined to engage
in comparisons with others will continuously review others’ shared
content to obtain information, or references for comparison, causing
information overload (Malik et al., 2020; Dhir et al., 2019). We posit
that this information overload and the negative emotions experienced
accordingly can burden a social media user’s cognitive capacity, as
suggested by LCM, thereby resulting in fatigue. Recent studies have
determined a significant positive association between social comparison
and fatigue (Malik et al., 2020; Dhir et al., 2019). For instance, Malik
et al. (2020) suggested that the association between social comparison
and fatigue may be attributed to users’ continual efforts to craft
impressive content that enhances their social image. We further argue
that such fatigue may be attributed to the negative feelings users
experience due to these comparisons, which can lessen users’ desire and
motivation to use social media. Thus, based on the prior literature and
consistent with LCM, we contend that the negative feelings and information overload users experience by engaging in social comparisons
limit their cognitive ability or capacity to process social media information and thus induce fatigue. Therefore, we propose the following
hypothesis:
H3. Social comparison positively correlates with fatigue.
2.5. Online subjective well-being and social comparison
The extant literature reports that social comparison correlates with
subjective well-being (SWB, Park and Baek, 2018; Verduyn et al., 2017),
but consensus is lacking about whether their relationship is positive or
negative. For example, Malik et al. (2020) asserted that individuals’
inclination to engage in comparison is contingent on the positive experiences others share on social media. Conversely, studies have also
suggested that social comparison can produce adverse effects for SWB by
evoking envy (e.g. Latif et al., 2020). For instance, Gerson et al. (2016)
found that SWB was negatively associated with social comparison.
Verduyn et al. (2020) also suggested that social media users’ tendency to
participate in social comparison may negatively affect them by causing
them to experience negative feelings. The authors further posited a
detrimental cyclical relationship between SWB and social comparison
(Verduyn et al., 2020). Prior research linking social comparison with
various facets of SWB supports this supposition. For instance, Park and
Baek (2018) determined that individuals’ social comparison orientation
is associated with general life satisfaction via the emotions created due
to social comparison.
However, prior research examining the association between social
comparison and SWB has been primarily cross-sectional and correlational, limiting researchers’ derivation of causal inferences. Thus, an
opposite relationship may also exist wherein social media users’ belief
about having an ideal digital life (i.e. their OSWB) causes them to
disengage from social comparison. For example, Jang et al. (2016) found
a negative relationship between social comparison and mental health,
which they attributed to the idea that the content others share on social
media platforms is less likely to detrimentally affect an individual with
higher self-esteem.
While, to the best of our knowledge, no prior study examines our
proposed directionality of association, we contend that individuals with
greater OSWB may exhibit a reduced proclivity for social comparison
due to their resilient belief in having a high satisfaction with their social
media lives. Our supposition is based on prior research that suggests
negative emotions may be linked to an increased proclivity towards
P. Kaur et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 172 (2021) 121039
5
engaging in social comparison (e.g. Gerson et al., 2016; Latif et al., 2020;
Verduyn et al., 2020). Extrapolating from previous studies and
addressing the lack of knowledge about the directionality of the association due to prior correlational research, we posit that individuals with
greater OSWB may exhibit positive emotions and personal traits (e.g.
high satisfaction and self-esteem; e.g. Jang et al., 2018) that drive their
social media use. We anticipate that such individuals will possess greater
resilience towards affirming their OSWB through comparison with
others on social media platforms. Thus, we propose the following
hypothesis:
H4. OSWB negatively correlates with social comparison.
2.6. Self-disclosure and fatigue
The existing literature suggests that self-disclosure on social media
can expose users to multiple adverse outcomes, such as online harassment, trolling and cyber-bullying (Krasnova et al., 2009). According to
Talwar et al. (2019), self-disclosure may even result in individuals’
inclination to share misinformation and fake news. Scholars have suggested that such adverse incidences may translate into stress, anxiety
and fatigue among social media users (Malik et al., 2020; Dhir et al.,
2019; Rains et al., 2016). However, we contend that self-disclosure may
cause fatigue for another reason as well. Because the information or
content social media users disclose attracts attention from online friends
and generates a high amount of social media communications, for
example, through notifications about likes and comments on their posted content, we expect social media users’ efforts to keep up with and
respond to such notifications to burden their cognitive capacity and
cause fatigue.
The findings of recent studies examining fatigue as a correlate of selfdisclosure support our supposition. For instance, Malik et al. (2020)
found that self-disclosure predicted fatigue for users of mobile
messaging apps, and they attributed this outcome to users’ concerns
about revealing sensitive information on social media. Consistent with
LCM, Dhir et al. (2019) also suggested that self-disclosure on social
media and mobile messaging apps has a limiting effect on users’
cognitive space, which contributes to fatigue. Thus, we hypothesise the
following:
H5. Self-disclosure positively correlates with fatigue.
2.7. Online subjective well-being and self-disclosure
Scholars have posited that multiple gratifications can be derived
through self-disclosure on social media, including building friendships
and intimate relationships, engaging in self-expression and developing
one’s own identity (Kramer ¨ and Schawel, ¨ 2020). Luo and Hancock
(2020) also observed that self-disclosure allows users to perceivably
gain increased social connectedness, support and capital. However,
conspicuously few studies have examined the relationship between
OSWB and self-disclosure, and those that have present inconsistent information on the association between the two. For example, Huang
(2016) found a positive association between well-being and
self-disclosure, while Kim et al. (2014) observed a negative one. A
possible reason for these inconsistent results may be differences in the
target population, such as the age groups studied. For example, Huang’s
(2016) work was based on young adults (below 30 years old), while Kim
et al. (2014) focused on a population between 30 and 40 years of age. It
is possible that individuals belonging to different age groups may, in
fact, have different perspectives regarding the long-term risks associated
with social media use (Tandon et al., 2020), such as self-disclosure. For
instance, Richey et al. (2018) found that participants were wary that
social media could be a form of surveillance for their professional colleagues or seniors, and they were, therefore, more cautious about their
posts. Contrarily, Throuvala et al. (2019) observed that self-disclosure
practices were prevalent among adolescents, who utilised these practices to identify common interests among their virtual groups and
responded to them as an incentive for social media use. Moreover, Dhir
(2016) suggested that self-disclosure practices are essential for adolescent social media users because such practices are linked to their
developmental goals.
While we could not find existing evidence for the influence of OSWB
on self-disclosure, we argue that if social media users have high OSWB,
experience positive emotions and are happy with their social media
lives, they will be more likely to engage in self-disclosure on social
media platforms. Our supposition is based on prior findings that suggest
that an individual’s psychological state influences self-disclosure. For
instance, Jeong et al. (2019) noted a dearth of studies examining how an
individual’s state of mind influences his or her social media activities.
However, they also suggested that individuals with an uncomfortable
psychological state arising from exposure to differing opinions on social
media may choose to selectively disclose or limit themselves on these
platforms. Cheung et al. (2015) determined that perceived benefits,
including enjoyment and relationship building, are strong predictors of
self-disclosure on social media platforms. In a recent study, Nabity-Grover et al. (2020) suggested that during the COVID-19 pandemic, individuals may have relied on self-disclosure via social media to maintain
connectedness, and they call for further research to understand the
mechanisms behind self-disclosures during and related to the pandemic.
Extrapolating from these studies, we contend that social media users
with a higher OSWB due to the perceived and derived benefits of social
media use may engage in more self-disclosure practices to reaffirm their
well-being (Luo and Hancock, 2020) and derive benefits, such as
enjoyment (Cheung et al., 2015) and connectedness (Nabity-Grover
et al., 2020). We expect OSWB to correlate positively with
self-disclosure in the current scenario as individuals across the globe
turn to social media to maintain connectivity, relationships and psychological well-being. Thus, we hypothesise as follows:
H6. OSWB positively correlates with self-disclosure.
2.8. Online subjective well-being and fatigue
The existing literature mainly reflects three schools of thought on the
correlations shared between social media use and SWB. These schools of
thought showcase extremely divergent views (Webster et al., 2021). The
first suggests an absence of any significant association between the use
of social media and its attributes, on one hand, and users’ SWB, on the
other (Vergeer and Pelzer, 2009). However, an increasing number of
recent studies have disproved this school of thought by consistently
revealing a significant association between the two variables. These
findings have motivated discussions on the remaining two schools of
thought, which we discuss next.
The second school of thought reports that users’ SWB may be
negatively affected by social media usage (Yao and Cao, 2017). Relatively recent literature has observed that expectations of positive benefits, such as building inter-personal relationships and engaging in social
interactions, may drive individuals’ social media use and the incumbent
activities they undertake (Kr¨
amer and Schawel, ¨ 2020, Roberts and
David, 2020; Cao et al., 2019). Such perceived benefits may increase
users’ attachment to social media platforms, which may encourage users
to excessively or compulsively use social media (Oberst et al., 2017),
thereby producing negative psychosocial outcomes (Roberts and David,
2020). In fact, compulsive use was found to have a significant positive
association with fatigue (Dhir et al., 2018).
On the contrary, the last school of thought posits that high SWB
could result from social media use (Reinecke and Hofmann, 2016),
thereby implying a positive effect of using social media on users’ SWB.
For instance, Satici and Uysal (2015) determined that SWB predictors of
life satisfaction and subjective happiness were negatively correlated
with the problematic use of Facebook. We agree with this school of
thought and also contend that social media users with high OSWB
experience fewer negative phenomena consistently associated with social media use, including fatigue. We assert that these users’ satisfaction
P. Kaur et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 172 (2021) 121039
6
and the higher levels of perceived benefits they derive from social media
use cause them to allocate greater time and cognitive capacity to process
the information and content shared on these platforms, which, in turn,
leads them to experience lower levels of social media fatigue. Our
contention is also advanced by the fact that the demographic cohort on
which we focus, i.e. young adults, considers social media to be an integral part of their lives and are highly frequent users of these platforms
(Statista, 2020).
Because the prevalent methodologies (e.g. cross-sectional studies)
used to study the correlation between SWB and social media use hinder
efforts to ascertain causality, our study achieves an important objective.
In fact, our efforts to examine whether OSWB and fatigue are negatively
correlated answer calls from recent studies to better understand the
factors that protect social media users from the adverse consequences of
using these platforms (e.g. Webster et al., 2021), especially when those
users are adolescents and young adults who are particularly vulnerable
to such consequences. Thus, we posit that OSWB-driven social media
users allocate greater cognitive processing abilities to process social
media communique and experience lower levels of fatigue. Based on this
discussion, we hypothesise the following:
H7. OSWB negatively correlates with fatigue.
2.9. The mediating role of network heterogeneity—privacy concerns, selfdisclosure and social comparison
The prior literature has presented inconsistent findings regarding the
relationship between well-being and social media use (e.g. Chai et al.,
2019), suggesting that intervening variables may influence the relationship between OSWB and the psychosocial consequences of social
media use (Keles et al., 2020), including fatigue. Recent studies examining the negative psychological outcomes associated with social media
use have reported the complexity of this relationship and the need to
investigate moderating and mediating variables that might influence it
(Keles et al., 2020; Chai et al., 2019; Reer et al., 2019). Keles et al.
(2020) indicated that behaviours and motives related to social media use
might be more influential as mediators than is the intensity of use. Based
on these studies, we examine whether, in concurrence with a direct influence, the network heterogeneity aspects—that is, privacy concerns,
self-disclosure and social comparison—mediate the association between
OSWB and fatigue. Our supposition finds support in LCM, which contends that privacy concerns, self-disclosure and social comparison can
adversely influence social media users’ cognitive processing abilities
(Dhir et al., 2019). This should, in turn, also influence the association
between OSWB and fatigue. We contend that due to OSWB, social media
users engage in increased network heterogeneity and exhibit individual
differences with respect to the degree of this heterogeneity.
2.9.1. Privacy concerns
The role of privacy concerns involving the use of social media and its
behavioural outcomes has also seen limited examination in the context
of fatigue (Malik et al., 2020; Zhu and Bao, 2018). However, the literature has suggested that privacy concerns have a mediating effect on
self-disclosure via social media. For instance, Tsay-Vogel et al. (2018)
determined that privacy-related concerns mediate between Facebook
use and offline and online disclosures. According to Alashoor et al.
(2017), privacy concerns mediate the associations between specific
antecedents (big data-related familiarity, self-efficacy, perceived control
and vulnerability) and outcomes (self-disclosure concerns and accuracy). Zhu and Bao (2018) also determined that privacy concerns in the
context of WeChat (a social networking service) mediate the association
between fatigue, on one hand, and perceived complementarity and
network size, on the other. To the best of our knowledge, however, no
existing evidence supports the mediating effect of privacy concern on
the association between OSWB and fatigue. This represents a key gap in
the literature because privacy concerns play a significant role in the dark
side of social media-related issues, such as fatigue (Malik et al., 2020;
Dhir et al., 2018, 2019; Bright et al., 2015). We argue that such a
mediating effect may exist as an individual’s level of privacy concerns
may influence his or her perceived OSWB from social media, ability to
process social media-related communications and, consequently, fatigue. Thus, we draw upon LCM to propose the following hypothesis:
H8a. Privacy concerns mediate the association between OSWB and
fatigue.
2.9.2. Social comparison
Scholars have previously studied the mediating role of individuals’
inclinations to compare themselves while using social media. Rozgonjuk et al. (2019) found that users’ orientation for social comparison
mediated between their personality traits (neuroticism) and passive use
of a specific social media platform (i.e. Facebook). Similarly, Reer et al.
(2019) determined that users’ social comparison orientation mediated
the relationship between FoMO and psychological well-being. Moreover, scholars have suggested that social media users may engage in
excessive passive use of these platforms to gain information and thereby
create a point of reference for social comparison (Malik et al., 2020;
Talwar et al., 2019). We argue that individuals with enhanced OSWB, i.
e. those who are happy and satisfied with their social media lives, are
more motivated to compare themselves with others on these platforms.
Moreover, we draw from existing literature and the propositions of LCM
to argue that individuals’ tendencies to compare themselves on social
media burden their cognitive space and indirectly affect the relationship
between OSWB and fatigue.
H8b. Social comparison mediates the association between OSWB and
fatigue.
2.9.3. Self-disclosure
While most of the research on the dark side of social media has
investigated self-disclosure as an antecedent of social media use-related
outcomes, such as fatigue (e.g. Malik et al., 2020; Dhir et al., 2019), few
scholars have investigated the indirect effect of self-disclosure. For
instance, Varnali and Toker (2015) found that self-disclosure mediated
between personality traits oriented towards communication and social
media use. Kim et al. (2014) also examined self-disclosure as a mediator
between well-being and the positive (communication, entertainment
and information) and negative (privacy concerns) factors associated
with social media use. They further determined that self-disclosure
mediated between well-being and positive factors, whereas privacy
concerns were insignificantly associated with self-disclosure. Thus,
limited research supports the role of self-disclosure as a mediator for
social media-related behaviours. However, we draw from the available
literature and intuitively argue that self-disclosure indirectly influences
the associations between OSWB and fatigue by increasing the amount of
information generated and thus increasing users’ burden of cognitive
processing. Hence, we hypothesise as follows:
H8c. Self-disclosure mediates the association between OSWB and fatigue.
2.10. Control variables
Individual-level differences may also influence social media-related
behaviours and outcomes. This is especially true for sociodemographic variables, such as age (Reer et al., 2019). Thus, we
follow prior studies (e.g. Dhir et al., 2021) in including age and gender
as control variables. Moreover, since we focus on young adults as the
respondent group, we also include educational qualification as a control
variable. Indeed, social media research has indicated that social media
use and its outcomes may vary with individuals’ academic performance
and achievement (e.g. Swain and Pati, 2019).
P. Kaur et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 172 (2021) 121039
7
3. Research methodology
3.1. Study instrument
We developed the instrument for the study by adapting existing scale
items (see Table 1), which measured responses on a five-point Likert
scale (wherein 1 = strongly disagree and 5 = strongly agree). To ensure
that the items and study instruments were appropriate, we conducted a
pilot study with 12 young adult social media users between 18 and 21
years of age. Following the pilot study, we made minor modifications in
the wording of three items to enhance their clarity and suitability in the
present context. Furthermore, to ensure the content and face validity of
the adopted items, we followed prior scholars (e.g. Talwar et al., 2019)
in soliciting the opinions of three expert researchers from the fields of
psychology, information systems science and marketing. The experts
suggested further modifications in the wording of four items, which we
incorporated. Thus, the pilot study and experts’ suggestions confirmed
that the study’s instrument and items were valid and suitable for further
use.
3.2. Sample and data collection
We utilised a cross-sectional survey, which has been extensively used
in social media literature (e.g. Dhir et al., 2018, 2019, 2021). In May
2021, we used Google Forms to collect the data from young adult social
media users (aged between 18 and 21 years) via Prolific Academic, which
is an online recruitment platform used extensively by scholars. We
informed the respondents that their participation in the survey was
voluntary and anonymised and assured them that we would use their
responses only for academic purposes. We limited the survey to respondents based in the USA and received 320 valid responses, which we
subsequently analysed (see Table 2 for a socio-demographic profile of
the respondents).
We selected the USA as the study context because it includes over
223 million active social media users. Approximately 90% of these users
fall within the ages of 18 to 29 years, and approximately 30% selfreported being addicted to social media platforms (Statista, 2020). We
chose young adults as our study participants for two key reasons. First,
social media platforms are extremely popular among this age group,
especially in the USA (Statista, 2020), to fulfil varied purposes, including
self-presentation, self-expression and identity building (Malik et al.,
2020; Dhir et al., 2018). Second, this age group is especially vulnerable
to the positive and negative attributes of social media use, such as stress
(Maier et al., 2015), technology overuse (Tarafdar et al., 2015) and
social overload (Maier et al., 2015). Deeper insights into the correlations
between young adults’ OSWB and the negative aspects of social media
use can help guide their safe use of these platforms to avoid these
negative attributes, which may hinder users’ development.
3.3. Data analysis
We analysed the data through SPSS 26 and AMOS 26. We used
structural equation modelling (SEM) because it is one of the most
commonly used methods of data analysis in the context of social media.
Furthermore, our methodology fulfilled the stringent requirements
required to conduct it (e.g. Tandon et al., 2020; Dhir et al., 2018, 2019).
4. Results
4.1. Normality and common method bias
We tested the assumptions of normality and multicollinearity before
conducting SEM. The skewness and kurtosis values fell below the recommended thresholds and confirmed that the data met the assumptions
for normality. Furthermore, the variance inflation factor and tolerance
values confirmed the absence of multicollinearity issues, which may
Table 1
Items and factor loadings for the measurement and structural models.
Study measures Measurement items CFA SEM
Privacy concerns (PC)
(Dhir et al., 2019; Malhotra
et al., 2004)
Compared to others, I am more
sensitive about the way social
media platforms handle my
personal information.
.73 .73
To me, it is the most important
thing to keep my privacy intact on
social media platforms.
.72 .72
I am concerned about threats to
my personal privacy on social
media platforms today.
.78 .78
I am concerned about my privacy
on social media.
.88 .88
I am concerned that the
information I submit on social
media platforms could be
misused.
.77 .77
I am concerned that a person can
find my private information on
social media.
.74 .74
Social comparison (SC)
(Gibbons & Buunk, 1999;
Latif et al., 2020; Reer et al.,
2019; Steers et al., 2014;
Talwar et al., 2019)
When I am on social media, I tend
to compare myself with others.
.84 .84
When I am on social media, I
always pay attention to how I do
things compared with others.
.75 .75
When I am on social media, I often
check how I am doing socially
compared with others.
.81 .81
When I am on social media, I often
compare my own
accomplishments with others.
.84 .84
When I am on social media, I often
compare how others handle the
same problems that I am facing
and/or handling.
.71 .71
When I am on social media, I
compare my situation in life with
that of others.
.83 .83
Self-disclosure (SD)
(Dhir et al., 2019; 2021;
Gibbs et al., 2006;
Wheeless, 1978)
I have a detailed profile on social
media.
.80 .80
My social media profile tells a lot
about me.
.85 .85
I reveal a lot of information about
myself on social media.
.84 .84
Online subjective wellbeing (OSWB)
(Ahn & Shin, 2013;
Brunstein, 1993; Chang &
Hsu, 2016; Diener et al.,
2015; Suh and Koo, 2011)
In most respects, my online social
life is close to my ideal.
.78 .78
The conditions of my online social
life on social media platforms are
excellent.
.78 .78
I am satisfied with my online
social life on social media
platforms.
.88 .88
So far, I have obtained important
things I want from my social life
on social media platforms.
.71 .71
At present, I am completely
satisfied with my life on social
media.
.81 .80
I feel happy about the personal
aspects (achievements,
personality, health, etc.) of my life
on social media.
.75 .75
Social media fatigue (SMF)
(Dhir et al., 2018; Islam
et al., 2020; Talwar et al.,
2019; Whelan et al., 2020)
The amount of information
available on social media makes
me tense.
.71 .71
Due to using social media, I feel
rather mentally exhausted.
.89 .89
After a session of using social
media, I feel really fatigued.
.89 .89
I find it difficult to relax after
continually using social media.
.88 .88
Due to social media use, I feel
exhausted.
.89 .89
Note: SEM = Factor loadings structural model, CFA = Factor loadings measurement model
P. Kaur et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 172 (2021) 121039
8
occur due to inter-associations among independent constructs (O’Brien,
2007). To assess for common method bias (CMB), we conducted Harman’s single factor test (Harman, 1976). This test produced a CMB value
of 25.23%, which is less than the recommended threshold (i.e. 50%).
Thus, CMB did not affect our study (Podsakoff et al., 2003).
4.2. Measurement model, validity and reliability
We used confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) to assess the measurement model and factor loadings of the scale items (see Table 1). The CFA
results helped establish the reliability and validity of the study measures. The measurement model’s fit was good, and the model fit indices
were as follows: X2
/df = 2.13; CFI = 0.94, TLI = 0.93, RMSEA = 0.06.
The study measures possessed sufficient convergent validity because
the value of the average variance extracted (AVE) for the study constructs satisfied the recommended threshold value of 0.50 (Kline, 2016),
the values of the loadings of the measurement items exceeded the suggested value of 0.50 (Kline, 2016; see Table 1) and the composite reliability (CR) value of the study constructs exceeded 0.70, as
recommended in the existing literature (Kline, 2016). These values
indicate the internal reliability of the considered research constructs.
The study measures further possessed sufficient discriminant validity
(Kline, 2016), and the correlation between any two given measures was
smaller than the square root of the AVE value of a given measure (Kline,
2016, see Table 3). In addition to CFA (Kline, 2016), we also conducted
heterotrait-monotrait (HTMT) analysis (Henseler et al., 2015) to confirm
the validity and reliability of the adopted scales in the current context
(see Table 4).
4.3. Structural model
The structural model exhibited a good fit, and the model fit indices
were as follows: X2
/df = 2.10; CFI = 0.93, GFI = 0.85, TLI = 0.92,
RMSEA = 0.06. The analysis statistically supported five proposed hypotheses (H1, H3, H4, H6 and H7) for the main effects, while the results
for two hypotheses (H2 and H5) were not statistically significant (H2
and H5; see Table 5 and Fig. 2). The structural model explained 31% of
the variance in users’ fatigue, 0.4% of the variance in privacy concerns,
7% of the variance in social comparison and 2.4% of the variance in selfdisclosure. Moreover, the analysis confirmed that none of the control
variables had a confounding influence on fatigue.
4.4. Mediation analysis
To answer RQ2, which examined the mediating role of network
heterogeneity, the analysis also employed Hayes’ PROCESS macro to
test for mediation in the considered relationships (Model 4). The results
indicate that only social comparison partially mediates the association
between OSWB and fatigue (See Tables 6 and 7). Thus, the analysis only
supported H8b, whereas the results for H8a and H8c were not statistically significant.
5. Discussion
The results of the data analysis support H1, H3, H4, H6 and H7 and
thus confirm that OSWB has a viable influence on network heterogeneity
aspects and fatigue. Our findings suggest that social media fatigue—a
dark side of social media use—is a viable concern for young adults who
are actively engaged with network heterogeneity aspects and have a low
or diminished OSWB.
The results confirm that privacy concerns positively correlate with
fatigue; thus, the first hypothesis (H1) is supported. These findings are
consistent with the existing literature, which has suggested that privacy
exposure risks are a critical part of social media fatigue (Lee and Hsieh,
2013) and that privacy concerns are positively associated with fatigue
Table 2
Respondents’ profile.
Socio-demographic
profile
Frequency Percentage
Age 18–19 years 79 24.7%
19–20 years 98 30.6%
21–22 years 143 44.7%
Gender Male 120 37.5%
Female 200 62.5%
Educational
qualification
Completed high school 82 25.6%
Completed/pursuing
professional/vocational
school
2 0.6%
Completed/pursuing
bachelor’s
230 71.9%
Completed/pursuing
master’s
6 1.9%
Average use per day of
social media in the
past week
Up to 30 minutes per day 9 2.8%
31 minutes–1 hour per
day
30 9.4%
1–3 hours per day 125 39.1%
3–5 hours per day 105 32.8%
More than 5–7 hours per
day
39 12.2%
More than 7 hours per
day
12 3.8%
Table 3
Validity and reliability analysis.
CR AVE MSV ASV SMF OSWB PC SD SC
SMF 0.94 0.73 0.22 0.09 0.85
OSWB 0.91 0.62 0.14 0.06 -0.37 0.79
PC 0.90 0.60 0.06 0.02 0.08 0.07 0.77
SD 0.87 0.69 0.12 0.05 0.09 0.16 -0.24 0.83
SC 0.91 0.64 0.22 0.11 0.47 -0.26 -0.10 0.35 0.80
Note: SMF = social media fatigue, OSWB = online subjective well-being, PC = privacy concerns, SD = self-disclosure, SC = social comparison
Table 4
Results of HTMT analysis.
OSWB PC SD SOC SMF
OSWB
PC 0.08
SD 0.18 0.25
SC 0.24 0.08 0.35
SMF 0.35 0.08 0.11 0.48
Table 5
Confirmation of hypothesis.
Hypothesis Path β Significance Supported
H1 PC → SMF 0.14 <0.01 Yes
H2 OSWB → PC 0.06 >0.05 No
H3 SC → SMF 0.39 <0.001 Yes
H4 OSWB → SC -0.27 <0.001 Yes
H5 SD → SMF 0.02 >0.05 No
H6 OSWB → SD 0.16 <0.05 Yes
H7 OSWB → SMF -0.28 <0.001 Yes
P. Kaur et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 172 (2021) 121039
9
(Malik et al., 2020; Dhir et al., 2019; Bright et al., 2015). The findings
also confirm the propositions of Malik et al. (2020) and Dhir et al.
(2019), who contended that high privacy concerns consume social
media users’ limited cognitive space, which results in fatigue
The analysis confirms that OSWB is uncorrelated with privacy concerns (H2). The findings suggest that privacy concerns are a network
heterogeneity aspect that is unaffected by the OSWB of social media
users in the USA. This may be explained by the fact that consumers in
this developed economy are distrustful of the data protection afforded
by social media platforms (eMarketer, 2019). Such consumers may be
pre-emptive in maintaining privacy controls on these platforms to create
a perceivably satisfactory and even ideal usage situation and thus proactively ensure their OSWB. However, this finding may be specific to the
sampled respondents, and further research is required to ascertain its
generalisability. Moreover, it may be worth examining this association
in the context of different types of social media platforms and degrees of
usage or content sharing activities that users may undertake on them.
Consistent with prior research (e.g. Malik et al., 2020; Dhir et al.,
2019), our study also finds that social comparison positively correlates
with fatigue (H3). We attribute this association to the fact that social
media users who engage in social comparison continually browse
through social media content. The resultant information overload thus
burdens their cognitive space and their information-processing abilities,
translating into fatigue (e.g. Malik et al., 2020; Dhir et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2016). Consistent with the tenets of LCM (Lang, 2000), this further
suggests that social comparison processes and the consequent emotions
users experience limit social media users’ cognitive capacity.
The results show that OSWB shares a significant negative correlation
with social comparison (H4), thereby supporting our supposition. This
finding lends credence to prior research (e.g. Gerson et al., 2016), which
has found a negative correlation between SWB and social comparison. It
suggests that users who enjoy high satisfaction with their digital lives on
social media platforms are less likely to engage in social comparisons to
reinforce their beliefs because they may already believe they have an
ideal social life on these platforms. Our results thus show that individuals who believe that they derive significant benefits from social
media platforms—for example, in terms of personal aspects (achievements, personality, health etc.)—may be inured from engaging in some
perceivably detrimental phenomena associated with using these platforms, which, in our case, involves social comparison.
We find that self-disclosure is uncorrelated with fatigue (H5). This is
a surprising finding, which is inconsistent with the prior literature (e.g.
Malik et al., 2020; Dhir et al., 2019; Rains et al., 2016). Because most
regions in the USA remain under stay-at-home orders or are only
beginning to ease the restrictions established to combat the pandemic
(Wu et al., 2021), we believe that this divergent result may be attributed
to individuals’ increased use of social media platforms to communicate
with others during the COVID-19 lockdown (Statista, 2020). Under these
circumstances, users may prioritise self-disclosure, which leads them to
devote greater cognitive processing capacity towards subsequently
generated communications and to discount the experience of fatigue.
However, this may be a highly context-specific finding contingent on the
environmental crisis (i.e. the COVID-19 pandemic) our participants
were experiencing. Any generalisations thus require further
investigation.
The findings reveal that OSWB positively correlates with selfdisclosure (H6), consistent with the suggestion that social media
Fig. 2. Results of the structural model. Note: Solid arrows show significant associations as hypothesised; dashed arrows show non-significant associations.
Table 6
Mediation analysis results.
OSWB → PC /SC/SD → SMF
β se t p LLCI ULCI
OSWB → PC .08 .06 1.35 .18 -.0372 .1994
OSWB → SC -.25 .06 -3.99 .00 -.3802 -.1290
OSWB → SD .18 .06 2.91 .00 .0586 .3030
OSWB → SMF -.32 .06 -4.96 .00 -.4487 -.1937
PC → SMF .16 .06 2.67 .01 .0410 .2710
SC → SMF .42 .06 7.29 .00 .3051 .5305
SD → SMF .06 .06 .95 .35 -.0619 .1765
Total effect of OSWB → SMF -.40 .07 -6.03 .00 -.5366 -.2726
Table 7
Indirect effects.
Effect se LLCI ULCI
OSWB → PC → SMF .01 .01 -.0054 .0416
OSWB →SC → SMF -.11 .03 -.1743 -.0493
OSWB → SD → SMF .01 .01 -.0126 .0405
P. Kaur et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 172 (2021) 121039
10
users’ psychological states influence their self-disclosure (e.g. Luo &
Hancock, 2020; Huang, 2016). Because we focused on adolescents, our
results indicate that self-disclosure forms a significant part of this population’s developmental goals, as Dhir (2016) suggested. Consequently,
higher OSWB, or increased satisfaction and happiness with social media
platforms, is likely to influence users’ network heterogeneity aspects
and may increase engagement in self-disclosure.
We also find OSWB to be negatively correlated with fatigue (H7),
thereby confirming our contention that individuals with a higher
perceived OSWB may experience lower levels of fatigue due to their
capacity to appropriately balance and process social media communications. A possible explanation for this finding may be that users’
attachment to and satisfaction with their social media lives inures them
to the negative phenomena that usually arise from high levels of social
media use by increasing their capacity to process the incumbent communications. Considering prior research, which has argued that social
media use culminates in fatigue, this is a paradoxical finding—although
one that finds some support in the existing literature (e.g. Satici and
Uysal, 2015). Our result suggests that individuals who are inherently
unsatisfied with social media and, therefore, unable to use it appropriately may be more vulnerable to the dark side of social media phenomena, including fatigue. In fact, for those young adults who believe
that social media makes them happy and enables them to flourish in
terms of their digital social lives, OSWB acts as a protective factor that
shields them from fatigue. However, it is also possible that this is a
finding specific to the COVID-19 pandemic or the USA context. Thus, it,
too, requires further research.
Lastly, we find partial support for the mediating role of network
heterogeneity aspects (H8a–c). In our study, only social comparison
partially mediated the association between OSWB and fatigue. These
results lend some credence to our argument that users’ network heterogeneity aspects can facilitate the transformation of a positive motive
or benefit, such as OSWB, into a negative aspect, such as fatigue, associated with the dark side of social media. However, we do not find any
support for the mediating effect of self-disclosure and privacy concerns,
and we attribute these divergent findings to the maturity of the USA
market in the context of social media use. Since the USA has a high
penetration and usage rate for social media, our respondents may be
somewhat inured to the indirect effects of information-related network
heterogeneity aspects (i.e. self-disclosure and privacy concerns) with
respect to their OSWB and experiences of fatigue. Contrarily, the social
comparison we observe may be driven by individual-level characteristics, such as self-esteem and narcissism (James et al., 2017; Jang et al.,
2018). We contend that the significant mediating effect of social comparison on the association between OSWB and fatigue may be attributed
to an individual’s problematic personality and traits, which lead them to
engage in comparisons with other users despite being satisfied with their
own social media lives. This preoccupation with social comparison may
cause such social media users to experience fatigue. While these findings
offer new insights into how entering social media use with positive expectations can lead to negative outcomes due to users’ attitudes and
behaviour on such platforms, we caution readers that our results may be
context-specific. More research is needed to examine these mediating
relationships in diverse contexts, such as developing economies, and
among other populations, such the employed and/or adults, before
making any generalisations.
6. Conclusion, implications, limitations and future scope
We raised two RQs and tested eight hypotheses for the direct and
indirect (mediating) relationships between OSWB, fatigue and aspects of
network heterogeneity associated with the dark side of social
media—that is, privacy concerns, self-disclosure and social comparison.
Through the analysis, we found support for five hypotheses regarding
the direct effects of the examined variables (H1, H3, H4, H6 and H7)
and partial support for the proposed mediating effect of network
heterogeneity aspects (i.e. social comparison, H8b) on the relationship
between OSWB and fatigue. We tested the associations while controlling
for the effects of socio-demographic differences (i.e. age, gender and
academic achievement) on fatigue; none of these factors enacted a significant influence as a control variable. Our research is a novel attempt
to explicate the relationships between well-being and outcomes associated with the dark side of social media, such as fatigue. Moreover, we
lend contemporary insights into the effect of network heterogeneity
aspects in inducing fatigue and the potential ability of OSWB to protect
users from fatigue in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic and
consequential lockdown. These findings explain the nuances of the
pathways through which social media use, as well as users’ motives and
activities in light of environmental situations, can translate into negative
or positive psychosocial outcomes. Thus, our study offers valuable insights for both theory and practice.
6.1. Contributions to theory
The study offers five key contributions and implications for theoretical advancement. First, the findings contribute to the emerging
literature on OSWB and social media fatigue, which have received
limited attention in the extant literature. Moreover, unlike other
scholars, who have focused mostly on OSWB’s antecedents (Wang et al.,
2017), we focus on its consequences, or outcomes, by using the
lesser-utilised LCM model. Our findings can guide future work examining OSWB and the dark side of social media issues, including fatigue,
among young adults from a multi-disciplinary outlook. For this purpose,
scholars might adopt seminal theories from the fields of psychology,
information systems science and consumer behaviour, such as the
stressor-strain-outcome framework (e.g. Dhir et al., 2019),
protection-motivation theory (Rogers, 1975) and problem behaviour
theory (Jessor et al., 1994). Moreover, we urge scholars to employ more
contemporary theoretical frameworks, such as the regulatory focus
theory (Higgins et al., 2012), to understand how an individual’s regulation focus affects his or her social media use and subsequently experienced phenomena.
Second, our utilisation of a cross-sectional research design contributes to the literature by allowing us to examine the stability of the
observed associations at a single point in time. However, deriving a
generalised understanding of these associations and specific understanding of the impact of temporality on these relationships requires
additional research examining these associations over a longer time
period and in diverse contexts. We also call for studies to assess whether
these associations hold for other user groups besides young adults and
whether the associations remain significant as this demographic cohort
transitions into employment and gains additional roles and responsibilities, which may burden their cognitive capacities for processing social media-related information.
Third, our study contributes to the existing knowledge on social
media use behaviour and network heterogeneity aspects with regards to
adverse psychosocial outcomes, such fatigue, for young adults. The wellbeing of this demographic cohort is an important issue for any nation
because these individuals represent the foundations for a society’s future
growth. Our findings indicate the need for scholars to focus on other
network heterogeneity aspects, such as poor sleep hygiene (e.g. Tandon
et al., 2020) and fake news perpetration (Talwar et al., 2019), as additional antecedents of fatigue among young adults, especially those who
are employed.
Fourth, our results highlight the need to examine other dark sides of
social media consequences for young adults, which, may be influenced
by OSWB and network heterogeneity aspects. Examples of such consequences include work or academic performance decrements (Dhir et al.,
2019; Tandon et al., 2021), disturbed sleep (Kaur et al., 2021) and peer
or familial alienation. Studying these consequences for young adults is
imperative because deeper insights into the effects of the dark side of
social media for this user group can help researchers develop and test
P. Kaur et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 172 (2021) 121039
11
interventions to positively shape this cohort’s well-being by encouraging appropriate and safe social media use. Furthermore, such examinations have the potential to ascertain how young adults’ satisfaction
with and belief in the ideal digital life promulgated by social media use
could act as a protective measure against their experience of the dark
side of social media phenomena.
Fifth, based on the percentage of variance in fatigue explained by the
considered network heterogeneity aspects (social comparison, privacy
concerns and self-disclosure), we posit the need to examine other aspects
of network heterogeneity, such as fake news perpetration and social
media stalking, which may provide more nuanced insights into how
OSWB-driven social media use can induce fatigue. Furthermore,
although we examined the hypothesised associations for young adults,
we urge scholars to explore whether the examined variables exhibit
similar associations among adolescents and adults (e.g. those aged 25
years or older), especially those employed in meaningful work.
6.2. Contributions and implications for practice
Our results provide five significant implications for practitioners, e.g.
service providers, parents and educators. First, information about the
antecedents of fatigue among social media users carries significant implications for service providers because fatigue can prompt individuals’
to discontinue using a service or to experience dissatisfaction with its use
(Zhang et al., 2016). Because the findings suggest a significant role for
some network heterogeneity aspects, service providers can address user
concerns regarding these aspects to lessen fatigue. For instance, social
media service providers can take measures to alleviate users’ privacy
concerns by assuring them of the security of their shared content and
personal information. Moreover, service providers from networking
sites, such as Facebook, can reinforce users’ engagement in positive
interactions and reduce social comparisons on these platforms. Service
providers may, for example, generate reminders about being respectful
of other users during incumbent interactions and about the uniqueness
of each individual’s social media experience, which is contingent on the
individual’s personal preferences and social media affordances, such as
number of friends and regularly accessed content. Such efforts may
reduce negative emotions and the anxiety users experience during their
participation in social comparison. These initiatives may also enhance
users’ perceived and derived OSWB and thus fortify their usage of
continuance behaviours.
Second, the findings imply that parents and educators must play an
active role in guiding young adults’ use of social media for positive
gratifications. We emphasise the influence of parents (e.g. Dhir et al.,
2019) and educators’ monitoring behaviours on young adults’ social
media use and network heterogeneity. Such monitoring may also have a
dampening effect on young adults’ experience of phenomena associated
with the dark side of social media, including FoMO, compulsive use, fake
news sharing and fatigue (Malik et al., 2020; Tandon et al., 2020; Talwar et al., 2019; Dhir et al., 2018, 2019). Furthermore, we urge parents
and educators to undertake a community-oriented approach to educate
and empower young adults to help their peers engage in appropriate and
safe social media use. Indeed, peer support or interventions may have a
similar dampening effect on young adults’ experience of the dark side of
social media phenomena, such as cyberstalking.
Third, prior studies have linked fatigue and social media use to
multiple indicators of negative well-being among both young adults and
adolescents. These include disturbed sleep, lower academic performance
and mental health problems. Based on prior research, we highlight the
need for educators, college psychologists or counsellors and parents to
increase awareness of these negative outcomes among young adults,
who may be more vulnerable to the adverse effects of social media (Dhir
et al., 2018). Moreover, based on our findings, we believe that educators
and parents should encourage young adults to be satisfied with the
gratifications and benefits they may derive from appropriate social
media use; as this satisfaction may improve young adults’ OSWB and
thereby reduce their fatigue. This is especially critical at the present
time, which, due to the COVID-19 lockdown, is characterised by
extremely digitised academic and social communication. It is important
to recognise that it may take considerable time before human lives
regain a semblance of normality with regard to real-life (i.e. offline)
communication.
Fourth, our findings identify OSWB as an antecedent of network
heterogeneity (i.e. social comparison and self-disclosure) and fatigue,
suggesting that educators, parents and psychologists must understand
how and why young adults derive positive benefits from social media
use. Insights into the antecedents of OSWB can guide stakeholders (i.e.
educators and psychologists) in developing interventions to negate the
dark side of social media experienced by young adults and perhaps even
adolescents.
Fifth, we suggest the need for parents and educators to engage in
community discussions about the roles and responsibilities of service
providers in protecting the well-being of their users. Such communal
discussions have the potential to influence the advanced formulation of
policies for the safe and ethical use of digital platforms, including social
media. Such policies can also facilitate users’ engagement with social
media appropriately and perhaps lessen the emergence of incidents
related to the dark side of social media, such as trolling, active cyberstalking and fake news sharing.
6.3. Limitations and future research directions
First, our findings’ generalisability is limited because the study’s
respondents included only young adults in the USA. Moreover, we
considered social media as an umbrella term for our study. Future
scholars should extend the scope of our study to examine these associations in other contexts, such as among middle-aged working professionals, users in developing countries, such as India and Pakistan, and
users of specific platforms, such as Facebook, Instagram and Snapchat.
Second, our findings are limited by the biases associated with crosssectional surveys, including the social desirability bias and the
inability to determine causality. In the future, scholars may consider
utilising longitudinal, experimental or observation-based research to
address these concerns. Third, we only considered three aspects of
network heterogeneity (self-disclosure, privacy concerns and social
comparison) as mediators. Scholars may examine the moderating and
mediating effects of other dark side social media-related behaviours,
such as problematic sleep and negative emotions, including jealousy or
envy, on the association between OSWB and fatigue.
Moreover, social media users’ network heterogeneity, such as their
tendency to engage in social comparison, and its resultant influence may
be contingent on individual users’ traits, such as self-esteem (Jang et al.,
2018). Scholars may thus study in greater detail the subtle direct and
moderating effects of such individual traits, especially darker personality traits, such as narcissism (James et al., 2017), on personal social
media use and network heterogeneity. We also encourage scholars to
explore the moderating influence of socio-demographic factors, especially age, for the investigated associations. Such cohort-based and
longitudinal studies are important because prior research has shown
that social media use-related practices may differ across age cohorts
(Richey et al., 2018; Tandon et al., 2020; Throuvala et al., 2019). Despite
its limitations, the study’s findings offer nuanced and novel insights into
the pathways and antecedents through which social media users may
experience the dark side of social media and the associated adverse
psychosocial outcomes.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Puneet Kaur: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation,
Formal analysis, Writing – original draft. Nazrul Islam: Supervision,
Writing – review & editing. Anushree Tandon: Writing – review &
editing. Amandeep Dhir: Supervision, Writing – review & editing.
P. Kaur et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 172 (2021) 121039
12
References
Ahn, D., Shin, D.H., 2013. Is the social use of media for seeking connectedness or for
avoiding social isolation? Mechanisms underlying media use and subjective wellbeing. Comput. Hum. Behav. 29 (6), 2453–2462.
Alashoor, T., Han, S., Joseph, R.C., 2017. Familiarity with big data, privacy concerns,
and self-disclosure accuracy in social networking websites: An APCO model.
Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 41 (1), 4.
Bano, S., Cisheng, W., Khan, A.N., Khan, N.A., 2019. WhatsApp use and student’s
psychological well-being: role of social capital and social integration. Child. Youth.
Serv. Rev. 103, 200–208.
Bright, L.F., Kleiser, S.B., Grau, S.L., 2015. Too much Facebook? An exploratory
examination of social media fatigue. Comput. Hum. Behav. 44 (44), 148–155.
Brunstein, J.C., 1993. Personal goals and subjective well-being: a longitudinal study.
J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 65 (5), 1061–1070. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-
3514.65.5.1061.
Cao, X., Khan, A.N., Zaigham, G.H., Khan, N.A., 2019. The stimulators of social media
fatigue among students: Role of moral disengagement. J. Educ. Comput. Res. 57 (5),
1083–1107.
Chai, H.Y., Niu, G.F., Lian, S.L., Chu, X.W., Sun, X.J., 2019. Why social network site use
fails to promote well-being? The roles of social overload and fear of missing out.
Comput. Hum. Behav. 100 (November), 85–92.
Chang, C.M., Hsu, M.H., 2016. Understanding the determinants of users’ subjective wellbeing in social networking sites: An integration of social capital theory and social
presence theory. Behav. Inf. Technol. 35 (9), 720–729.
Cheung, C., Lee, Z.W.Y., Chan, T.K.H., 2015. Self-disclosure in social networking sites:
the role of perceived cost, perceived benefits and social influence. Internet Res. 25
(2), 279–299.
Chiu, C.M., Cheng, H.L., Huang, H.Y., Chen, C.F., 2013. Exploring individuals’ subjective
well-being and loyalty towards social network sites from the perspective of network
externalities: the Facebook case. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 33 (3), 539–552.
Cho, H., Li, P., Goh, Z.H., 2020. Privacy risks, emotions, and social media: a coping
model of online privacy. ACM Trans. Comput. Hum. Interact. (TOCHI) 27 (6), 1–28.
Choi, H., Park, J., Jung, Y., 2018. The role of privacy fatigue in online privacy behavior.
Comput. Hum. Behav. 81, 42–51.
Choi, T.R., Sung, Y., 2018. Instagram versus Snapchat: Self-expression and privacy
concern on social media. Telemat. Inf. 35 (8), 2289–2298.
Dhir, A., 2016. Exploring online self-presentation in computer-mediated environments:
Motives and reasons for photo-tagging and untagging. Published Doctoral
dissertation. Aalto University, Finland, p. 241.
Dhir, A., Kaur, P., Chen, S., Pallesen, S., 2019. Antecedents and consequences of social
media fatigue. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 48, 193–202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijinfomgt.2019.05.021. April 2018.
Dhir, A., Talwar, S., Kaur, P., Budhiraja, S., Islam, N., 2021. The dark side of social
media: stalking, online self-disclosure and problematic sleep. Int. J. Consum. Stud.
00, 1–19.
Dhir, A., Yossatorn, Y., Kaur, P., Chen, S., 2018. Online social media fatigue and
psychological well-being—a study of compulsive use, fear of missing out, fatigue,
anxiety and depression. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 40, 141–152.
Diener, E., Oishi, S., Lucas, R.E., 2015. National accounts of subjective well-being. Am.
Psychol. 70, 234–242. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0038899.
eMarketer, 2019. Share of internet users in the United States who trust Facebook with
their personal information as of October 2019 [Graph]. Statista. Retrieved June 01,
2021, from. https://www.statista.com/statistics/562650/trust-with-personal-data
-among-facebook-users-by-age-us/.
Fan, X., Deng, N., Dong, X., Lin, Y., Wang, J., 2019. Do others’ self-presentation on social
media influence individuals’ subjective well-being? A moderated mediation model.
Telemat. Inf. 41, 86–102.
Fan, X., Jiang, X., Deng, N., Dong, X., Lin, Y., 2020. Does role conflict influence
discontinuous usage intentions? Privacy concerns, social media fatigue and selfesteem. Inf. Technol. People 1–23. Ahead of print.
Festinger, L., 1954. A theory of social comparison processes. Hum. Relat. 7, 117–140.
Gerson, J., Plagnol, A.C., Corr, P.J., 2016. Subjective well-being and social media use: Do
personality traits moderate the impact of social comparison on Facebook? Comput.
Hum. Behav. 63, 813–822.
Gibbons, F.X., Buunk, B.P., 1999. Individual differences in social comparison:
development of a scale of social comparison. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 76 (1), 129–142.
Gibbs, J.L., Ellison, N.B., Heino, R.D., 2006. Self-presentation in online personals: the
role of anticipated future interaction, self-disclosure, and perceived success in
Internet dating. Commun. Res. 33 (2), 152–177.
Harman, H.H., 1976. Modern Factor Analysis. University of Chicago Press.
Henseler, J., Ringle, C.M., Sarstedt, M., 2015. A new criterion for assessing discriminant
validity in variance-based structural equation modeling. J. Acad. Market. Sci. 43 (1),
115–135. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-014-0403-8.
Higgins, E.T, 2012. Regulatory focus theory. In: Van Lange, P.A.M., Kruglanski, A.W.,
Higgins, E.T. (Eds.), Handbook of Theories of Social Psychology. Sage Publications
Ltd, pp. 483–504. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446249215.n24.
Huang, H.Y., 2016. Examining the beneficial effects of individual’s self-disclosure on the
social network site. Comput. Hum. Behav. 57, 122–132.
Islam, A.K.M.N., Laato, S., Talukder, S., Sutinen, E., 2020. Misinformation sharing and
social media fatigue during COVID-19: An affordance and cognitive load perspective.
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 159, 120201.
James, C., Davis, K., Charmaraman, L., Konrath, S., Slovak, P., Weinstein, E., Yarosh, L.,
2017. Digital life and youth well-being, social connectedness, empathy, and
narcissism. Pediatrics 140, S71–S75. Supplement 2.
Jang, K., Park, N., Song, H., 2016. Social comparison on Facebook: Its antecedents and
psychological outcomes. Comput. Hum. Behav. 62, 147–154.
Jang, W.E., Bucy, E.P., Cho, J., 2018. Self-esteem moderates the influence of selfpresentation style on Facebook users’ sense of subjective well-being. Comput. Hum.
Behav. 85, 190–199.
Jeong, M., Zo, H., Lee, C.H., Ceran, Y., 2019. Feeling displeasure from online social
media postings: a study using cognitive dissonance theory. Comput. Hum. Behav. 97,
231–240.
Jessor, R., Donovan, J.E., Costa, F.M., 1994. Beyond Adolescence: Problem Behaviour
and Young Adult Development. Cambridge University Press.
Kaur, P., Dhir, A., Alkhalifa, A.K., Tandon, A., 2021. Social media platforms and sleep
problems: A Systematic literature review, synthesis and framework for future
research. Internet Res. 1–40. Ahead of print.
Kaur, P., Dhir, A., Tandon, A., Alzeiby, E.A., Abohassan, A.A., 2020. A systematic
literature review on cyberstalking. An analysis of past achievements and future
promises. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change, 120426. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
techfore.2020.120426. September.
Keles, B., McCrae, N., Grealish, A., 2020. A systematic review: The influence of social
media on depression, anxiety and psychological distress in adolescents. Int. J.
Adolesc. Youth 25 (1), 79–93.
Kim, B., Kim, Y., 2017. College students’ social media use and communication network
heterogeneity: implications for social capital and subjective well-being. Comput.
Hum. Behav. 73, 620–628.
Kim, J.Y., Chung, N., Ahn, K.M., 2014. Why people use social networking services in
Korea: The mediating role of self-disclosure on subjective well-being. Inf. Dev. 30
(3), 276–287.
Kline, R.B., 2016. Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling, 4th Ed.
Guilford.
Koltay, T., 2017. The bright side of information: Ways of mitigating information
overload. J. Doc. 73 (4), 767–775. https://doi.org/10.1108/JD-09-2016-0107.
Kr¨
amer, N.C., Schawel, ¨ J., 2020. Mastering the challenge of balancing self-disclosure and
privacy in social media. Curr. Opin. Psychol. 31, 67–71.
Krasnova, H., Kolesnikova, E., Günther, O., 2009. It won’t happen to me!’: Self-disclosure
in online social networks. In: Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
Information System. San Francisco, California, US.
Lang, A., 2000. The limited capacity model of mediated message processing. J. Commun.
50 (1), 46–70.
Latif, K., Weng, Q., Pitafi, A.H., Ali, A., Siddiqui, A.W., Malik, M.Y., Latif, Z., 2020. Social
comparison as a double-edged sword on social media: The role of envy type and
online social identity. Telemat. Inf., 101470
Lee, C.C., Hsieh, M.C., 2013. Development of a social media fatigue scale. in Proc. 6th
International Colloquium on Business & Management, Bangkok, Thailand.
Lee, E., Lee, K.Y., Sung, Y., Song, Y.A., 2019. #DeleteFacebook: antecedents of facebook
fatigue. Cyberpsychol. Behav. Soc. Netw. 22 (6), 417–422.
Li, H., Luo, X.R., Zhang, J., Xu, H., 2017. Resolving the privacy paradox: toward a
cognitive appraisal and emotion approach to online privacy behaviors. Inf. Manag.
54 (8), 1012–1022.
Luo, M., Hancock, J.T., 2020. Self-disclosure and social media: motivations, mechanisms
and psychological well-being. Curr. Opin. Psychol. 31, 110–115.
Maier, C., Laumer, S., Eckhardt, A., Weitzel, T., 2015. Giving too much social support:
Social overload on social networking sites. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 24 (5), 447–464.
Maier, C., Laumer, S., Weinert, C., Weitzel, T., 2015. The effects of technostress and
switching stress on discontinued use of social networking services: a study of
Facebook use. Inf. Syst. J. 25 (3), 275–308.
Malhotra, N.K., Kim, S.S., Agarwal, J., 2004. Internet users’ information privacy
concerns (IUIPC): The construct, the scale, and a causal model. Inf. Syst. Res. 15 (4),
336–355.
Malik, A., Dhir, A., Kaur, P., Johri, A., 2020. Correlates of social media fatigue and
academic performance decrement: a large cross-sectional study. Information
Technology and People 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1108/ITP-06-2019-0289. Ahead of
print.
Mei, S., Yau, Y.H.C., Chai, J., Guo, J., Potenza, M.N., 2016. Problematic Internet use,
well-being, self-esteem and self-control: data from a high school survey in China.
Addict. Behav. 61, 74–79.
Munzel, A., Meyer-Waarden, L., Galan, J.P., 2018. The social side of sustainability: Wellbeing as a driver and an outcome of social relationships and interactions on social
networking sites. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 130, 14–27.
Nabity-Grover, T., Cheung, C.M., Thatcher, J.B., 2020. Inside out and outside in: how the
COVID-19 pandemic affects self-disclosure on social media. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 55,
102188.
Oberst, U., Wegmann, E., Stodt, B., Brand, M., Chamarro, A., 2017. Negative
consequences from heavy social networking in adolescents: The mediating role of
fear of missing out. J. Adolesc. 55, 51–60.
O’Brien, R.M., 2007. A caution regarding rules of thumb for variance inflation factors.
Qual. Quant. 41, 673–690.
Park, S.Y., Baek, Y.M., 2018. Two faces of social comparison on Facebook: The interplay
between social comparison orientation, emotions, and psychological well-being.
Comput. Hum. Behav. 79, 83–93.
Piwek, L., Joinson, A., 2016. What do they Snapchat about?’ Patterns of use in timelimited instant messaging service. Comput. Hum. Behav. 54, 358–367.
Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B., Lee, J.Y., Podsakoff, N.P., 2003. Common method
biases in behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended
remedies. J. Appl. Psychol. 88 (5), 879–903.
Rains, S.A., Brunner, S.R., Oman, K., 2016. Self-disclosure and new communication
technologies: the implications of receiving superficial self-disclosures from friends.
J. Soc. Pers. Relationsh. 33 (1), 42–61.
P. Kaur et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 172 (2021) 121039
13
Reer, F., Tang, W.Y., Quandt, T., 2019. Psychosocial well-being and social media
engagement: the mediating roles of social comparison orientation and fear of missing
out. New Media Soc. 21 (7), 1486–1505. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1461444818823719.
Reinecke, L., Hofmann, W., 2016. Slacking off or winding down? An experience sampling
study on the drivers and consequences of media use for recovery versus
procrastination. Hum. Commun. Res. 42 (3), 441–461.
Richey, M., Gonibeed, A., Ravishankar, M.N., 2018. The perils and promises of selfdisclosure on social media. Inf. Syst. Front. 20 (3), 425–437.
Roberts, J.A., David, M.E., 2020. The social media party: fear of missing out (FoMO),
social media intensity, connection, and well-being. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Interact. 36
(4), 386–392. https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2019.1646517.
Rogers, R.W., 1975. A protection motivation theory of fear appeals and attitude change1.
J. Psychol. 91 (1), 93–114.
Rozgonjuk, D., Ryan, T., Kuljus, J.K., T¨
aht, K., Scott, G.G., 2019. Social comparison
orientation mediates the relationship between neuroticism and passive Facebook
use. Cyberpsychology 13 (1). https://doi.org/10.5817/CP2019-1-2.
Satici, S.A., Uysal, R., 2015. Well-being and problematic Facebook use. Comput. Hum.
Behav. 49, 185–190.
Statista, 2020. Social media usage in the United States. Retrieved May 29, 2021, from. htt
ps://www.statista.com/study/40227/social-social-media-usage-in-the-united-state
s-statista-dossier/.
Steers, M.L.N., Wickham, R.E., Acitelli, L.K., 2014. Seeing everyone else’s highlight reels:
how Facebook usage is linked to depressive symptoms. J. Soc. Clin. Psychol. 33 (8),
701–731.
Suh, E.K., Koo, J.S., 2011. A concise measure of subjective well-being (COMOSWB): scale
development and validation. Korean J. Soc. Pers. Psychol. 25 (1), 95–113.
Swain, R.K., Pati, A.K., 2019. Use of social networking sites (SNSs) and its repercussions
on sleep quality, psychosocial behavior, academic performance and circadian
rhythm of humans—a brief review. Biol. Rhythm Res. 00 (00), 1–40. https://doi.
org/10.1080/09291016.2019.1620487.
Talwar, S., Dhir, A., Kaur, P., Zafar, N., Alrasheedy, M., 2019. Why do people share fake
news? Associations between the dark side of social media use and fake news sharing
behavior. J. Retail. Consum. Serv. 51, 72–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jretconser.2019.05.026.
Tandon, A., Dhir, A., Almugren, I., AlNemer, G.N., Mantym ¨ ¨
aki, M., 2021a. Fear of
missing out (FoMO) among social media users: a systematic literature review,
synthesis and framework for future research. Internet Res. 1–45. Ahead of print.
Tandon, A., Dhir, A., Mantym ¨ ¨
aki, M., 2021b. Jealousy due to social media? A systematic
literature review and framework of social media-induced jealousy. Internet Res.
1–45. Ahead of print.
Tandon, A., Kaur, P., Dhir, A., Mantym ¨ ¨
aki, M., 2020c. Sleepless due to social media?
Investigating problematic sleep due to social media and social media sleep hygiene.
Comput. Hum. Behav. 113 (July), 106487 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chb.2020.106487.
Tarafdar, M., D’Arcy, J., Turel, O., Gupta, A., 2015. The dark side of information
technology: Is overuse of information technology sapping your employees’
productivity, innovation, and well-being? MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 56 (2), 60–70.
Throuvala, M.A., Griffiths, M.D., Rennoldson, M., Kuss, D.J., 2019. Motivational
processes and dysfunctional mechanisms of social media use among adolescents: A
qualitative focus group study. Comput. Hum. Behav. 93, 164–175.
Tsay-Vogel, M., Shanahan, J., Signorielli, N., 2018. Social media cultivating perceptions
of privacy: A 5-year analysis of privacy attitudes and self-disclosure behaviors among
Facebook users. New Media Soc. 20 (1), 141–161.
Varnali, K., Toker, A., 2015. Self-disclosure on social networking sites. Soc. Behav. Pers.
Int. J. 43 (1), 1–13.
Verduyn, P., Gugushvili, N., Massar, K., Taht, ¨ K., Kross, E., 2020. Social comparison on
social networking sites. Curr. Opin. Psychol. 36 (December), 32–37. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.copsyc.2020.04.002.
Verduyn, P., Ybarra, O., Resibois, M., Jonides, J., Kross, E., 2017. Do social network sites
enhance or undermine subjective well-being? A critical review. Soc. Issues Policy
Rev. 11 (1), 274–302.
Vergeer, M., Pelzer, B., 2009. Consequences of media and internet use for offline and
online network capital and well-being. A causal model approach. J. Comput. Mediat.
Commun. 15 (1), 189–210.
Wang, J.L., Gaskin, J., Rost, D.H., Gentile, D.A., 2017. The reciprocal relationship
between passive social networking site (SNS) usage and users’ subjective well-being.
Soc. Sci. Comput. Rev. 1–12.
Webster, D., Dunne, L., Hunter, R., 2021. Association between social networks and
subjective well-being in adolescents: a systematic review. Youth Soc. 53 (2),
175–210.
Wheeless, L.R., 1978. A follow-up study of the relationships among trust, disclosure, and
interpersonal solidarity. Hum. Commun. Res. 4 (2), 143–157.
Whelan, E., Islam, Najmul, A., K.M., Brooks, S, 2020. Is boredom proneness related to
social media overload and fatigue? A stress–strain–outcome approach. Internet Res.
30 (3), 869–887. https://doi.org/10.1108/INTR-03-2019-0112.
Wu, J., Smith, S., Khurana, M., Siemaszko, C. & DeJesus-Banos, B. (2021). Stay-at-home
orders across the country: What each state is doing—or not doing—amid widespread
coronavirus lockdowns. NBC News. https://www.nbcnews.com/health/healthnews/here-are-stay-home-orders-across-country-n1168736.
Yao, J., Cao, X., 2017. The balancing mechanisms of social networking overuse and
rational usage. Comput. Hum. Behav. 75, 415–422.
Ye, S., Ho, K.K., 2019. Would you feel happier if you have more protection behaviour? A
panel survey of university students in Japan. Behav. Inf. Technol. 38 (4), 422–434.
Zhang, S., Zhao, L., Lu, Y., Yang, J., 2016. Do you get tired of socializing? An empirical
explanation of discontinuous usage behavior in social network services. Inf. Manag.
53 (7), 904–914.
Zhu, Y., Bao, Z., 2018. The role of negative network externalities in SNS fatigue. Data
Technol. Appl. 52 (3), 313–328.
Puneet Kaur is currently a postdoctoral researcher at Department of Psychosocial Science, University of Bergen, Norway.
Her research appears in Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, International Journal of Information Management, Computers in Human Behaviour, International Journal of Hospitality
Management, and Information Technology & People among
others.
Nazrul Islam is Associate Professor of Innovation/Entrepreneurship and an Interdisciplinary Pathway Lead for global
political economy at the University of Exeter Business School,
England, UK. He holds a PhD in innovation management. His
research interest focuses on interdisciplinary fields: the management of technology and strategy; innovation and entrepreneurship; the emergence and growth of disruptive and
digital technology-based innovation; SMEs business sustainability. His research was published in the leading international
journals and he has complemented his peer reviewed journal
efforts with three books. Prof Islam’s research received awards
including the ‘Brad Hosler Award for Outstanding Paper’ from
USA; and the ‘Pratt & Whitney Canada Best Paper Award’ from Canada. Prof Islam serves
on the board of directors for Business and Applied Sciences Academy of North America. He
currently serves as an Associate Editor of Technological Forecasting & Social Change and
Editor-in-Chief of International Journal of Technology Intelligence and Planning.
Anushree Tandon (PhD) is currently a postdoctoral researcher
at Turku School of Economics, University of Turku. Her
research appears in Computers in Human Behaviour, Computers in Industry, Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, Food Quality & Preference, Journal of Cleaner Production, Technology in Society, Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, Internet Research and Appetite among others.
Amandeep Dhir is a Professor of Research Methods at University
of Agder, Norway. He is also a visiting professor at Norwegian
School of Hotel Management, University of Stavanger, Norway.
His research appears in Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, International
Journal of Information Management, Computers in Human
Behaviour, Computers in Industry, International Journal of Hospitality Management, Journal of Cleaner Production, Food quality
and preferences, Appetite, Information Technology & People,
Australasian Marketing Journal, and Enterprise Information Systems among others.
P. Kaur et al. 