Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
Available online 26 March 2022
0160-791X/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Strategies to overcome barriers to innovative digitalisation technologies for
supply chain logistics resilience during pandemic
Himanshu Gupta a,*
, Avinash Kumar Yadav a
, Simonov Kusi-Sarpong b,c
,
Sharfuddin Ahmed Khan d
, Shashi Chandra Sharma e
a Department of Management Studies Indian Institute of Technology (Indian School of Mines), Dhanbad, India b Southampton Business School, University of Southampton Southampton S017 1BJ, United Kingdom c Department of Transport and Supply Chain Management University of Johannesburg Johannesburg, South Africa d Industrial Systems Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Applied Sciences University of Regina, 3737 Wascana Pkwy, Regina, SK, Canada, S4S 0A2 e Mechanical Engineering Department Acropolis Institute of Technology and Research Indore, India
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Logistics
Resilience
Pandemic
COVID-19
Bayesian best-worst method
ABSTRACT
Logistics is a crucial function for any organisation. In the scenario of a pandemic or other disruptions, the role of
logistics becomes even more important. Digitalisation of logistics and the supply chain is seen as an important
tool for logistics resilience in such situations, but for developing countries digitalisation poses certain challenges.
This study identifies barriers to innovative digitalisation technology that hinder the digital elevation of supply
chain logistics during a pandemic. Strategies to deal with and overcome these barriers are proposed. The multicriteria decision analysis method (Bayesian best-worst method) is used to prioritise such barriers within the
context of the Indian logistics sector of manufacturing organisations. The strategies are also prioritised according
to their impact on the barriers, for which the additive value function is used. The results show that “high cost of
investment”, “lack of monetary resources”, “inadequate internet connectivity”, “lack of IT (Information Technology) infrastructure” and “unclear economic benefit of digital investment” are the top five barriers to
implementing innovative digitalisation technologies in developing countries like India, during a pandemic situation. The findings reveal an insight into digitalisation barriers during a pandemic that can be of value to
managers and researchers.
1. Introduction
Logistics is a crucial function of every business [1]. For a company,
the logistics cost makes up around 9–10% of the final price of goods
during the period of 2005 [2], currently this cost is estimated to be
around 20–25%, and also the logistics cost in developing countries such
as India is around 14%, which is quite large compared to developed
countries, where it is approximately 7% of the GDP [3]. Companies always try to cut this cost, and cost reduction is possible in many ways
such as by reducing the level of services [2] or increasing the performance of the logistics system [4]. An increase in the performance of the
logistics system reduces the logistics cost and also increases the level of
customer satisfaction [5]. The performance of the logistics system can be
improved by operational and technical improvement of the processes
associated with it [4]. The Internet of Things (IoT), artificial intelligence
(AI), cloud computing, blockchain and augmented reality (AR) are new
and emerging digitisation technologies used in different areas such as
the smart grid, smart home, manufacturing, etc. For process improvement and efficiency [6]. Using these innovative digitisation technologies
can immensely benefit organisations in terms of efficiency and customer
satisfaction. Logistics is one such sector that has tremendous scope for
digitisation [7], as especially in developing countries like India this
sector relies mostly on manual systems, causing a loss of material and
time and hence unsatisfied customers. With rapid penetration of the
internet, the digital customer base has increased in India, which is now
next only to China in terms of internet subscribers. With the scope for
digitisation in the logistics sector, investments increased by more than
80% from $161 million in 2013 to over $3 billion in 2019 [3]. Widespread disruptions occurring over the course of the last few decades have
also necessitated the digitisation of the logistics sector. Disruptions such
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: himanshuguptadoms@gmail.com, himanshug@iitism.ac.in (H. Gupta), avinashkiem@gmail.com, avi4zero@gmail.com (A.K. Yadav),
simonov2002@yahoo.com (S. Kusi-Sarpong), Sharfuddin.Khan@uregina.ca, sharfuddin82@yahoo.com (S.A. Khan), sharmacsharma28@gmail.com (S.C. Sharma).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Technology in Society
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/techsoc
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2022.101970
Received 26 October 2021; Received in revised form 21 March 2022; Accepted 22 March 2022 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
2
as pandemic outbreaks, like the Spanish flu, swine influenza, avian flu
and recently the COVID-19 virus, have a severe and widespread impact
on the economy as well as the supply chain [8–11]. The COVID-19 virus
was first reported in the city of Wuhan in China [12]. Wuhan city is a
major Chinese business hub. It seemed a local problem at the initial
stage, but, as time passed, it assumed global dimensions. Tier 1 suppliers
or direct suppliers of about 51,000 (163 Fortune 1000) companies from
all over the world are located in Wuhan. First- or second-tier suppliers of
about 5 million companies (938 Fortune 1000) from all over the world
are located in Wuhan [13]. However, the number of containers held in
Chinese ports dropped by 10.1% in the first months of 2020 [14].
Globally, companies that operate in the gift and toys industries suffered
from both a supply shortage from China and demand disruption round
the world, which was severely affected by the Coronavirus [15]. The
supply chains of different markets of the world have been disrupted. This
generates a spillover effect throughout different levels of supplier networks [16]. The US Institute for Supply Management has said that the
lead-time has doubled for many companies and 75% of companies are
affected by supply chain disruption [17]. Coronavirus is a type of LFHI
(Low-frequency-high-impact) event that comes as a high-risk event
because we did not prepare for it in advance [18,19]. The supply chain is
also under tremendous pressure in India ever since the
government-imposed lockdown restrictions [20]. Large Indian companies have either halted or reduced operations temporarily due to
supply-chain logistics disruption [21]. Fast moving consumer goods
(FMCG) companies also stopped manufacturing, except for essential
items [22]. During the first phase of lockdown, interstate logistics was
banned; this hampered the supply chain of medical supplies also [23].
To manage these disruptions in future and to prepare our supply chains
and logistics sector for these high-risk events, digitisation of the supply
chain and logistics sector is necessary. Our primary focus is on supply
chain logistics resilience, which can be improved by using the futuristic
technology discussed above such as IOT, AI, blockchain, cloud
computing, Industry 4.0, and AR. These technologies improve the visibility of the supply chain, which can help to understand the impact of a
pandemic. Records can be digitised to avoid future shocks, making the
supply-chain more resilient. Tracking and tracing play a significant role
in the management of goods and products. Industry 4.0, along with
other applications in the logistics sector, can reduce manual practices
within the logistics system, improve system performance and reduce
overall costs [24,25]. However, for emerging economies like India,
digitisation of the supply chain and logistics sector for resilience is an
uphill task and is often marred by a number of issues. Past literature
regarding these is scant: Al-Talib et al. [26] worked on IoT as a tool for
supply chain resilience; Golan et al. [27] worked on a literature review
for supply chain resilience; Marusak et al. [28] studied supply chain
resilience in the food industry and Sharma et al. [29] studied mitigation
strategies for supply chain resilience. Studies exploring the challenges
and strategies for adopting digitisation technologies in the supply chain
and logistics sector have not been undertaken yet.
Based on this background, the inherent issues and disruptions
existing in the supply chain and logistics sector, which have been even
more exacerbated due to the COVID-19 pandemic, this study tries to
answer the following research questions:
• What are the barriers to the adoption of digitisation technologies for
achieving supply chain and logistics resilience?
• What strategies can be identified to overcome the challenges/barriers to the adoption of digitisation technologies for achieving supply
chain and logistics resilience?
• Which are the most prominent of the barriers identified to the
adoption of digitisation technologies for achieving supply chain and
logistics resilience?
The structure of this paper is as follows. The literature is reviewed in
Section 2 and research gaps are highlighted. The methodology is
discussed in Section 3. Section 4 discusses the case and expert background. Section 5 presents the results of the analysis. Section 6 discusses
the results of the study. Section 7 highlights the implications of the study
and the last section presents conclusions.
2. Literature review
2.1. Supply chain management, logistics resilience and digitisation
technologies
Supply chain management is a crucial part of improving an organisation’s productivity, profitability and competitive success [30]. It is the
basic requirement of any company for the movement of goods from the
point of origin to the customer, or from the supplier to the company.
With globalisation, many multinational companies try to manufacture
their products in a developing country because of the availability of
resources and cheap labour; they then sell their products to different
countries, the management of which requires efficient, effective and
very complex logistics management. The components of the supply
chain are planning, marketing, procurement, operation and logistics.
Logistics management is an important part of supply chain management,
which includes inventory setting and transportation. Logistics deals with
the flow of items and their storage [31]. Perfect logistics is that which
can deliver goods to the right person in the right quantity at the right
time at the right place and with the goods in the original condition.
Digitisation technologies are helping supply chain and logistics organisations to efficiently manage their operations and provide resilience to
enable them to manage disruptions.
Supply chain and logistics resilience can be defined as “The adaptive
capability of the supply chain to prepare for unexpected events, respond
to disruptions, and recover from them by maintaining continuity of
operations at the desired level of connectedness and control over
structure and function” [32]. Some of the important digitisation technologies for supply chain and logistics resilience are discussed in next
section.
2.2. Digitisation technologies for supply chain and logistics resilience
There are many digitisation technologies that are gaining traction in
the supply chain and logistics sector, one of which is the Internet of
Things (IoT). The term IoT was first coined by Kevin Ashton in 1999.
Computers are being empowered to gather real-time data by themselves
‒, that is, without human intervention ‒ on the physical environment,
thus creating what is termed as the IoT. The IoT is an interconnected
system of devices or products embedded with different types of sensors,
actuators, and software, with the help of which they can communicate
among themselves or with humans, for exchanging status information or
surrounding information, with much less human involvement, over the
internet [33–35]. For the implementation of IoT, two things are essential: one is Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) and the other is sensor
technology. RFID is a technique used for the identification of objects and
electronic labelling, using radio waves [36]. Sensors are used to collect,
comprehend and specify real-world data [37]. Due to its pervasive and
ubiquitous nature, IoT is being used widely [38]. IoT can be used for
different purposes in different sectors, such as the health sector [39];
sustainable energy sector [40]; volcano monitoring [41]; intelligent
automobile systems for smart cities [42]; lean manufacturing [43];
sustainability in manufacturing organisations [44]; agri-food supply
chain [45]. According to Radivojevi´ca et al. [46]; in the Internet of
Things concept, objects become smart in terms of identification,
communication and interaction. The architecture of IoT includes all
elements from sensors/actuators, interconnection to applications and
services in IoT, and consists of four layers: the “perception”, “network”,
“middleware” and “application” layers [47,48]. The perception layer
contains all such sensors/actuators that are embedded in the object, and
are used to collect data on its status or surroundings. This layer actually
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
3
interconnects the physical world with the virtual world. This layer’s
smart objects send and receive data from their surroundings, identify
themselves and also interact among themselves or with end-users or
other entities in the network [49,50].
Other important digitisation technology is Industry 4.0. Industry 4.0
refers to the fourth Industrial Revolution. The term was first used in
Germany when the new economic policy was introduced. It has a focus
on the evolution of revolutioniory Advanced Technology such as the
Internet of Things, cloud computing, artificial intelligence, augmented
reality and 3D printing [51,52]. In this system, the production process is
fully automated, and communication is also autonomous. Data and information are updated on the cloud in real time so that the top official
can monitor any information in real time while sitting in the office. The
system is fully integrated vertically and horizontally, which significantly
helps in improving the efficiency and productivity of the whole system
[53]. Industry 4.0 collects a lot of data through the IoT sensors that is
used in the analytics supporting equipment servicing, product quality
and sales prediction. In this way, decision-making becomes very easy,
and the whole process becomes very efficient and productive.
There has been a lot of positive change in the industry due to the use
of cloud computing. The price is also decent because of the availability
of cloud solutions and competition in the market. Thus, it is easier and
cheaper than conventional data storage methods. Cloud computing is
nothing but a simple data storage point. Apart from storage, different
companies also provide several web-based tools which make data
analysis easy. The user does not require any type of software installation
for this web application [54,55]. National cloud service providers create
cloud facilities, keeping in mind its use by industry. They also provide
knowledge processing engines that can handle big data. Extending
knowledge from the collected data and using it in decision-making due
to this efficient data, it can improve the service sector supply chain [56].
Blockchain technology is also gaining momentum in the supply chain
and logistics sector. Blockchain is a digital ledger that stores information
in such a way that it becomes impossible to change or hack the information. A blockchain is a chain of blocks that is connected by a hash.
This hash is based on cryptography technology that stores the information of previous blocks. Changing any block without changing the
subsequent block becomes impossible. Satoshi Nakamoto (a pseudonym) started blockchain, which is used in data privacy, banking and
virtual currency such as bitcoin, ethereum. It can also be used for data
privacy in industry [57]. Whenever the user makes a new transaction, a
verification note is generated, and a new block is added to the blockchain after being verified through predefined rules [58].
2.3. Recent related studies
Moktadir et al. [59] reported that Big Data are extensively used in
different sectors today. Big Data can help in decision-making within the
manufacturing supply chain. But there are many barriers to the implementation of Big Data. In this paper, the author has identified these
barriers and analysed them based on their criticality. Data from five
Bangladeshi companies were taken for analysis, and the Delphi-based
AHP method was used for that analysis. Sensitivity analysis was also
done to verify the robustness of the model. Its findings can help researchers and industrial managers to understand the potential barriers
in the manufacturing supply chain and their nature. Singh et al. [60]
argued that the worldwide spread of COVID-19 has resulted in all
manufacturing and logistic activities being greatly affected. An action
plan is proposed in this paper, which tackles the effects of the pandemic
on food supply, handling of medicine, grains and medical safety-related
items such as PPE (Personal Protective Equipment) kits and masks,
enabling them to reach their consumption points. In this system, trucks
and drones can deliver food and grain to high-rise buildings with the
help of a synchronisation system. A simulated study of the PDS (Public
Distribution System) system has also been done, in which the supply
chain was disrupted due to the lack of labour and truck drivers in the
pandemic situation. In another study, Choi et al. [61] found that the
service sector has been affected more than the manufacturing sector by
the pandemic. A piano class was taken as a case study in this paper, and
the study is situated in Hong Kong, a crowded city. The author developed a model with the help of which piano classes can be converted to
mobile operations from static operations. In this, a fully-equipped van
will accompany the piano to the student’s home and serve there. In this
model, government institutions at the initial stage will have to provide
subsidies in different ways such as fixed cost subsidies and operational
cost subsidies. The author has a greater preference for operational cost
subsidies. This model will also become financially viable in the long
term. The author also discusses the transition of static service operations
to mobile service operations. Konˇcar et al. [62]; in their paper, explored
setbacks that inhibit the deployment of technologies such as IoT, in an
FMCG company located in the Western Balkan region in a pandemic
situation. They analysed the setbacks and found that the supply system
should be less dependent on humans. IoT should not only be engaged in
logistics but also in all production and service operations. It is not easy to
predict such type of pandemic situation and its economic impact; so,
FMCG companies should also change their philosophy and promote
digitisation. Biswas et al. [23] pointed out that Coronavirus had a profound effect on the supply chain, and the supply of most products was
stalled, whether raw materials or finished products. Food supplies,
medicines and essential everyday items were also affected. Due to the
manufacturing sector being affected, the cost of essential items also
increased. In such a situation, it becomes necessary to revive the
manufacturing supply chain. In this paper, the author has identified the
barriers in the Indian manufacturing supply chain. The author also
proposes a method for pairwise comparison based on the fuzzy AHP
method. Al-Talib et al. [26] studied how IoT helps in achieving resilience in the supply chain. They found that ‘visibility’, ‘flexibility’,
‘control’ and ‘collaboration’ are key attributes of supply chain resilience
and these can be effectively achieved by the adoption of IoT technologies in supply chains. Golan et al. [27] carried out a systematic literature
review of resilience analytics in supply chain modelling in the context of
the COVID-19 pandemic. They found that, although there are numerous
studies related to supply chain resilience, there is a dearth of studies
related to the uncertainty arising from the threats of conditions arising
out of ‘unknown unknowns’ like COVID-19. More emphasis is required
on this context. Marusak et al. [28] studied resilient food supply chains
in the United States in the context of COVID-19, using a case study
approach to identify how the food supply chain in regional parts of the
US can improve its resilience during the time of pandemic. The results
indicate that the adoption of new innovative distribution and logistics
strategies along with collaboration among food supply chain partners
and proper communication and information sharing helped the regional
food supply chains to improve their resilience. Sharma et al. [29]
studied resilient strategies to mitigate the long-term effects of the
pandemic on retail supply chains. The study utilised a full consistency
model and best-worst method (BWM) for the analysis. The study identified that efficient collaboration among stakeholders is the most
important criterion for enhancing the performance of the retail supply
chain and also determined that digitisation of the supply chain along
with order fulfilment are the most important resilient strategies for
overcoming the long-term effects of the pandemic.
2.4. Research gap and highlights
As soon as the pandemic broke out, the attention of many scholars
was drawn to this and they researched the impact of the pandemic on
supply chains and logistics. For example, some research papers focus on
the impact of the pandemic on logistics and discuss the commercial
aspect of the supply chain (for example, [61,63]; Wiley, 2020; [64].
Choi [10] analysed the model of logistics for mobile service operation
during the Coronavirus outbreak. Ivanov [65] developed a model of a
viable supply chain (VSC), which focused on the redesign of the
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
4
structure of the supply chain and planning economic performance.
Biswas et al. [23] found barriers to supply chain management in the
manufacturing sector and also discussed the impact of COVID-19. Not
only scholars, but many industry experts have also done research work
and published reports on this topic. Singh et al. [60] discussed the ways
and technologies that can quickly help overcome the effects of the
pandemic. Marusak et al. [28] discussed the resilient food supply chain
in the US. Sharma et al. [29] discussed resilient strategies to mitigate the
effects of the pandemic. Deloitte [66] discussed the short-term plan for
supply chain disruption due to the pandemic and also discussed how to
mitigate the effect of a pandemic. Forbes [67] studied the impact of the
pandemic on the global automotive supply chain and mainly discussed
the effect of Chinese industries on the global supply chain. Dubey et al.
[68] published a report mainly focused on the application of blockchain
on supply chain transparency, but did not work on other technical aspects such as the IOT, cloud computing, AI and AR. DNB [13] is an
analytics firm that published a report on the impact of Coronavirus and
how industries should mitigate the risk and further disruption to business. WEF (World Economic Forum) published an article on past instances and compared these with the current pandemic situation [69]
and suggested how to recover from the current situation. WEF also
published many other articles and discussed the impact of Coronavirus
on the supply chain and logistics [70]. The Institute for Supply Chain
Management discussed the impact of a pandemic on supply chain ISM
[71].
From the above discussion, it is clear that the majority of studies
focused on the impact of a pandemic on supply chains and logistics, and
some of the research proposed revival strategies to address it. Other
studies focused on finding the barriers to supply chain management. No
one has conducted a study of the barriers to supply chain logistic resilience improvement in terms of technological transformation, or found
strategies to address it and help to establish a resilient logistics system.
These innovative technologies can solve the issues arising due to the
pandemic in organisations [27]. Thus it becomes clear that we can use
the new technology to build a resilient logistics environment. In this
paper, we are integrating technology and supply chain logistics to propose the idea of a resilient logistics system during the pandemic. We
study different barriers to technological transformation in the logistics
system and try to find a strategy to deal with such barriers.
3. Research methodology
A multi-case study methodology is utilised in this study. The
Bayesian best-worst method (BBWM) is used to prioritise the barriers
and strategies for innovative technologies.
3.1. The Bayesian best-worst method (BBWM)
As mentioned above, BBWM is used to prioritise the barriers and
strategies for innovative technologies. The simple BWM is comparable to
the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) in that it uses the same 9-point
scale for pairwise comparison among the criteria, and calculation of
criteria weights. However, BWM first identifies the best and worst
criteria among the set of criteria, and then performs comparisons among
the best-to-others and others-to-worst criteria. It is also better than AHP
in that it provides more consistent results using fewer pairwise comparisons than are required for AHP [72]. Over time, BWM has gained
importance among researchers across the world, and more and more
researchers have started applying BWM in their works. Some important
studies mentioning applications of BWM include Gupta and Barua [73]
on green innovation supplier selection, Kheybari et al. [74] on bioethanol facility selection, Malek and Desai [75] on sustainable
manufacturing barriers prioritisation, Yadav et al. [76] on smart cities
framework evaluation, Govindan et al. [77,144] on barriers to industrial
sharing economy analysis, Moktadir et al. [59] on the analysis of circular
economy practices, Kaushik et al. [78] on online apparel return factors
analysis, Orji et al. [79] on the analysis of social media success factors
for sustainability, and Gupta et al. [80] on supply chain sustainability
innovation-related barriers and their mitigation strategies. Mohammadi
and Rezaei [81] proposed BBWM for determining group weights on the
basis of statistical probability distribution. Steps for BWM are listed
below:
Step 1: Select relevant criteria for the study.
Step 2: Once the criteria are finalised, choose, from amongst the
main and sub-criteria, the best and worst criteria.
Step 3: The next step is to get a rating of the best criterion over all
other criteria. For this purpose, a scale of 1–9 is used. This will result in
vector AB = (aB1, aB2, …, aBn).
Step 4: Similarly, the next step is to obtain ratings of all other criteria
with the worst criterion. All the experts are required to follow steps 3
and 4. This will also result in vector. AW = (a1W, a2W, …, anW)
T.
Step 5: Next is to obtain optimised weights (w*
1, w*
2, …,w*
n) for all the
criteria.
The AB and AW vectors mentioned above can be converted into a
multinomial probability distribution. The probability mass density
function of a multinomial distribution of AW can be written as
P(AW |w) =
(∑n
j=1ajw)
!
∏n
j=1ajw!
∏n
j=1
wajW
j (1)
where the probability distribution is represented by w. The number of
experiments has a direct impact on the probability of event j as per the
multinomial distribution:
wj ∝∑ajw
n
i=1aiw
, ∀j = 1, …, n (2)
In a similar manner, the worst criterion equation can be obtained as
wW ∝∑aWW
n
i=1aiw
= 1
∑n
i=1aiw
(3)
Combining Equations (2) and (3), one can obtain the following:
wj
wW
∝ajw, ∀j = 1, …, n. (4)
Equation (4) is similar to the concept followed in the original BWM.
Similar to the above, the multinomial distribution can be used to
model AB. However, the vectors AB and AW are different from each
other, as the former is a vector representation of the best-to-other
criteria and AW is a representation of the other-to-worst criteria. Thus,
AB can be denoted as the inverse of the earlier weight as follows:
AB ∼ multinomial(1 / w) (5)
which can be further written as
1
wj
∝∑aBj
n
i=1
aBi
, 1
wB
∝∑aBB
n
i=1
aBi
= ∑
1
n
i=1
aBi
⇒wB
wj
∝aBj, ∀j = 1, …, n,
(6)
The weight vector can now be determined using the statistical distribution, provided it satisfies a non-negative constraint and sums to one
property. The Dirichlet distribution can be used for the same as
mentioned below
Dir(w|α) = 1
B(α)
∏n
j=1
wαj− 1
j (7)
Next, BBWM is used instead of the maximum likelihood method for
approximating the parameters. The posterior distribution model can be
represented as below:
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
5
μj = αpostj − 1
∑n
i=1αposti − n
= 1 + ajw − 1
∑n
i=1(aiw + 1) − n
= ∑ajw
n
i=1aiw
, ∀j = 1, …, n.
(8)
The next step is to estimate the joint probability distribution for
vectors AB and AW for group decision-making.
Let us assume that we have k decision makers and n criteria; wk
represents the individual optimal weight related to each expert, wgg
represents the group weight, A1:K
B a vector indicating all experts’ best-toother criteria evaluation, and A1:K
W represents a vector indicating all
experts’ other-to-worst criteria evaluation. The joint probability distribution for group decision-making can be represented as
P
(
wagg, w1:K⃒
⃒A1:K
B , A1:K
w
) (9)
The following marginal probability rule can be used to obtain the
individual probability of any arbitrary variables x and y as
P(x) =
∑
y
P(x, y) (10)
The next step is the development of the Bayesian hierarchy model.
This is based on the iterative method, which means that the AK
B and AK
W
vectors will generate weight wK after each expert’s evaluation, which, in
turn, will generate the optimal group weight wagg . This indicates that
there is conditional independence between variables. Thus, the joint
probability of the Bayesian model considering conditional independence
can be represented as
P
(
wagg, w1:K⃒
⃒A1:K
B , A1:K
w
)
∝P
(
A1:K
B , A1:K
w
⃒
⃒wagg, w1:K)
P
(
wagg, w1:K)
= P(wagg)
∏K
k=1
P
(
Ak
W
⃒
⃒ wk
)
P
(
Ak
B
⃒
⃒ wk
)
P
(
wk ⃒
⃒ wagg)
(11)
The next step is to specify the distributions of each element. The
above elements can also be specified as a multinomial distribution as per
the inferences drawn in Equation (2) –(8).
Ak
B
⃒
⃒wk ∼ multinomial(
1
/
wk
)
, ∀k = 1, ……K,
Ak
B
⃒
⃒wk ∼ multinomial(
wk
)
, ∀k = 1, ….K. (12)
Here, wK and wagg can be modelled as a Dirichlet distribution as
wk
⃒
⃒wagg ∼ Dir(γ × wagg), ∀k = 1, ……K, (13)
where wagg is the average of the distribution and γ is the concentration
parameter.
The concentration parameter can be modelled using a gamma distribution to satisfy the non-negativity constraints.
γ ∼ gamma(a, b) (14)
Finally, the Dirichlet distribution is used to model the optimal weight
wagg as
wagg ∼ Dir(α) (15)
Here. α = 1.
Once all the parameters have been represented with their probability
distributions, Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation is used to
solve the posterior distribution and thus obtain the group optimal
weight wagg based on expert preference ratings.
The next step is the ranking confidence test. Here, credal ranking is
used to determine the confidence of the consistency of group weights.
Thus, the probability that a criterion ci is better than cj will be
P
(
ci > cj
)
=
∫
I
(
wagg
i > wagg
j
)
P(wagg) (16)
Here, P(wagg) is the posterior distribution of wagg . I will be 1 if the
condition (wagg
i > wagg
j ) holds, otherwise it will be 0. Q samples obtained
by MCMC will be used for calculating the confidence as
P (
ci > cj
)
= 1
Q
∑Q
q=1
I
(
waggq
i > waggq
j
)
P (
cj > ci
)
= 1
Q
∑Q
q=1
I
(
waggq
j > waggq
i
)
(17)
where the qth sample of wagg obtained from MCMC is represented as
waggq . When P (ci > cj) > 0.5, it represents that criterion i is more significant than criterion j, and the confidence is represented by the corresponding probability. Also, the total probability should be equal to 1,
i.e., P (ci > cj) + P(cj > ci) = 1.
The additive value function given by Ref. [82] is used to evaluate
alternatives.
Vi = ∑n
j=1
wjnij (18)
where I is the index of any alternative, nij is the normalised score of the
alternative i with respect to criterion j. The value of nij can be calculated
by using expressions (19) and (20), where Equation (19) is used when
the criterion value is supposed to increase and we label it as a profit or
positive criterion, and Equation (20) is used when criteria value is
supposed to decrease and it is labelled as a cost or negative criterion.
nij∑
yij
i
yij
for all j (19)
nij =
1
∑yij
i
1
yij
for all j (20)
Where yij is the actual score of alternative i with respect to criterion j.
4. Case analysis
4.1. Information related to experts and about the case
With the aim of achieving the objectives, twelve different experts
with similar or related profiles, but from different organisations, were
selected. The experts involved in the study have different levels of
experience, with a minimum of 10 years’ experience. We deliberately
included experts from different backgrounds in our study to make the
result more homogeneous and generalisable for the organisation and for
different industrial contexts. The information on these twelve experts is
provided in Table 1.
4.2. Identification of barriers to innovative digitalisation
In this phase of the study, the authors identified the 22 barriers from
the literature and presented these barriers to the experts for their
opinions and suggestions regarding the addition or elimination of any
barrier. The experts agreed with the 22 identified barriers and found
them relevant for our study. After that, these barriers were categorised
and put into 5 main categories, namely: Technological, Organisational,
Economic and Financial, Cultural, and Regulatory and Institutional
barriers. The final list of barriers categorised into these 5 main categories is presented in Table 2.
4.3. Strategies for overcoming barriers to innovative digitalisation
This pandemic has exposed the weaknesses of the classical logistics
system, and it made us think again about how we can use innovative
technology to create a better logistics system. As discussed above, there
are many barriers to the implementation of these innovative
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
6
technologies, so it is essential further that we find strategies to overcome
these barriers. Each barrier is quite complicated and different from the
others, and they cannot be tackled with only one strategy, so we need
more than one strategy to overcome them all. After an in-depth literature review, we made a list of nine crucial strategies to overcome the
barriers to innovative digitalisation, as shown in Table 3.
In the next step, we ranked the barriers using the Bayesian BWM
methodology. We asked each expert to select one best and one worst
barrier for the main category and all sub-categories. After this, we asked
the experts to rate the best-to-others and others-to-worst barriers on a
scale of 1–9 for the main category and all sub-categories. We consolidated all the expert pairwise comparison sheets and made a
Table (Table 4). The pairwise ratings for all the sub-category barriers are
given in Appendix A (Tables A1–A5).
In the next step, we calculated the weight of the main category
barriers and all sub-category barriers by using the Bayesian BWM
methodology with the help of pairwise rating sheets. We then calculated
their global weight. The weight of a main category barrier becomes its
global weight, whereas, in order to calculate the global weight of a
barrier in a sub-category, the local weight of that barrier in the subcategory has to be multiplied with the weight of the barrier of the
respective main category. The global weights of all the main- and subcategory barriers are presented in Table 5. After identifying the strategy, we need to analyse the strategy’s impact on the barrier. Every
strategy was analysed with the main-category and all sub-category
barriers. Rating of the strategies on a Likert scale of 1–9, corresponding to their power to resolve the respective barrier, was required. So, we
asked the experts to rate the strategy for the main-category and all subcategory barriers, where 1 means very low, and 9 means very high. The
rated strategies are presented in Table A6 attached in the Appendix. We
collected the ratings from all 12 experts and extracted the average using
Equation (19), and then found the normalised value (Uij) of the score
using Equation (4). We obtained the Vij value for all strategies by
multiplying Uij with the global weight of the main criterion corresponding to every barrier. To obtain the Vi value of the strategy, we
added the Vij value of all barriers for each strategy within the main
category using Equation (18).
The Vi values and the corresponding ranks are displayed in Table 6
for the main category and also all sub-categories.
Table 1
Details of respondents.
Expert Expertise Experience
(Years)
Education Industry/
Organisation
Expert1
Manager- Operations 11 M.Tech Food
Expert2
Analyst 12 M.Tech Automobile
Expert3
Manager- Operations 11 MBA Manufacturing
Expert4
Asst. ManagerOperations
10 MBA Steel
Expert5
Manager- Operations 12 MBA Power
Expert6
Asst. ManagerProcess Control
10 B.Tech. Steel
Expert7
Deputy ManagerOperations
10 BE. Steel
Expert8
Asst. ManagerOperations
10 B.Tech. Steel
Expert9
Data Scientist 11 M.Tech Core Compete
Expert10
Manager - Logistics
and Supply Chain
Management
11 MBA Logistics
Expert11
Asst. ManagerOperations
12 B.Tech. Steel
Expert12
Senior Manager -
Procurement
13 B.Tech. Automobile
Table 2
Barriers to innovative digitalisation in logistics.
Main Category Barriers Description References
Technological
barriers (TB)
The need for
unique, faster,
and cheap
identification
process
Many items going from
origin to the
consumption point and
their receiving,
storing, and sorting
should be done quickly
and with highly
accurate unique
identifications.
[49,83]
[33,84–86].
Lack of IT
infrastructure
IT infrastructure
(hardware, software,
and network) needs to
be improved to support
technological
transformation in the
industries, which will
improve the resilience
of logistics during
pandemic situations
when information and
instructions are
transferred through
the IT network.
[59,87–92].
Inadequate
internet
connectivity
Internet connectivity is
poor in 3rd tier cities
and rural areas, which
needs to be addressed
for improving realtime data transfer to
the cloud visibility
across the entire
supply chain, and work
from home experience.
There is less mobility
of employees, so we
need adequate internet
facilities for better
connectivity, which is
required for resilience
during pandemics.
[83,91,
93–96].
Lack of
integration
among IT
networks
During a pandemic, the
logistics system relies
on automation, which
needs integration
among IT networks
and legacy systems,
which is a big issue in
implementing IOT and
cloud computing in
logistics.
[50,91,
96–99].
Security and
privacy concerns
During a pandemic
exchange of
information is mostly
online, the security of
this critical
information is our
prime concern.
[89,93,
100–104].
Complexity of
data
In logistics, a variety of
data is generated from
different sources,
which creates
problems with data
storage and data
integration.
[59,89,93,
105–108].
Scalability For better resilience
during a pandemic,
scalability is a big issue
in adopting artificial
intelligence and big
data analysis, which
are necessary tools for
building a scalable
logistics model.
[59,88,91,
100,101,
108].
(continued on next page)
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
7
Table 2 (continued )
Main Category Barriers Description References
Organisational
barriers (OB)
Resistance from
employees due to
fear of job loss
Digitalisation during a
pandemic in the
logistics firm requires
significantly fewer
employees, so there
will be layoffs and
retained employees
who need to learn new
skills, which creates
uncertainty among
employees.
[109–111].
Lack of technical
knowledge/skill
Lack of technical skills
hinders the adoption of
such complicated
technologies to
develop a resilient
logistics system during
a pandemic situation.
[59,89,93,
100,106,108,
112,113].
Lack of training
facilities
There are insufficient
training facilities to
provide a new skill to
the employee.
[59,88].
Lack of support by
top management
A resilient logistics
system requires highlevel commitment
from top-level
management for
working culture
transformation, which
is required to
implement these
technologies.
[93,96,98,
108,112].
Need to find a
suitable research
partner
SMEs lack support
from research
institutes compared to
the large industries,
which is required to
develop new products/
services and new
business models in the
digital world to
counter pandemic
problems and develop
a resilient logistics
system.
[112,114,
115].
E-waste
management
The generation of Ewaste from millions of
sensors, batteries, and
old computers
increases day by day,
and contains
hazardous and toxic
materials. For a
sustainable and
resilient supply chain,
it is necessary to adopt
a waste management
system; organisations
face the problem of
disposing of E-waste
because the workforce
is already insufficient
during a pandemic
situation.
[91,100,
116–118]
Economic and
financial
barriers (EFB)
The high cost of
investment
The cost associated
with smart sensors and
IOT devices and its
implementation plays
a significant role in
adopting these
technologies. The cost
of sensors and IOT
devices is high during a
pandemic because of
poor supply chain
management between
[100,119]
[59,112].
Table 2 (continued )
Main Category Barriers Description References
cross-border
organisations.
Unclear economic
benefit of digital
investments
Return on investment
is not clearly defined,
which discourages
investment in these
high investment
technologies.
[93,96,98,
108,120,
121].
Lack of monetary
resources
If a pandemic is longlasting, it leads to
economic crises among
small and medium
enterprises, as the
implementation of new
technologies requires
immense financial
resources.
[59,93,98,
109,111,
122].
Cultural barriers
(CB)
Lack of trust
among partners
Trust among the
partners is necessary
for critical information
sharing and buying on
credit without any fear
of misuse of data they
entrust to each other;
trust leads to a
seamless flow of data
and items from
suppliers to customers
during pandemic
situations, which
makes a resilient
supply chain.
[112,
123–125].
Lack of support
from supplier/
customer
Supplier/customer
needs to be ready to
support new systems
and improve
coordination and
communication among
partners and suppliers
for better performance
during a pandemic.
[98,112,126,
127].
Acceptance of
new technologies
Acceptance of
wearable devices such
as cameras and
microphones is a big
concern for employees
due to privacy and
confidentiality issues.
[86,112,119,
124].
Regulatory and
institutional
barriers (RIB)
Lack of standards
and regulation
Standardisation is
essential for sharing
information among
smart devices, and
information- sharing
plays a crucial role in
building smart and
resilient supply-chain,
smart objects, and
environments.
Integration between
smart devices is
difficult because each
country has different
rules and regulations.
[91,96,98,
108,111,112,
124,125,
128].
Lack of financial
supports in govt
policies.
During a pandemic,
financial crises faced
by the organisation,
along with the lack of
incentives by the
government and
professional
organisations to
promote the adoption
of new technologies in
logistics, create a
double setback for the
organisation.
[80,93,104,
124,125,
129].
(continued on next page)
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
8
5. Results
In the classical BWM method, we use two criteria to determine the
confidence superiority, whereas with the Bayesian BWM the concept of
credal ranking is introduced, which gives the confidence of each credal
ranking. When this principle is applied to a real-world scenario, the
confidence superiority between different pairs of criteria can be
determined.
As shown in Fig. 1, “Technological Barriers” prove to be the most
important of all the main criteria barriers. This is due to the fact that, in
the implementation of innovative technologies in logistics, the technological barrier plays a major role. Although “Technological Barriers” is
considered more important than the other four criteria, a confidence of
0.76 between it and the “Economic Barriers” shows that a few experts
believe “Economic Barriers” to be more important. Other than that, all
experts believe technological barriers to be more important than the
other three barriers, with a confidence of 1. Similarly, “Organisational
Barriers” is considered more important than “Cultural Barriers” and
“Regulatory & Institutional Barriers”, but the confidence of 0.99 between “Cultural Barriers” and “Regulatory & Institutional Barriers”
shows that some experts believe “Social & Cultural Barriers” to be more
important than “Regulatory & Institutional Barriers".
The credal ranking of the main criteria and all sub-criteria along with
their confidence is shown in Fig. 1‒6.
6. Discussion of results related to barriers and identified
strategies
6.1. Discussion of the ranking of the barriers
In this study, after an in-depth literature review, the first barrier was
identified, and the second strategy that tackles barriers to the implementation of innovative technologies was also identified. Subsequently,
the responses concerning the barrier and the strategy were separately
analysed, based on discussions with supply chain and logistics experts.
The barriers were analysed with the help of the Bayesian BWM methodology, and the results are presented in Table 5.
After analysis, it becomes clear that the technological barrier (TB) is
a very significant one for implementation of the new innovative technologies that can make supply chain logistics more resilient and minimise the hindrances caused by the pandemic. It is often seen in
developing countries that the technological barrier becomes very
important as technology penetration and implementation cannot be
achieved easily [148]. The lack of IT infrastructure is also a massive
problem in a developing country, hindering the implementation of new
technology [91,132]. Technology reduces operational costs and also
increases the delivery performance and customer satisfaction levels,
making the company more competitive in terms of cost, quality, delivery
and flexibility [5]. The technological factor plays a significant role,
perhaps because the unique identification made possible by devices
improves the tracking and location of items [33,133]. An enormous
amount of data can be used for forecasting future sales and customer
behaviour. Interconnected devices reduce human work, which ultimately reduces causes of damage due to direct human intervention.
Compatibility with other hardware and software enhances usability
[96]. The faster and cheaper identification process reduces costs
incurred by the company. These things ultimately affect the adoption of
these new technologies. The data provided by a person or firm when
placing an order contains sensitive information like the name of the
consumer, address, and bank details. The information given by the
consumer can be used for tracking the user and monitoring the purchase
Table 2 (continued )
Main Category Barriers Description References
Lack of rewards
and recognition
Rewards and
recognition motivate
the employee to
perform well in
pandemic type difficult
situations.
[130,131].
Table 3
Strategies for achieving innovative digitalisation in logistics.
Strategy Description
Focus on research, development,
and innovation (S1)
These strategies are essential for achieving
a resilient logistics system during a
pandemic situation. They also help with
cost reduction of technological
equipment, improvement of system
effectiveness, and improvement of the
deliverable product and services.
Provide financial support (S2) During a pandemic situation, small
businesses face economic crises. So big
organisations in the supply chain should
provide monetary support to small
stakeholders such as suppliers and
retailers for adopting these technologies to
overcome the financial problems and
develop trust and relationships, which is
most important for building a resilient
supply chain.
Enhance training facilities and
conduct awareness programs (S3)
Provide training to employees to
understand these technologies and
organise seminars and awareness
programs to think about new technologies
that can help build a resilient logistics
system, and impart awareness and
knowledge from top-level management to
lower-level management.
Enhance security and privacy (S4) Cyber-attacks have risen during COVID-19
(ISACA Survey), so improved security and
privacy are needed by using new era
technology such as blockchain and
artificial intelligence. This also builds
confidence among customers and
suppliers to use technology-driven
logistics systems.
Automation strategy (S5) There is a lack of skilled workforce during
a pandemic situation, so replacing the
workforce by robots can help tackle this
situation and increase the precision and
accuracy of the processes involved in
logistics like the sorting and loading of
packages.
Adoption of new and alternative
technology (S6)
The adoption of new technology is very
critical. Under this strategy, the cost of
adopting new technology and its
alternatives needs to be analysed. Also,
there is a need to check the scalability and
feasibility of that technology.
Create or hire an organisation to
monitor the complete supply
chain (S7)
Several types of problems arise, such as
trust and relationship problems, financial
problems, and credit dispute problems
during a pandemic. Such an organisation
can solve the problems between different
stakeholders and create a system under
which all stakeholders operate seamlessly.
If any concern arises, stakeholders may
approach this organisation for support.
Use satellite internet access (S8) Internet connectivity is poor in remote
areas, so we can use satellite internet
access, which can also help during natural
disasters such as floods, earthquakes, and
tsunamis.
Collaboration with technical
institutes (S9)
Several new industrial problems arise
during a pandemic, so technical institutes
can also support research and innovation
as per the industry requirements. This is
also a crucial strategy for training young
minds and developing relevant skills
required by the industry.
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
9
behaviour [111]. The use of consumer data without the consent of the
consumer comes under the privacy issue [49]. This becomes a core issue
when data analytics tools are used to infer knowledge about the
customer and create a digital picture of the customer without the
customer knowing that their private information is being used [134].
As seen in the analysis results list, economic and financial barriers
(EFB) are in second place. For many developing countries, these have
been significant barriers to the implementation of new technology. The
costs associated with sensors, cameras, other digital devices, and the
implementation of such technology play a significant role [119]. A firm
or company not only incurs the costs of the sensors and IoT devices and
Table 4
Pairwise comparison for main category barriers.
Best-to-others for 12 respondents.
Best to others TB OB EFB CB RIB
Expert-1 TB 1 6 2 9 5
Expert-2 TB 1 9 2 6 7
Expert-3 TB 1 6 2 7 9
Expert-4 EFB 3 4 1 9 7
Expert-5 EFB 2 3 1 8 9
Expert-6 TB 1 6 2 9 4
Expert-7 TB 1 7 3 9 5
Expert-8 TB 1 5 2 9 4
Expert-9 EFB 2 4 1 9 7
Expert-10 TB 1 4 3 9 7
Expert-11 OB 5 1 3 6 9
Expert-12 TB 1 4 2 6 9
Others-to-worst
Experts→ Expert 1 Expert 2 Expert 3 Expert 4 Expert 5 Expert 6 Expert 7 Expert 8 Expert 9 Expert 10 Expert 11 Expert 12
Worst Criterion → CB OB RIB CB RIB CB CB CB CB CB RIB RIB
TB 9 9 9 7 8 9 9 9 8 9 3 9
OB 3 1 4 5 7 3 3 4 5 5 9 5
EFB 8 8 8 9 9 7 6 7 9 5 6 7
CB 1 3 3 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 3
RIB 4 2 1 2 1 5 4 5 3 2 1 1
Table 5
Criteria weights and rankings of the barriers.
Main Criteria Main
Criteria
Weight
Subcriteria
Subcriteria
Local
Weights
Subcriteria
Global
Weights
Ranks
Technological
barriers
0.344 TB1 0.137 0.047 6
TB2 0.216 0.074 4
TB3 0.218 0.075 3
TB4 0.126 0.043 8
TB5 0.119 0.041 9
TB6 0.092 0.031 13
TB7 0.088 0.030 16
Organisational
barriers
0.157 OB1 0.201 0.031 14
OB2 0.22 0.035 12
OB3 0.197 0.031 15
OB4 0.170 0.026 17
OB5 0.103 0.016 21
OB6 0.100 0.015 22
Economic and
financial
barriers
0.310 EFB1 0.431 0.134 1
EFB2 0.170 0.053 5
EFB3 0.397 0.123 2
Cultural barriers 0.084 CB1 0.224 0.018 20
CB2 0.307 0.025 18
CB3 0.467 0.039 10
Regulatory and
institutional
barriers
0.103 RIB1 0.352 0.036 11
RIB2 0.445 0.045 7
RIB3 0.202 0.020 19
Table 6
Ranking of strategies.
Strategies Main Category Barriers Technological Barriers Organisational Barriers Economic Barriers Cultural Barriers Institutional Barriers
Vi Rank Vi Rank Vi Rank Vi Rank Vi Rank Vi Rank
S1 0.120 2 0.049 1 0.016 7 0.034 5 0.007 8 0.012 2
S2 0.127 1 0.042 3 0.019 2 0.049 1 0.009 6 0.012 4
S3 0.110 6 0.030 7 0.023 1 0.033 7 0.013 1 0.011 7
S4 0.107 7 0.029 8 0.016 8 0.035 4 0.011 2 0.012 3
S5 0.096 9 0.042 4 0.018 4 0.025 9 0.008 7 0.010 9
S6 0.112 4 0.047 2 0.016 6 0.038 2 0.010 4 0.010 8
S7 0.105 8 0.025 9 0.017 5 0.034 6 0.011 3 0.011 5
S8 0.111 5 0.040 6 0.013 9 0.026 8 0.006 9 0.011 6
S9 0.112 3 0.041 5 0.019 3 0.036 3 0.009 5 0.014 1
Fig. 1. Main criteria barrier credal ranking.
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
10
the implementation of these devices, but also incurs the cost of training
employees. The initial investment needed for the adoption of IoT is very
high [59], which prevents small and medium-sized organisations
implementing such technologies in their firms due to limited funds and
resources [109,111].
Organisational barriers (OB) are also significant because of the lack
of training facilities, lack of digital knowledge and lack of awareness of
new technologies [113]. The lack of technological skill limits the harnessing of the adopted technology, which ultimately reduces the expected benefit to the organisation. Small firms are reluctant to
implement these technologies due to their great complexity, which requires highly skilled professionals. The wages of highly skilled professionals are high, as is the cost of training employees [111]. The
adoption, implementation and operation or use of these technologies in
an organisation requires experienced and knowledgeable professionals
[50]. Thus, we can say that organisational barriers play an essential role
in the adoption and implementation of innovative technology in the
organisation.
Among the sub-category barriers, “High cost of investment (EFB1)"
emerged as the most critical issue related to the implementation of
innovative technologies. These technologies need very high investment
as the cameras, goggles, UID chips, IOT devices and sensors used in them
are quite expensive [59]. The high cost of investment in these innovative
technologies in the initial stage makes it difficult for any SME or small
organisation to implement such innovative technologies [119]. “Lack of
monetary resources (EFB3)" also comes out as an essential barrier that
needs attention. As discussed above, these technologies require very
high-cost investments and huge monetary resources to implement them
[119]. If the pandemic is long-lasting, this can lead to economic crises.
Developing countries are very fragile in any financial crisis [135], so the
financial institutions of a developing country such as NBFCs and banks
may find themselves unable to fulfil the financial requirements of the
organisation [59]. As concerns “Inadequate internet connectivity
(TB3)", this becomes critical in pandemic situations as the mobility of
human resources is low, and logistics professionals have to work
remotely, so they have the problem of connecting to the shared server
without internet connectivity. In rural and remote areas, there is an
Internet connectivity problem that hampers the adoption of new and
innovative technologies in the field of logistics (Luthra et al., 2019). The
internet is a medium for the sharing of real-time data for the company; if
there is poor internet connection, then the company cannot get real-time
data and the is not able to derive benefits from the data. The connectivity in remote areas is insufficient, thus reducing the efficiency and
productivity of employees [91]. To use innovative and new technologies
like IOT and cloud computing, we need to have good internet connectivity [96]. “Lack of IT infrastructure (TB2)" comes out at number four in
our study, if we look at this barrier from the impact point of view.
Efficient software, a fast network and hardware are needed extensively
to implement these new and innovative technologies, but a developing
Fig. 2. Technological credal ranking.
Fig. 3. Organisational barriers credal ranking.
Fig. 4. Economic and financial barriers credal ranking.
Fig. 5. Cultural barriers credal ranking.
Fig. 6. Regulatory and institutional barriers credal ranking.
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
11
country like India still does not have an IT infrastructure on that scale
[52,92]. These technologies should work in connection with various
software packages to utilise the knowledge extracted from the data
gathered by the sensors. IoT devices and sensors are used in connection
with application software such as WMS, ITS, and TMS used by many
companies [136], so we need software and hardware which are
compatible with many platforms and devices. “Unclear economic
benefit of digital investments (TB2)" is another critical barrier to
implementing these innovative technologies [108]. These technologies
require high investments, but exactly when the returns on that investment will materialise, and in which form it will come, are unstructured.
For these reasons, investors still avoid investing in these new technologies [93].
6.2. Discussion of the strategies
The second phase of the analysis is a strategic analysis to overcome
the barriers to the implementation of these new innovative technologies.
The strategic analysis suggests that no single strategy alone can overcome these barriers. This becomes clear by looking at the total weight of
each study (see Table 6 for these results). To overcome the main category barriers (overall barrier) “Provide financial support (ST2)" emerges
as the most crucial strategy for tackling the main category barriers.
“Technological barriers (TB)" and “Economic and financial barriers
(EFB)" are the top two barriers in the main category and “Provide
financial support (ST2)" can be the most useful strategy for overcoming
these barriers. If a small organisation is given financial support from the
bank and NBFCs, then it will be able to improve its research and
development. This funding can help to further reduce the technological
and economic barriers. The organisation can also build its IT infrastructure. Focusing on research, development, and innovation (ST1) also
helps to improve the research work to implement these technologies.
To overcome the technological barriers (TB), an essential strategy
emerges to be “Focus on research, development and innovation (ST1)".
Research development can improve the use of inexpensive and fast
identification chips such as inkjet-printed chips. It can also solve problems such as internet connectivity through innovations; a project like
Sterling can revolutionise this field. Further modification of the blockchain technology through innovation can be used to strengthen data
security and privacy and avoid data breaches. “Adoption of new and
alternative technology (ST6)" strategies also help to overcome the
technological barriers. These technologies are quite new so there is not
much exploration of these technologies; if a chip or device is too
expensive, then we can explore secondary alternatives.
For overcoming organisational barriers (OB), the most crucial
strategy proves to be to “Enhance training facilities and conduct
awareness programs (ST3)", because these technologies are very complex and the adoption of such technology is not easy for a company if
there are no employees who can understand it. For overcoming economic and financial barriers (EFB), providing financial support (ST2)
emerges as the most important strategy. Financial support from governments to various logistics and manufacturing organisations can help
build resilience and also help them build innovative digital technologies
so that these organisations can better cope with pandemic and other
disruptions.
7. Implications
7.1. Managerial implications
The study has some significant implications for organisations and
their managers in their adoption of digitisation technologies in the
supply chain and logistics sector for resilience. Logistics and supply
chain organisations often face uncertainties due to the disruptions
occurring in this sector, which have been further compounded due to the
recent COVID crisis. Organisations are looking to become more resilient
to overcome these disruptions. but this is an uphill task for the managers
of the organisations, especially in developing countries. They face a lot
of challenges and need first of all to overcome the economic and
financial challenges in adopting digitisation technologies for building
resilience. Implementing digitisation technologies requires a high initial
investment and many organisations lack the necessary monetary resources. Managers of these organisations need to focus on acquiring
funds from government and other regulatory bodies for digitisation of
their supply chains, and large organisations in the chain should provide
monetary support to small stakeholders such as suppliers and retailers
for adopting these technologies to overcome the financial problems and
develop trust and relationships, which is most important for building a
resilient supply chain. Collaboration with technical institutes is also
necessary for developing low-cost digitisation technologies for the
supply chain and logistics sector. Technology complexity and nonavailability is also a major challenge for the managers of these organisations to adopt digitisation technologies for resilience. Often the technology is complex and not easily understandable or is simply not
available. Managers need to focus on providing training for their employees related to these digitisation technologies and also to seek technological support from other larger industries or regulatory bodies.
Large organisations in the supply chain again have their role in
providing technological support to the other supply chain partners for
the adoption of digitisation technologies for supply chain and logistics
resilience. In a broader sense, organisations need to focus more on
providing financial support, and research & development, for adopting
innovative technologies in their domain. Government participation
throughout the process is very critical, and they need to provide incentives and other help to encourage it.
7.2. Theoretical and academic implications
The current study has significant theoretical and academic implications also as it tries to fill the gap by providing results related to barriers
to the adoption of digitisation technologies for supply chain and logistics
resilience. This study identified the challenges to supply chain logistics
resilience from the perspective of an emerging economy like India. The
major contribution is the identification of 22 challenges related to
digitisation for supply chain logistics resilience. This study also contributes with the identification of nine strategies to overcome these
challenges. Thus, a comprehensive framework is developed for researchers, policy makers and academics for further study of the challenges to digitisation for resilience in other industry contexts also.
Academics and policy makers need to work together to develop policies
to facilitate organisations’ adoption of digitisation technologies for
supply chain and logistics resilience, especially in these times of extreme
uncertainty and turbulence.
8. Conclusions and future research directions
The outbreak of the pandemic has completely exposed the weaknesses of the classical logistics system and now requires that the logistics
system be reformed. The whole logistics system, especially for organisations operating their logistics in the traditional manner, has been
facing numerous challenges during the pandemic. Innovative technologies play an important role in this reform, and without them, reform
cannot be achieved. However, these reforms are often inhibited by many
challenges, as discussed in the above sections. This study focused first on
identifying the barriers/challenges to the adoption of innovative digitisation technologies and then on identifying and ranking resilient
strategies to overcome these challenges. The BBWM methodology was
used for the analysis of the barriers and strategies. The results identified
technological, economic, and organisational barriers as the most significant barriers to the adoption of innovative digitisation technologies
in the logistics sector. Technological and economic barriers are the two
major problems. More than one strategy is needed to tackle these
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
12
barriers and no single strategy is sufficient. In this context, an analysis of
resilient strategies with respect to each barrier was carried out for both
the main and sub-category barriers. To overcome the major technological and economic barriers, focusing on research, development and
innovation, providing financial support, and collaboration with technical institutes are the most important resilient strategies. Enhancing
training facilities and conducting awareness programs is essential also
since it helps workers and managers to learn technical skills so that they
can easily apply these technologies and make them operational. Organisations need to focus more on research and development of innovative
technologies so that these technologies can be adopted through some
innovative projects in the context of the logistics sector. Bigger budgets
need to be allocated by organisations for innovation, research and
development, and the adoption of innovative technologies in order to
improve resilience to unknown-unknowns like the current pandemic.
Government also needs to pitch in and provide financial as well as other
support in terms of incentives to the logistics sector to enable them to
become resilient.
As with the other research works, this work also suffers from certain
limitations. This study is based on the opinions of experts from the logistics sector as well as government and academics. The sample of experts chosen is limited, but future studies can carry out a statistical
analysis of the factors identified using techniques like structural equation modelling. Future studies can also explore the interdependencies
among the various barriers to logistics resilience through digitisation.
Future studies related to the pandemic can also include other related
fields like studying the relationships with respect to inventory management, transportation and the energy sector as well. Studies related to
resilience in the logistics sector can include more complex mathematical
models like the one discussed by Refs. [137–143]. These methodologies
can help to develop more strategies for resilient logistics during uncertain times like a pandemic. Future studies can focus on studying the
impact of one specific technology like Industry 4.0 or Artificial Intelligence for supply chain logistics and resilience.
Author statement
Himanshu Gupta was involved in conceptualization of Idea,
Methodology design, analysis of data, writing original draft and revision, Avinash Kumar was involved in data collection, analysis of data
and writing of original draft, Simonov Kusi-Sarpong was involved in
writing original draft and supervision, Sharfuddin Ahmed Khan was
involved in writing original draft and supervision, Shashi Chandra
Sharma was involved in writing original draft and supervision
Appendix A
Table- A1
Pairwise comparison for technological barriers
Best to others for 12 respondents
Experts Best to Others TB1 TB2 TB3 TB4 TB5 TB6 TB7
Expert-1 TB3 3 2 1 7 5 8 9
Expert-2 TB1 1 7 2 5 3 9 6
Expert-3 TB3 8 6 1 3 4 9 7
Expert-4 TB1 1 6 4 7 3 6 9
Expert-5 TB2 9 1 2 4 5 5 7
Expert-6 TB2 5 1 3 9 7 6 8
Expert-7 TB3 5 2 1 4 8 9 7
Expert-8 TB2 4 1 2 7 6 8 9
Expert-9 TB2 3 1 2 9 4 6 7
Expert-10 TB4 9 3 6 1 7 5 4
Expert-11 TB2 7 1 6 2 9 3 5
Expert-12 TB2 3 1 2 5 6 7 9
Others to the Worst
Experts→ Expert-1 Expert-2 Expert-3 Expert-4 Expert-5 Expert-6 Expert-7 Expert-8 Expert-9 Expert-10 Expert-11 Expert-12
Worst Criterion → TB7 TB6 TB6 TB7 TB1 TB4 TB6 TB7 TB4 TB1 TB5 TB7
TB1 6 9 2 9 1 4 4 5 7 1 2 7
TB2 7 2 4 3 9 9 8 9 9 5 9 9
TB3 9 8 9 5 8 7 9 8 8 2 3 7
TB4 3 4 6 2 5 1 6 3 1 9 7 4
TB5 4 7 5 7 4 3 2 4 5 2 1 3
TB6 2 1 1 2 4 3 1 2 3 3 5 2
TB7 1 3 3 1 3 2 3 1 3 5 4 1
Table A2
Pairwise comparison for organisational barriers
Best to others for 12 respondents
Experts Best to Others OB1 OB2 OB3 OB4 OB5 OB6
Expert-1 OB4 7 2 3 1 8 9
Expert-2 OB2 5 1 3 6 8 9
Expert-3 OB1 1 5 6 3 8 8
Expert-4 OB1 1 5 7 2 9 5
Expert-5 OB3 5 3 1 4 8 9
Expert-6 OB2 7 1 2 9 5 6
Expert-7 OB1 1 4 7 3 6 9
(continued on next page)
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
13
Table A2 (continued )
Best to others for 12 respondents
Experts Best to Others OB1 OB2 OB3 OB4 OB5 OB6
Expert-8 OB1 1 6 7 3 9 5
Expert-9 OB1 1 8 4 5 6 7
Expert-10 OB2 5 1 3 4 7 9
Expert-11 OB2 4 1 2 6 9 7
Expert-12 OB3 6 2 1 9 5 6
Others to the Worst
Experts→ Expert-1 Expert-2 Expert-3 Expert-4 Expert-5 Expert-6 Expert-7 Expert-8 Expert-9 Expert-10 Expert-11 Expert-12
Worst Criterion → OB6 OB6 OB6 OB5 OB6 OB4 OB6 OB5 OB2 OB6 OB5 OB4
OB1 3 4 9 9 4 3 9 9 9 3 3 3
OB2 8 9 4 3 7 9 5 3 2 9 9 7
OB3 6 7 3 2 9 8 3 2 5 5 7 9
OB4 9 3 7 8 5 1 6 6 4 5 3 1
OB5 2 2 2 1 2 4 4 1 3 2 1 4
OB6 1 1 1 4 1 3 1 4 3 1 2 3
Table A3
Pairwise comparison for economical barriers
Best to others for 12 respondents
Experts Best to Others EB1 EB2 EB3
Expert-1 EB2 3 1 7
Expert-2 EB1 1 9 4
Expert-3 EB3 3 9 2
Expert-4 EB1 1 9 4
Expert-5 EB3 7 4 1
Expert-6 EB1 1 9 3
Expert-7 EB3 3 9 1
Expert-8 EB1 1 9 4
Expert-9 EB3 8 6 1
Expert-10 EB1 1 8 3
Expert-11 EB3 2 9 1
Expert-12 EB1 1 8 4
Others to the Worst
Experts→ Expert1
Expert2
Expert3
Expert4
Expert5
Expert6
Expert7
Expert8
Expert9
Expert10
Expert11
Expert12
Worst
Criterion
→
EB3 EB2 EB2 EB2 EB1 EB2 EB2 EB2 EB1 EB2 EB2 EB2
EB1 7 9 7 9 1 9 7 9 2 8 5 9
EB2 9 1 1 1 5 1 1 1 3 1 1 2
EB3 1 5 8 5 9 7 9 5 8 4 9 5
Table A4
Pairwise comparison for cultural barriers
Best to others for 12 respondents
Experts Best to Others CB1 CB2 CB3
Expert-1 CB3 9 7 1
Expert-2 CB3 8 6 1
Expert-3 CB3 6 9 1
Expert-4 CB3 9 7 1
Expert-5 CB1 1 5 9
Expert-6 CB3 8 5 1
Expert-7 CB2 4 1 8
Expert-8 CB3 9 6 1
Expert-9 CB3 9 7 1
Expert-10 CB3 9 4 1
Expert-11 CB2 8 1 3
Expert-12 CB2 4 1 8
(continued on next page)
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
14
Table A4 (continued )
Others to the Worst
Experts→ Expert1
Expert2
Expert3
Expert4
Expert5
Expert6
Expert7
Expert8
Expert9
Expert10
Expert11
Expert12
Worst
Criterion
→
CB1 CB1 CB2 CB1 CB3 CB1 CB3 CB1 CB2 CB1 CB1 CB3
Others to the Worst
Experts→ Expert1
Expert2
Expert3
Expert4
Expert5
Expert6
Expert7
Expert8
Expert9
Expert10
Expert11
Expert12
Worst
Criterion
→
CB1 CB1 CB2 CB1 CB3 CB1 CB3 CB1 CB2 CB1 CB1 CB3
CB1 1 1 3 1 9 1 5 1 1 1 1 5
CB2 3 3 1 2 4 3 9 3 2 3 8 9
CB3 8 9 9 9 1 9 1 9 9 9 4 2
Table A5
Pairwise comparison for regulatory & institutional barriers
Best to others for 12 respondents
Experts Best to Others RB1 RB2 RB3
Expert-1 RB3 9 4 1
Expert-2 RB2 3 1 9
Expert-3 RB1 1 8 6
Expert-4 RB2 2 1 9
Expert-5 RB2 4 1 8
Expert-6 RB1 1 9 5
Expert-7 RB2 3 1 9
Expert-8 RB2 3 1 9
Expert-9 RB2 4 1 9
Expert-10 RB2 3 1 9
Expert-11 RB3 8 3 1
Expert-12 RB2 5 1 9
Others to the Worst
Experts→ Expert1
Expert2
Expert3
Expert4
Expert5
Expert6
Expert7
Expert8
Expert9
Expert10
Expert11
Expert12
Worst
Criterion
→
RB3 RB2 RB2 RB3 RB3 RB2 RB3 RB3 RB3 RB3 RB1 RB3
RB1 1 7 9 8 5 9 7 7 5 4 1 4
RB2 5 9 1 9 9 1 9 9 9 9 4 9
RB3 9 1 3 1 1 4 1 1 1 1 8 1
Appendix B
Sample Survey Questionnaire
Reference: Survey for research work.
Dear Respondent.
I am working on a research paper regarding “Strategies to overcome barriers of innovative digitalisation technologies for supply chain logistics
resilience during pandemic”. Our research has the following objective:
• Identification and ranking of barriers to digitisation for supply chain and Logistics resilience during pandemics.
• Identification and ranking of strategies to overcome barriers to digitisation for supply chain and Logistics resilience during pandemics.
Considering your expertise in this field, we require your opinion on the identified barriers of the study.
Using the scale as mentioned in Table 2 below please rate the barriers presented in Table 1.
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
15
Table 1
Barriers to advancing supply chain logistics resilience during pandemic
Category Criteria
Technological barriers (TB) Need of Unique, Faster and Cheap Identification Process (TB1)
Lack of IT infrastructure (TB2)
Inadequate internet connectivity (TB3)
Lack of integration among IT networks (TB4)
Security and Privacy Concerns (TB5)
Complexity of data (TB6)
Scalability (TB7)
Organisational barriers (OB) Resistance from employee due to fear of job loss (OB1)
Lack of technical knowledge/skill (OB2)
Lack of training facilities (OB3)
Lack of support by top management (OB4)
Need to find suitable research partner (OB5)
E-waste management (OB6)
Economical and Financial
Barriers (EFB)
High cost of investment (EFB1)
Unclear economic benefit of digital investments (EFB2)
Lack of monetary Resources (EFB3)
Cultural barriers (CB) Lack of trust among partners (CB1)
Lack of Support from supplier/Customer (CB2)
Acceptance of new Technologies (CB3)
Regulatory and Institutional barriers (RIB) Lack of standard and regulation (RIB1)
Lack of financial supports in gov polices (RIB2)
Lack of rewards and recognition (RIB3)
Table 2
Linguistic scale for pairwise comparison for best worst methodology
Scale for Best worst methodology
Equally
important
Equal to
moderately more
important
Moderately
more important
Moderately to
strongly more
important
Strongly
more
important
Strongly to very
strongly more
important
Very strongly
more
important
Very strongly to
extremely more
important
Extremely
more
important
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Example for Rating
If Best Main category barrier is TB and worst is EB then.
Main category barriers comparison
BO TB OB EFB OB EB
Best barriers: TB 1 Relative to TB Relative to TB Relative to TB 9
OW Worst barriers: EB
TB 9
CB Relative to EB
IB Relative to EB
OB Relative to EB
EB 1
Score for ranking of barriers (Expert 1)
Among the four main category barriers, identify which is the best and which is the worst among given (You can use codes only as mentioned in
Table 1).
Best Main Barriers:
Worst main Barriers:
Using 9-point scale mentioned in Table 2, rate the Best to Other and Other to Worst barriers in format mentioned below:
Main category barriers comparison
BO TB OB EFB CB RIB
Best barriers:
OW Worst barriers:
TB
(continued on next page)
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
16
(continued )
OW Worst barriers:
OB
EFB
CB
RIB
Part 2
This part deals with ranking the strategies with respect to main category barriers as well as each of sub category barriers.
Table 3
supply chain logistics resilience during pandemic strategies
Category Criteria
supply chain logistics resilience during pandemic strategies Focus on research, development and Innovation strategy (S1)
Provide Financial Support strategy (S2)
Enhance Training facilities and conduct awareness programs strategy (S3)
Enhance security and privacy strategy (S4)
Automation strategy (S5)
Adoption of new technology Strategies (S6)
Create or hire an organisation for monitor complete supply chain strategy (S7)
Use Satellite Internet Access (S8)
Collaborations with Technical institute (S9)
Rate the Strategies for SSL with respect to barriers using a scale of 1–9 where 1 represents minimum influence and 9 represents maximum
influence.
Strategies Barriers
TB OB EFB CB RIB
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
References
[1] Stephen M. Rutner, C. John Langley Jr., Logistics value: definition, process and
measurement, Int. J. Logist. Manag. 11 (2) (2000) 73–82.
[2] G. Ghiani, G. Laporte, R. Musmanno, Introduction to Logistics Systems Planning
and Control, John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
[3] McKinsey, Fast and Furious Riding the next growth wave of logistics in India and
China. https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Featured%20Insigh
ts/Asia%20Pacific/Riding%20the%20next%20growth%20wave%20of%20logi
stics%20in%20India%20and%20China/Riding-the-next-growth-wave-of-logistic
s-in-India-and-China.pdf, 2019. (Accessed 20 April 2021).
[4] NITI Aayog, Rocky Mountain Institute, Goods on the Move: Effciency &
Sustainability in Indian Logistics, 2018.
[5] S. Ramachandran, M.S. Nakhava, K. Pratik, Logistics in India: challenges and
scope, International Review of Research in Emerging Markets and the Global
Economy (IRREM): An Online International Research Journal 1 (2) (2015)
364–377.
[6] D. Güvercin, Digitalization and populism: cross-country evidence, Technol. Soc.
68 (2022) 101802.
[7] B. Burroughs, W.J. Burroughs, Digital logistics: enchantment in distribution
channels, Technol. Soc. 62 (2020) 101277.
[8] J. Amankwah-Amoah, Note: mayday, mayday, mayday! Responding to
environmental shocks: insights on global airlines’ responses to COVID-19,
Transport. Res. E Logist. Transport. Rev. 143 (2020) 102098.
[9] P. Barbieri, A. Boffelli, S. Elia, L. Fratocchi, M. Kalchschmidt, D. Samson, What
can we learn about reshoring after Covid-19? Operations Management Research
13 (3) (2020) 131–136.
[10] T.M. Choi, Innovative "bring-service-near-your-home" operations under Coronavirus (COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2) outbreak: can logistics become the messiah?
Transport. Res. E Logist. Transport. Rev. 140 (2020) 101961.
[11] H. Seddighi, H. Baharmand, Exploring the role of the sharing economy in
disasters management, Technol. Soc. 63 (2020) 101363.
[12] NCB, World Health Organization declares global emergency, Retrieved Oct 30,
2020, from, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7105032/, 2020.
[13] DNB, Business impact of the coronavirus, Retrieved Oct 30, 2020, from, https:
//www.dnb.com/content/dam/english/economic-and-industry-insight/DNB_Bu
siness_Impact_of_the_Coronavirus_US.pdf, 2020.
[14] IFC, The impact of COVID-19 on logistics, Retrieved Oct 30, 2020, from, http
s://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/2d6ec419-41df-46c9-8b7b-96384cd36ab3
/IFC-Covid19-Logistics-final_web.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=naqOED5, 2020.
[15] NCB, Predicting the impacts of epidemic outbreaks on global supply chains,
Retrieved Oct 30, 2020, from, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PM
C7147532/, 2020.
[16] D. Ozdemir, M. Sharma, A. Dhir, T. Daim, Supply Chain Resilience during COVID
19 Pandemic, Technology in Society, 2022, p. 101847.
[17] N. Fernandes, Economic Effects of Coronavirus Outbreak (COVID-19) on the
World Economy, 2020. Available at SSRN 3557504.
[18] D. Ivanov, Predicting the impacts of epidemic outbreaks on global supply chains:
a simulation-based analysis on the coronavirus outbreak (COVID-19/SARS-CoV2) case, Transport. Res. E Logist. Transport. Rev. 136 (2020) 101922.
[19] D. Ivanov, A. Das, Coronavirus (COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2) and supply chain
resilience: a research note, Int. J. Integrated Supply Manag. 13 (1) (2020)
90–102.
[20] S.A. Chaudhry, Covid-19 puts India’s food supply chain to a stresstest, Retrieved
Oct 30, 2020, from, https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-bus
iness/covid-19-puts-indias-food-supply-chain-to-a-stress-test/article31173973.
ece, 2020.
[21] S. Singh, Covid-19 pandemic spoils Indian startup funding party, growth stage
worst hit in Q1 2020, Retrieved Oct 30, 2020, from, https://inc42.com/datala
b/covid19-impacts-indian-startup-funding-growth-stage-worst-hit-in-q1-2020/,
2020.
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
17
[22] A. Mudgill, How will India lockdown play out for economy & markets: 4
scenarios, Retrieved Oct 30, 2020, from, https://economictimes.indiatimes.com
/markets/stocks/news/how-will-india-lockdown-play-out-for-economy-markets4scenarios/articleshow/74804087.cms, 2020.
[23] T.K. Biswas, M.C. Das, Selection of the barriers of supply chain management in
Indian manufacturing sectors due to COVID-19 impacts, Operational Research in
Engineering Sciences: Theory and Applications 3 (3) (2020) 1–12.
[24] E. Borgia, The Internet of Things vision: key features, applications and open
issues, Comput. Commun. 54 (2014) 1–31.
[25] Oracle, Transformational technologies: today, Retrieved Oct 30, 2020, from,
http://www.oracle.com/us/solutions/cloud/tt-technologies-white-paper 44
98079.pdf, 2020.
[26] M. Al-Talib, W.Y. Melhem, A.I. Anosike, J.A. Garza Reyes, S.P. Nadeem,
A. kumar, Achieving resilience in the supply chain by applying IoT technology,
Procedia CIRP 91 (2020) 752–757.
[27] M.S. Golan, L.H. Jernegan, I. Linkov, Trends and applications of resilience
analytics in supply chain modeling: systematic literature review in the context of
the COVID-19 pandemic, Environ Syst Decis 40 (2020) 222–243.
[28] A. Marusak, N. Sadeghiamirshahidi, C.C. Krejci, A. Mittal, S. Beckwith, J. Cantu,
J. Grimm, Resilient regional food supply chains and rethinking the way forward:
key takeaways from the COVID-19 pandemic, Agric. Syst. 190 (2021) 103101.
[29] M. Sharma, S. Luthra, S. Joshi, A. Kumar, Accelerating retail supply chain
performance against pandemic disruption: adopting resilient strategies to
mitigate the long-term effects, J. Enterprise Inf. Manag. 34 (6) (2021) 1844–1873
(Vol. ahead-of-print No. ahead-of-print).
[30] A. Verma, N. Seth, N. Singhal, Enablers of supply chain competitiveness: an
interpretive structural modelling approach, Int. J. Value Chain Manag. 5 (3–4)
(2011) 212–231.
[31] J.T. Mentzer, Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management: Twelve Drivers of
Competitive Advantage, Sage, 2004.
[32] S.Y. Ponomarov, M.C. Holcomb, Understanding the concept of supply chain
resilience, Int. J. Logist. Manag. 20 (1) (2009) 124–143, 2009.
[33] P. Tadejko, Application of Internet of Things in logistics–current challenges,
Ekonomia i Zarządzanie 7 (2015).
[34] K. Rose, S. Eldridge, L. Chapin, The Internet of Things: an Overview, The Internet
Society (ISOC), 2015, pp. 1–50.
[35] A. Meola, What is the internet of things (IoT)? Meaning & definition [online]
Business Insider. Retrieved Oct 30, 2020, from, https://www.businessinsider.
com/internet-of-things-definition?IR=T, 2019.
[36] B. Srivastava, Radio Frequency ID Technology: the Next Revolution in SCM.
Business Horizons, 2004.
[37] C. Marinagi, P. Belsis, C. Skourlas, New directions for pervasive computing in
logistics, Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences 73 (2013) 495–502.
[38] J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic, M. Palaniswami, Internet of Things (IoT): a vision,
architectural elements, and future directions, Future Generat. Comput. Syst. 29
(7) (2013) 1645–1660.
[39] H. Ahmadi, G. Arji, L. Shahmoradi, R. Safdari, M. Nilashi, M. Alizadeh, The
application of internet of things in healthcare: a systematic literature review and
classification, Univers. Access Inf. Soc. 18 (4) (2019) 837–869.
[40] P.K. Khatua, V.K. Ramachandaramurthy, P. Kasinathan, J.Y. Yong, J. Pasupuleti,
A. Rajagopalan, Application and assessment of internet of things toward the
sustainability of energy systems: challenges and issues, Sustain. Cities Soc. 53
(2020) 101957.
[41] S. Awadallah, D. Moure, P. Torres-Gonz´
alez, An internet of things (IoT)
application on volcano monitoring, Sensors 19 (21) (2019) 4651.
[42] V.G. Menon, S. Jacob, S. Joseph, P. Sehdev, M.R. Khosravi, F. Al-Turjman, An IoTEnabled Intelligent Automobile System for Smart Cities, Internet of Things, 2020,
p. 100213.
[43] A. Anosike, K. Alafropatis, J.A. Garza-Reyes, A. Kumar, S. Luthra, L. Rocha-Lona,
Lean manufacturing and internet of things–A synergetic or antagonist
relationship? Comput. Ind. 129 (2021) 103464.
[44] G. Yadav, A. Kumar, S. Luthra, J.A. Garza-Reyes, V. Kumar, L. Batista,
A framework to achieve sustainability in manufacturing organisations of
developing economies using industry 4.0 technologies’ enablers, Comput. Ind.
122 (2020) 103280.
[45] A. Kumar, R.K. Singh, S. Modgil, Exploring the relationship between ICT, SCM
practices and organizational performance in agri-food supply chain, Benchmark
Int. J. 27 (3) (2020) 1003–1041.
[46] G. Radivojevi´ca, N. Bjeli´ca, D. Popovi´ca, Internet OF things IN logistics, in: 3rd
Logistics International Conference. [online] BELGRADE, SERBIA, 2017,
pp. 185–190. Retrieved Oct 30, 2020, from, http://logic.sf.bg.ac.rs/wp-content/
uploads/2017/DRAFT%20LOGIC%202017%20Proceedings.pdf.
[47] R. Khan, S.U. Khan, R. Zaheer, S. Khan, Future internet: the internet of things
architecture, possible applications and key challenges, in: 2012 10th
International Conference on Frontiers of Information Technology, IEEE,
December, 2012, pp. 257–260.
[48] A. Al-Fuqaha, M. Guizani, M. Mohammadi, M. Aledhari, M. Ayyash, Internet of
things: a survey on enabling technologies, protocols, and applications, IEEE
communications surveys & tutorials 17 (4) (2015) 2347–2376.
[49] D. Miorandi, S. Sicari, F. De Pellegrini, I. Chlamtac, Internet of things: vision,
applications and research challenges, Ad Hoc Netw. 10 (7) (2012) 1497–1516.
[50] S.S. Kamble, A. Gunasekaran, H. Parekh, S. Joshi, Modeling the internet of things
adoption barriers in food retail supply chains, J. Retailing Consum. Serv. 48
(2019) 154–168.
[51] C.S. Tang, L.P. Veelenturf, The strategic role of logistics in the industry 4.0 era,
Transport. Res. E Logist. Transport. Rev. 129 (2019) 1–11.
[52] R. Sindhwani, S. Afridi, A. Kumar, A. Banaitis, S. Luthra, P.L. Singh, Can Industry
5.0 Revolutionize the Wave of Resilience and Social Value Creation? A MultiCriteria Framework to Analyze Enablers, Technology in Society, 2022, p. 101887.
[53] B. Chen, J. Wan, L. Shu, P. Li, M. Mukherjee, B. Yin, Smart factory of industry 4.0:
key technologies, application case, and challenges, IEEE Access 6 (2017)
6505–6519.
[54] S.B. C´
amara, J.M. Fuentes, J.M.M. Marín, Cloud computing, Web 2.0, and
operational performance, Int. J. Logist. Manag. 26 (3) (2015) 426–458.
[55] S. Namasudra, P. Roy, B. Balusamy, Cloud computing: fundamentals and research
issues, in: 2017 Second International Conference on Recent Trends and
Challenges in Computational Models (ICRTCCM), IEEE, 2017, February,
pp. 7–12.
[56] A. Singh, N. Mishra, S.I. Ali, N. Shukla, R. Shankar, Cloud computing technology:
reducing carbon footprint in beef supply chain, Int. J. Prod. Econ. 164 (2015)
462–471.
[57] P. Tasatanattakool, C. Techapanupreeda, Blockchain: challenges and
applications, in: 2018 International Conference on Information Networking
(ICOIN), IEEE, 2018, January, pp. 473–475.
[58] A. Narayanan, J. Bonneau, E. Felten, A. Miller, S. Goldfeder, Bitcoin and
Cryptocurrency Technologies: a Comprehensive Introduction, Princeton
University Press, 2016.
[59] M.A. Moktadir, S.M. Ali, S.K. Paul, N. Shukla, Barriers to big data analytics in
manufacturing supply chains: a case study from Bangladesh, Comput. Ind. Eng.
128 (2019) 1063–1075.
[60] S. Singh, R. Kumar, R. Panchal, M.K. Tiwari, Impact of COVID-19 on logistics
systems and disruptions in food supply chain, Int. J. Prod. Res. (2020) 1–16.
[61] T.Y. Choi, D. Rogers, B. Vakil, Coronavirus is a wake-up call for supply chain
management, Retrieved Oct 30, 2020, from, https://hbr.org/2020/03/coronavi
rus-is-a-wake-up-call-for-supply-chain-management, 2020.
[62] J. Konˇcar, A. Grubor, R. Mari´c, S. Vuˇcenovi´c, G. Vukmirovi´c, Setbacks to IoT
implementation in the function of FMCG supply chain sustainability during
COVID-19 pandemic, Sustainability 12 (18) (2020) 7391.
[63] M.M. Queiroz, D. Ivanov, A. Dolgui, S.F. Wamba, Impacts of epidemic outbreaks
on supply chains: mapping a research agenda amid the COVID-19 pandemic
through a structured literature review, Ann. Oper. Res. (2020) 1–38.
[64] P. Haren, D. Simchi-Levi, How coronavirus could impact the global supply chain
by mid-March, Retrieved Oct 30, 2020, from, https://hbr.org/2020/02/how-coro
navirus-could-impact-the-global-supply-chain-by-mid-march, 2020.
[65] D. Ivanov, Viable supply chain model: integrating agility, resilience and
sustainability perspectives—lessons from and thinking beyond the COVID-19
pandemic, Ann. Oper. Res. 1 (2020).
[66] Deloitte, COVID-19: managing supply chain risk and disruption, Retrieved Oct
30, 2020, from, https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/c
ovid-19-managing-supply-chain-risk-and-disruption.html, 2020.
[67] Forbes, The coronavirus’ impact on the global automotive supply chain,
Retrieved Oct 30, 2020, from, https://www.forbes.com/sites/laurieh
arbour1/2020/03/13/the-coronavirus-impact-on-th
e-global-automotive-supply-chain/#2f607021444e, 2020.
[68] R. Dubey, A. Gunasekaran, D.J. Bryde, Y.K. Dwivedi, T. Papadopoulos,
Blockchain technology for enhancing swift-trust, collaboration and resilience
within a humanitarian supply chain setting, Int. J. Prod. Res. 58 (11) (2020)
3381–3398, https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2020.1722860. Retrieved Oct
30, 2020, from.
[69] World Economic Forum—WEF, What past disruptions can teach us about reviving
supply chains after COVID-19, Retrieved Oct 30, 2020, from, https://www.
weforum.org/agenda/2020/03/covid-19-coronavirus-lessons-past-supply-ch
ain-disruptions/, 2020.
[70] World Economic Forum—WEF, The ongoing impact of COVID-19 on global
supply chains, Retrieved Oct 30, 2020, From, https://www.weforum.org/agenda
/2020/06/ongoing-impact-covid-19-global-supply-chains/, 2020.
[71] Institute for Supply Chain Management—ISM, Coronavirus Impact on Supply
Chain, 2020. Retrieved March 29, 2020.
[72] J. Rezaei, Best-worst multi-criteria decision-making method, Omega 53 (2015)
49–57.
[73] H. Gupta, M.K. Barua, Supplier selection among SMEs on the basis of their green
innovation ability using BWM and fuzzy TOPSIS, J. Clean. Prod. 152 (2017)
242–258.
[74] S. Kheybari, M. Kazemi, J. Rezaei, Bioethanol facility location selection using
best-worst method, Appl. Energy 242 (2019) 612–623.
[75] J. Malek, T.N. Desai, Interpretive structural modelling based analysis of
sustainable manufacturing enablers, J. Clean. Prod. 238 (2019) 117996.
[76] G. Yadav, S.K. Mangla, S. Luthra, D.P. Rai, Developing a sustainable smart city
framework for developing economies: an Indian context, Sustain. Cities Soc. 47
(2019) 101462.
[77] K. Govindan, H. Mina, B. Alavi, A decision support system for demand
management in healthcare supply chains considering the epidemic outbreaks: a
case study of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), Transport. Res. E Logist.
Transport. Rev. 138 (2020) 101967.
[78] V. Kaushik, A. Kumar, H. Gupta, G. Dixit, Modelling and prioritising the factors
for online apparel return using BWM approach, Electron. Commer. Res. (2020)
1–31.
[79] I.J. Orji, S. Kusi-Sarpong, H. Gupta, The critical success factors of using social
media for supply chain social sustainability in the freight logistics industry, Int. J.
Prod. Res. 58 (5) (2020) 1522–1539.
[80] H. Gupta, S. Kusi-Sarpong, J. Rezaei, Barriers and overcoming strategies to supply
chain sustainability innovation, Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 161 (2020) 104819.
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
18
[81] M. Mohammadi, J. Rezaei, Bayesian best-worst method: a probabilistic group
decision making model, Omega 96 (2020) 102075.
[82] Keeney, R.L.H. Raiffa, Decisions with Multiple Objectives: Preferences and Value
Tradeoffs, 1976.
[83] S.G. Azevedo, H. Carvalho, Contribution of RFID Technology to Better
Management of Fashion Supply Chains, International Journal of Retail &
Distribution Management, 2012.
[84] B. Karakostas, A DNS architecture for the internet of things: a case study in
transport logistics, Procedia Comput. Sci. 19 (2013) 594–601.
[85] E. Ginters, J. Martin-Gutierrez, Low cost augmented reality and RFID application
for logistics items visualisation, Procedia Comput. Sci. 26 (2013) 3–13.
[86] M.H. Stoltz, V. Giannikas, D. McFarlane, J. Strachan, J. Um, R. Srinivasan,
Augmented reality in warehouse operations: opportunities and barriers, IFACPapersOnLine 50 (1) (2017) 12979–12984.
[87] O. Trelles, P. Prins, M. Snir, R.C. Jansen, Big data, but are we ready? Nat. Rev.
Genet. 12 (3) (2011), 224-224.
[88] I. Malaka, I. Brown, September). Challenges to the organisational adoption of big
data analytics: a case study in the South African telecommunications industry, in:
Proceedings of the 2015 Annual Research Conference on South African Institute
of Computer Scientists and Information Technologists, 2015, pp. 1–9.
[89] A. Alharthi, V. Krotov, M. Bowman, Addressing barriers to big data, Bus. Horiz.
60 (3) (2017) 285–292.
[90] A. Kankanhalli, Y. Charalabidis, S. Mellouli, IoT and AI for Smart Government: A
Research Agenda, 2019.
[91] M. Sharma, S. Joshi, D. Kannan, K. Govindan, R. Singh, H.C. Purohit, Internet of
Things (IoT) adoption barriers of smart cities’ waste management: an Indian
context, J. Clean. Prod. (2020) 122047.
[92] S. Idwan, I. Mahmood, J.A. Zubairi, I. Matar, Optimal management of solid waste
in smart cities using internet of things, Wireless Pers. Commun. 110 (1) (2020)
485–501.
[93] S. Luthra, S.K. Mangla, Evaluating challenges to Industry 4.0 initiatives for supply
chain sustainability in emerging economies, Process Saf. Environ. Protect. 117
(2018) 168–179.
[94] D. Bruneo, S. Distefano, M. Giacobbe, A.L. Minnolo, F. Longo, G. Merlino,
C. Puliafito, An iot service ecosystem for smart cities: the# smartme project,
Internet of Things 5 (2019) 12–33.
[95] A. Zeb, Q. Ali, M.Q. Saleem, K.M. Awan, A.S. Alowayr, J. Uddin, F. Bashir,
A proposed IoT-enabled smart waste bin management system and efficient route
selection, Journal of Computer Networks and Communications (2019), 2019.
[96] A.Q. Abdul-Hamid, M.H. Ali, M.L. Tseng, S. Lan, M. Kumar, Impeding challenges
on industry 4.0 in circular economy: palm oil industry in Malaysia, Comput. Oper.
Res. 123 (2020) 105052.
[97] I.V. Lokshina, B.J. Durkin, C.J. Lanting, Data analysis services related to the IoT
and big data: strategic implications and business opportunities for third parties,
Int. J. Interdiscip. Telecommun. Netw. (IJITN) 9 (2) (2017) 37–56.
[98] D. Horv´
ath, R.Z. Szabo, ´ Driving forces and barriers of Industry 4.0: do
multinational and small and medium-sized companies have equal opportunities?
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 146 (2019) 119–132.
[99] S.M. Deore, P.S. Kukade, K.L. Yadav, J. John, Waste Management system using
AWS, Waste Manag. 6 (1) (2019).
[100] S.C. Mukhopadhyay, N.K. Suryadevara, Internet of things: challenges and
opportunities, in: Internet of Things, Springer, Cham, 2014, pp. 1–17.
[101] R.G. Richey, T.R. Morgan, K. Lindsey-Hall, F.G. Adams, A global exploration of
big data in the supply chain, Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 46 (8) (2016)
710–739.
[102] A.R. Sfar, Y. Challal, P. Moyal, E. Natalizio, A game theoretic approach for
privacy preserving model in IoT-based transportation, IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transport. Syst. 20 (12) (2019) 4405–4414.
[103] B.W. Wirtz, J.C. Weyerer, F.T. Schichtel, An integrative public IoT framework for
smart government, Govern. Inf. Q. 36 (2) (2019) 333–345.
[104] P. Emami-Naeini, Y. Agarwal, L.F. Cranor, H. Hibshi, Ask the Experts: what
Should Be on an IoT Privacy and Security Label?, 2020 arXiv preprint arXiv:
2002.04631.
[105] J.E. Johnson, Big data+ big analytics= big opportunity: big data is dominating
the strategy discussion for many financial executives. As these market dynamics
continue to evolve, expectations will continue to shift about what should be
disclosed, when and to whom, Financ. Exec. 28 (6) (2012) 50–54.
[106] M. Douglas, Big data raises big questions, Government Technology 26 (4) (2013)
12–16.
[107] D.Q. Chen, D.S. Preston, M. Swink, How the use of big data analytics affects value
creation in supply chain management, J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 32 (4) (2015) 4–39.
[108] D. Arunachalam, N. Kumar, J.P. Kawalek, Understanding big data analytics
capabilities in supply chain management: unravelling the issues, challenges and
implications for practice, Transport. Res. E Logist. Transport. Rev. 114 (2018)
416–436.
[109] E. Hoti, The technological, organisational and environmental framework of IS
innovation adaption in small and medium enterprises. Evidence from research
over the last 10 years, Int. J. Bus. Manag. 3 (4) (2015) 1–14.
[110] D. Tomic, The Benefits and Challenges with Implementation of Internet of Things
(IoT) in Manufacturing Industry, 2017.
[111] B. Doan, Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) Technology and its Impacts on
Logistics Activities, 2018.
[112] G. Orzes, E. Rauch, S. Bednar, R. Poklemba, Industry 4.0 implementation barriers
in small and medium sized enterprises: a focus group study, in: 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management
(IEEM), IEEE, 2018, December, pp. 1348–1352.
[113] K. Umachandran, V. Della Corte, P. Amuthalakshmi, D.F. James, M.M.T. Said,
B. Sawicka, I. Jurcic, Designing learning-skills towards industry 4.0, World
Journal on Educational Technology: Current Issues 11 (2) (2019) 150–161.
[114] B.H. Hall, A.N. Link, J.T. Scott, Barriers inhibiting industry from partnering with
universities: evidence from the advanced technology program, J. Technol. Tran.
26 (1–2) (2001) 87–98.
[115] A. Issa, D. Lucke, T. Bauernhansl, Mobilising SMEs towards Industrie 4.0-enabled
smart products, Procedia CIRP 63 (2017) 670–674.
[116] R. Lotfi, N. Mardani, G.W. Weber, Robust bi-level programming for renewable
energy location, Int. J. Energy Res. 45 (5) (2021) 7521–7534.
[117] S.S. Ali, R. Kaur, F. Ersoz, ¨ B. Altaf, A. Basu, G.W. Weber, Measuring carbon
performance for sustainable green supply chain practices: a developing country
scenario, Cent. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 28 (4) (2020) 1389–1416.
[118] S.S. Ali, F. Ersoz, ¨ R. Kaur, B. Altaf, G.W. Weber, A quantitative analysis of low
carbon performance in industrial sectors of developing world, J. Clean. Prod. 284
(2021) 125268.
[119] A.M. Al-Momani, M.A. Mahmoud, M.S. Ahmad, Factors that influence the
acceptance of internet of things services by customers of telecommunication
companies in Jordan, J. Organ. End User Comput. 30 (4) (2018) 51–63.
[120] D. Kiel, J.M. Müller, C. Arnold, K.I. Voigt, Sustainable industrial value creation:
benefits and challenges of industry 4.0, Int. J. Innovat. Manag. 21 (8) (2017)
1740015.
[121] M. Marques, C. Agostinho, G. Zacharewicz, R. Jardim-Gonçalves, Decentralised
decision support for intelligent manufacturing in Industry 4.0, J. Ambient Intell.
Smart Environ. 9 (3) (2017) 299–313.
[122] S. Erol, A. Schumacher, W. Sihn, January). Strategic guidance towards Industry
4.0–a three-stage process model, International conference on competitive
manufacturing 9 (No. 1) (2016) 495–501.
[123] I.W.G. Kwon, T. Suh, Factors affecting the level of trust and commitment in
supply chain relationships, J. Supply Chain Manag. 40 (1) (2004) 4–14.
[124] A. Ustundag, E. Cevikcan, Industry 4.0: Managing the Digital Transformation,
Springer, 2017.
[125] J. Nagy, J. Ol´
ah, E. Erdei, D. Mat ´ ´e, J. Popp, The role and impact of Industry 4.0
and the internet of things on the business strategy of the value chain—the case of
Hungary, Sustainability 10 (10) (2018) 3491.
[126] E.W.T. Ngai, S. Peng, P. Alexander, K.K. Moon, Decision support and intelligent
systems in the textile and apparel supply chain: an academic review of research
articles, Expert Syst. Appl. 41 (1) (2014) 81–91.
[127] M. Yazdani, P. Zarate, A. Coulibaly, E.K. Zavadskas, A group decision making
support system in logistics and supply chain management, Expert Syst. Appl. 88
(2017) 376–392.
[128] G. Lee, What roles should the government play in fostering the advancement of
the internet of things? Telecommun. Pol. 43 (5) (2019) 434–444.
[129] BRICS Business Council, Skill development for industry 4.0, in: A White Paper by
BRICS Skill Development Working Group, BRICS Business Council, India Group,
2017. Retrieved Oct 30, 2020, from, http://www.globalskillsummit.com/Wh
itepaperSummary.pdf.
[130] S. Luthra, S.K. Mangla, L. Xu, A. Diabat, Using AHP to evaluate barriers in
adopting sustainable consumption and production initiatives in a supply chain,
Int. J. Prod. Econ. 181 (2016) 342–349.
[131] M. Kouhizadeh, S. Saberi, J. Sarkis, Blockchain technology and the sustainable
supply chain: theoretically exploring adoption barriers, Int. J. Prod. Econ. 231
(2020) 107831.
[132] K.S. Hald, P. Coslugeanu, The preliminary supply chain lessons of the COVID-19
disruption—what is the role of digital technologies? Operations Management
Research (2021) 1–16.
[133] B. Shen, S. Minner, H.L. Chan, A. Brun, Logistics and supply chain management in
the luxury industry, Transport. Res. E Logist. Transport. Rev. 143 (2020) 102095.
[134] M. Marjani, F. Nasaruddin, A. Gani, A. Karim, I.A.T. Hashem, A. Siddiqa,
I. Yaqoob, Big IoT data analytics: architecture, opportunities, and open research
challenges, ieee access 5 (2017) 5247–5261.
[135] B. Gurtner, The financial and economic crisis and developing countries,
International Development Policy| Revue internationale de politique de
d´eveloppement 1 (1) (2010) 189–213.
[136] L. Barreto, A. Amaral, T. Pereira, Industry 4.0 implications in logistics: an
overview, Procedia Manuf. 13 (2017) 1245–1252.
[137] S. Khalilpourazari, A. Mirzazadeh, G.W. Weber, S.H.R. Pasandideh, A robust fuzzy
approach for constrained multi-product economic production quantity with
imperfect items and rework process, Optimization 69 (1) (2019) 63–90.
[138] S. Khalilpourazari, S. Soltanzadeh, G.W. Weber, S.K. Roy, Designing an efficient
blood supply chain network in crisis: neural learning, optimization and case
study, Ann. Oper. Res. 289 (1) (2020) 123–152.
[139] S. Khalilpourazari, S.H.R. Pasandideh, Designing emergency flood evacuation
plans using robust optimization and artificial intelligence, J. Combin. Optim. 41
(3) (2021) 640–677.
[140] S. Khalilpourazari, H.H. Doulabi, A.O. ¨ Çiftçioglu, ˘ G.W. Weber, Gradient-Based
Grey Wolf Optimizer with Gaussian Walk: Application in Modelling and
Prediction of the COVID-19 Pandemic, Expert Systems with Applications, 2021,
p. 114920.
[141] E.B. Tirkolaee, P. Abbasian, G.W. Weber, Sustainable fuzzy multi-trip locationrouting problem for medical waste management during the COVID-19 outbreak,
Sci. Total Environ. 756 (2021) 143607.
[142] A. Goli, E.B. Tirkolaee, G.W. Weber, A perishable product sustainable supply
chain network design problem with lead time and customer satisfaction using a
hybrid whale-genetic algorithm, in: Logistics Operations and Management for
Recycling and Reuse, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2020, pp. 99–124.
H. Gupta et al. 
Technology in Society 69 (2022) 101970
19
[143] M. Graczyk-Kucharska, M. Szafranski, ´ S. Gütmen, M. Golinski, ´ M. Spychała, G.
W. Weber, A. Ozmen, ¨ Modeling for human resources management by data
mining, analytics and artificial intelligence in the logistics departments, in: Smart
and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics–Trends, Challenges, Methods and
Best Practices, Springer, Cham, 2020, pp. 291–303.
[144] K. Govindan, K.M. Shankar, D. Kannan, Achieving sustainable development goals
through identifying and analysing barriers to industrial sharing economy: a
framework development, Int. J. Prod. Econ. 227 (2020) 107575.
[148] J. Zemin, On the Development of China’s Information Technology Industry,
Academic Press, 2009.
H. Gupta et al. 