The platformisation of digital payments: The
fabrication of consumer interest in the EU FinTech
agenda
Ms Valeria Ferrari
Institute for Information Law (IViR), UvA: Universiteit van Amsterdam, the Netherlands
a r t i c l e i n f o
Keywords:
Platformisation
Digital payments
Infrastructures
EU policy
Socio-technical imaginaries
a b s t r a c t
This paper investigates, through a qualitative analysis of official documents, how certain
imaginaries about technology filter into EU policymaking, allowing or accelerating the transformation of payment infrastructures into the platform economy.
One of the ways in which socio-technical imaginaries filter into policymaking is, it turns
out, by informing an image of the consumer which serves to justify measures for the realization of a desired future. In particular, the documents offer a view of the consumer as
an actor that is empowered by digitisation. The thesis of this paper is that this view of the
consumer is partial: the rhetoric of consumer technological empowerment outweighs and
conceals much needed considerations about the vulnerability of consumers vis-a-vis dataintensive payment technologies. Ultimately, the fault lies with the future imaginaries upon
which such image is grounded. The vision of the digital payment infrastructure portrayed
in the documents is in fact problematic for two reasons. First, the technologies that are
portraited as desirable are chosen based on industry interests and trends rather than considerations of benefits and risks that these technologies entail. Secondly, the assumption
that a liberalized market will offer more and better choices is flawed, as platformisation entails risks of monopolization and abuses of market power. We suggest that policymakers in
this domain should be more critical of the risks entailed by platformisation, and open their
imagination to alternative technological futures.
© 2022 Ms Valeria Ferrari. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
1. Introduction
The financial sector is undergoing a fundamental digital
transformation (King and Nesbit, 2020). New kinds of mobile
financial applications sit between consumers and traditional
banks: social payment platforms, mobile banking and digital payment services constitute the interface through which
consumers interact with their finances (Westermeier, 2020).
E-mail address: v.ferrari@uva.nl
Transaction data is the main driver of the new digital payment industry. European policy enables this trend: the 2nd
Payment Services Directive (PSD2) favours market liberalization and posits the platform model at the core of future banking and payment infrastructures (Westermeier, 2020). Under the PSD2, banks are required to allow third party service providers to access payers’ accounts information; this
favours the entrance of new types of service providers: technology companies that provide payment intermediation services, acquiring “customer ownership” and control of data
flows (Zetzsche et al., 2019).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2022.105687
0267-3649/© 2022 Ms Valeria Ferrari. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
2 computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687
Image 1 – Technologies: number of mentions.
Organized around banks’ APIs and mediated by tech companies, payment infrastructures are reshaped as digital platforms aimed at maximising data production and valorisation. Such process of ‘platformisation’ of financial services
is likely to bring about issues typically associated with platform business models (Poell et al., 2019) and information
capitalism (Cohen, 2019). Yet, while financial innovation is
widely discussed from advantaging business perspectives, it
is rarely scrutinized in terms of information control-related
risks, power asymmetries and negative externalities of platformisation (Image 1).
The present paper uses discourse analysis to investigate
how sociotechnical imaginaries influence the fabrication of
the notion of consumer interest in policymaking around digitalization of payments, and how the latter is mobilized to justify policy choices.
Section 2 introduces the issue that is central to the policy
agenda here analysed: the process of platformisation of digital payment infrastructures. Specifically, it draws a critique
of platforms as infrastructures (2.1); it explains how payment
services are becoming a new digital industry (2.2) and it illustrates the European policy that is enabling this change (2.3).
Section 3 explains the notion of ‘socio-technical imaginaries’
and its relevance in the exploration of policy discourse (3.1).
Section 3.2 outlines the role of ‘consumer interest’ as justification in policy discourse. Section 4 explains the methodology, which consists of a systematic qualitative analysis of policy documents issued by EU institutions (Commission, EU Parliament, European Banking Authority, European Central Bank
and two technical bodies) in the area of FinTech and, more
specifically, digital payments, starting from the 2017 Fintech
Resolution and the following 2018 Fintech Action Plan until
today.
Section 5 reports the findings of the qualitative analysis, illustrating, in 5.1,the sociotechnical imaginaries of digital payments as they emerge from the corpus of selected documents,
and, in 5.2, the notion of consumer interest that is mobilized in
the policy discourse to justify the process of platformisation
of payment services. Finally, Section 6 provides a critical analysis of such findings, arguing that the notion of consumer interest portrayed in the documents is based on a assumptions
– identified through the discourse analysis as part of the sociotechnical imaginaries - that are partially constructed.
The thesis of this paper is that there are two main fallacies in the policy-makers discourse on digital payments. The
technologies that are portraited as desirable are chosen based
on industry interests and trends rather than on a scrutiny of
the benefits and risks that these technologies imply for consumers. Moreover, the assumption that a liberalized market
will offer more and better choices is flawed, as the platformisation of the digital payment industry entails the risk of monopolization and abuses of market power. The mobilized notion of consumer interest – anchored to the rhetoric of consumer technological empowerment - outweighs and conceals
much needed considerations about the vulnerability of consumers in the context of data-intensive technologies and platform economy.
We conclude by suggesting that policymakers in this domain should be more attentive to the risks that are emerging
in adjacent digital industries, and open their imagination to
alternative technological futures.
2. The platformisation of the digital payment
infrastructure
2.1. Infrastructures as platforms
The present paper is concerned with the platformisation of the
digital payment infrastructure. The term ‘infrastructure’ is generally used to refer to sociotechnical systems, or technological
assemblages, that underlie or support public interest, universal or quasi-universal services (Plantin et al., 2018). The traditional notion of infrastructure sees these systems as centrally
created and controlled, organized as public or semi-public monopolies. This so called “modern infrastructural ideal”, however, collapsed in the 70s with the liberalization and deregulation of many infrastructures based on neoliberal stances
on free competition and market efficiency (Plantin et al., 2018,
p. 300). This meant the replacement of public, centrally organized infrastructures with “fragmented, privatized yet interoperable systems and services” (Plantin et al., 2018, p. 300).
The design and the governing model of infrastructures reflect particular political-economic choices. The notion of “infrastructure” is in fact scrutinized across various
academic disciplines - including Sociology (Mukerji, 2010),
International Political Economy (Bernards and CampellVerduyn, 2019; Bellanova and de Goede, 2021), and Anthropology (Larkin, 2013) - as the domain of power exercised
through invisible, untransparent technological devices and architectures. They are investigated as material assemblages
in which political choices, dynamics of oppression and exclusion are embedded and transferred upon social and economic exchanges. A specialized domain of study - Critical Infrastructure Studies - has emerged which brings infrastructures within the domain of humanistic enquiry, understanding them not only as technical skeletons but also as conditions
and vehicles for cultural experiences and expressions in late
modernity. This latest conceptualization becomes salient in
the context of expanding information infrastructures and cyberinfrastructures which, in the past three decades, came to
organize and define all areas of cultural and economic interactions.
The concept of ‘platform’ shares some features with that
of ‘infrastructure’, but it’s useful, from an analytical point of
view, to distinguish between the two. Both concepts refer to
a technical system which serves more salient activities per-
computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687 3
formed on top of it. Platforms have been defined across a variety of disciplines as firms, markets, or data infrastructures.
Poell et al. describe them as “(re)programmable digital infrastructures that facilitate and shape personalised interactions
amongst end-users and complementors, organised through
the systematic collection, algorithmic processing, monetisation, and circulation of data” (Poell et al., 2019). From a technical point of view, they are technical systems composed of
low variability core components which allow to build applications on top of it, using complementary components. From
an economic point of view, “platforms constitute two sided,
or increasingly, complex multi-sided markets that function as
aggregators of transactions amongst end-users and a wide variety of third parties” (Poell et al., 2019).
The platform ecosystem expands quickly with the inclusion of third-party service providers abiding by the platforms
technical and economic standards (Plantin at al., 2018). Centralizing control over data across multiple services and unilaterally setting rules across entire portions of the market,
platforms gain competitive advantage and power; exploiting
global scale network effects, they easily establish market monopolies across multiple industries and jurisdictions (van Dijck et al., 2019).
The expansive nature of platforms determines the enclosure of more and more substrata of infrastructural systems
within the platform ecosystem. Scholars point out that many
infrastructures are undergoing a process of platformization
(Plantin et al., 2018). The process of ‘platformisation’ has been
defined as the “penetration of infrastructures, economic processes and governmental frameworks of digital platforms in
different economic sectors and spheres of life, as well as the
reorganization of cultural practices and imaginations around
these platforms” (Poell et al., 2019, p.1). The concept is mostly
deployed to criticize the increasingly central role uptaken
by globally operating businesses platforms - such as Google,
Facebook, Amazon and Uber - in all aspects of social, economic, cultural and political life. While the latter is more accurately referred to as “infrastructuralisation of platforms”,
“platformisation” also refers to the specular phenomena of
the reorganization of existing infrastructures in the form of
platforms.
A critical approach anchored on platform studies looks at
the relationship between agency and architecture, against the
background of a particular political economy. Understanding
the ongoing changes in the digital payment ecosystem as a
shift at the infrastructural level, and, more specifically, as a
process of platformisation, directs the attention towards the
power relationships that are typical of platforms economies,
and it demands to consider technological affordances and design options in light of the logics of accumulation and expansion which characterize the latter.
2.2. The emerging digital payments ecosystem
The platformization of the payment infrastructure is the substitution of a pre-existing assemblage of actors, material infrastructures and processes with a digital platform ecosystem
(Langley and Leyshon, 2021). This entails the representation
of money in the form of digital data (Mejias, 2019) that can
be captured and valorised within the platform digital architecture (Sadowski, 2019), and the reorganization of financial
interactions around digital platforms (Mattila et al., 2018).
Payment services are increasingly bundled within platforms ecosystems which leverage integrated data pools to establish dependencies across large portions of markets and
scale across jurisdictions. On one side, banks allow this penetration providing technology companies access to financial
data networks (through APIs) and outsourcing services and
functionalities to technology providers. On the other, technology companies expand their businesses by adding payment
functionalities which allow them to “embed financial transactions within their data streams” (Westermeier, 2020 p. 2).
Established digital platforms position themselves between payers and financial institutions, incorporating in
their ecosystems payment functionalities (Westermeier, 2020;
Mattila et al., 2018). This is the case of, for instance, Apple Pay and Google Pay. In this model, the digital service
provider collaborates with incumbent payment institutions;
offering users frictionless, seamless, convenient means to initiate transactions, tech companies ensure that transaction
data are produced within the platform. The key element here
is that of authentication: users do not need to go through additional steps when paying with their smartphones, as the platform has already the means in place to certify their identity.
This raises concerns about power and information concentration in the hand of few big global corporations; such concerns
are particularly worrying in light of the huge data analytics potentials of transaction data when interlinked with other data
points held big digital platforms (Ferrari, 2020).
Tech-driven companies also provide intermediation between the financial infrastructure and businesses. Westermeier makes the example of solarisBank, a so-called bankingas-a-Service platform which allows non-bank businesses to
provide financial services to end customers, using solarisBank
as a bridge to financial infrastructures (Westermeier, 2020, p.
8). This model is incentivized by the PSD2, which enhances
the role of APIs as points of access to financial data streams
for third party service providers (Berber and Atabey, 2021).This
paves the way to a financial service industry where interaction
with costumers is shifted from banks to non-bank digital service providers; while the latter capture costumers data, banks
fall into the background, remaining invisible to consumers.
Finally, the penetration of the tech industry within the
financial domain comprises initiatives that, completely bypassing existing financial infrastructures, introduce newly
built networks on top of which users can transact digitallynative currencies. Digital currencies based on blockchain technologies have initially been developed by tech-savvy individuals and groups of developers with anarcho-libertarian
aims. Around cryptocurrencies, a market has developed including digital currencies exchanges, investment firms and
a continuous stream of software and hardware releases. The
hype around blockchain-based financial technologies has also
stimulated experimental adoptions of national digital currencies (so called Central Banks Digital Currencies), as well digital
currencies backed and controlled by private parties. A notable
4 computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687
example of the latter is the stablecoin1 Libra (now renamed
Diem), a currency designed by Facebook and intended to be
used for payments within and outside the platform’s ecosystem. The project, announced in 2019, received a push back
from regulators and is under re-evaluation from the side of
the company. However, the idea of leveraging on blockchain
technologies for the creation of digital payment infrastructures is still popular in both the public and the private sector
(Westermeier, 2020, p. 8).
2.3. The European policy on FinTech and digital payments
European policymakers have been explicit about their intention of opening the financial sector to tech-driven companies.
In 2016,the European Commission set up a Financial Technology Task Force “to help FinTech innovation reach its full potential” (Commission, 2016). The European Parliament, in its
2017 Resolution on Fintech, acknowledged the potentials and
risks of “the influence of technology on the future of the financial sector and called the Commission to “to draw up a comprehensive FinTech Action Plan” to foster the development of
FinTech ” (European Parliament, 2017). Following a Public Consultation in 2017,the Commission launched its Fintech Action
Plan in 2018: a broad policy agenda whose aim is to “enable the
EU financial sector to make use of the rapid advances in new
technologies that are transforming the industry and revolutionizing the way people access financial services” (Commission, 2018). In particular, the Action Plan has a threefold goal:
1) enabling innovative business models to scale up at the EU
level using common standards and interoperable solutions; b)
supporting the uptake of innovation in the financial sector by
ensuring the absence of legal obstacles to the adoption of new
technologies; c) enhancing the security and integrity of the financial system.
A central pillar of the broader FinTech policy agenda is
the promotion of a European digital payment market. The
PSD2 is the key legal instrument setting the conditions for
the liberalization of this market; entered into force in 2018,
it expanded the scope of PSD to new types of internet-based
payment intermediaries, and it established banks’ obligations
to share customer data with third-party service providers
(Donnelly, 2016).
The technical steps for the promotion of a European digital
payment ecosystem are directed and supervised by the Euro
Retail Payments Board (ERPB), a “high level strategic body”
chaired by the ECB. Created in 2013,the ERPB comprises representatives” from the demand side” (consumers, retailers and
corporations) and “from the supply side” (banks and payment
and e-money institutions), as well as representatives from national central banks.2 Since its launch, it works on the promotion of: (1) pan-European instant payments; (2) payment
initiation services; (3) peer-to-peer mobile payments; (4) contactless payments. From 2017, the ERPB meets the chairs of
1 ‘Stablecoins’ are virtual currencies the value of which is assetbacked (in physical collateral or crypto-assets) or algorithmically
controlled in order to avoid price fluctuations typical of non-fiat
digital currencies. 2 See: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/groups/erpb/html/
index.en.html.
EU national payment committees in the European Forum for
Innovation in Payments (EFIP) ,
3 another informal forum initiated by the ECB and the Commission to facilitate the exchange
of information between the various stakeholders involved in
the restructuring of the digital payment ecosystem.
In January 2020, the Commission published an updated
Work Programme titled “A Union that strives for more”, announcing its intention to launch a new action plan on FinTech before the end 2020. On 24 September 2020, following
a consultation with stakeholders during the same year, the
Commission released a Communication on a digital finance
strategy, confirming its commitment to support digital transformation in finance. In the document, particular attention is
given to digital payments, as it is recognized that they play a
“key role amongst digital financial services, being at the cutting edge of innovation and instrumental to support the digital economy” (Commission, 2020). Beside the ongoing efforts
to consolidate and standardize existing payment schemes,the
Commission and the European Central Bank (ECB) announced,
in early 2021, their cooperation on the development on a digital euro (ECB, 2021). The digital euro project was officially
launched in July 2021 with the aim of investigating, for the
first 24 months, “key issues regarding design and distribution”
of the digital euro architecture (ECB, 2021).
3. Sociotechnical imaginaries and
justifications as analytical discursive elements
3.1. The role of socio-technical imaginaries in highly
technical fields of policymaking
Formulating policy always requires, to some extent, making
predictions about the future. This is particularly true when
the aim is to regulate technologies that are yet to be materialized, or that are in the process oftransformation.The design of
policy agendas demands the mobilization of a certain vision
of the future: an expected threat, a desired outcome. When
policymaking regards complex scientific issues or technological developments, the delineation of that desired outcome is
highly dependent on the imaginaries, hopes and fears that are
attached to the technology or scientific phenomena in question.
According to Katzenbach and Mager, “evocations of possible or fantastic, desiderable or dystopian futures are necessarily genuine sociopolitical processes with material consequences in the present” (Mager and Katzenbach, 2020). Visions
of the future are not only imagined but, when properly located
and promoted, they are “concretely constructed”; imaginaries
are performative in as much as they induce the materialization
of future prospects in the present.
The concept of “socio-technical” or “future imaginaries”
has been deployed in several studies as analytic tool to
identify the “collectively held and institutionally stabilized”
(Jasanoff and Kim, 2009) visions of the future that mobilize the coproduction of technoscientific projects and policy.
When the development and regulation of digital technologies
3 See: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/groups/efip/html/
index.en.html.
computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687 5
is concerned, studies have shown that influential tech companies propagate assumptions about technology which reflect the design of their products (Mager and Katzenbach 2020;
Markham, 2020). .
Recent studies have explored the role of industry-driven
sociotechnical imaginaries in the ongoing development of
digital payments infrastructures (Mützel, 2021; Vidan 2020).
These studies, as well as similar studies conducted in other
fields (Haupt, 2021; Liao and Iliadis, 2021), demonstrate that
sociotechnical imaginaries are largely produced by corporations promoting specific technological design and functionalities. In my analysis, I identify and offer to the reader the vision
of the future of payments as it emerges from the words of policymakers. Linkages between this vision and external sources
that might have influenced the institutions’ imagination (such
as private actors’ promotion of technological choices) are not
established, nor they can be extracted directly from the text;
yet, deploying the concept of sociotechnical imaginaries already implies the possibility of that link.
The policy-making agenda that is the object of the present
study is highly future-orientated. The digital payment infrastructure presented in the policy documents is in large part yet
to be materialized. The policy agenda that is analysed in this
paper is, therefore, partially a story about a future to be built,
and partially a manual of instructions for its realization. For
this reason, I deploy the concept of “sociotechnical imaginary”
as a thinking tool to highlight the speculative nature of certain
descriptions and expectations, and to recall the notion that
the prospected vision of the future is determined by a given
discourse, chosen amongst other multiple possible futures.
3.2. Consumer interest as justification in processes of
liberalization
For the purpose of the textual analysis, this paper identifies
policy ‘justifications’ as a distinctive discursive element that
intersects with, but performs different functions from, the
sociotechnical imaginaries. While the latter consists of narratives, imaginative visions about what the digital payment
ecosystem will look like, justifications are articulated as normative arguments. Appealing to considerations of necessity,
efficiency and benefits, justifications are pragmatic considerations which motivate and corroborate the idea that a particular future should materialise.
In EU policymaking discourse – particularly in relation to processes of market liberalization and deregulation
(Cseres, 2008; Reisch and Micklitz, 2006) - a central justification for policy action is the realisation of consumer interest (Lynggaard, 2019). Adopting regulation requires balancing
rights of consumers/citizens with prerogatives of businesses;
in such balancing exercise, a precise notion of consumer is developed. Such image is necessarily fictional: it is a simplification of reality which collapses together a heterogeneous mass
of individuals which in fact differ in terms of preferences,
needs and capabilities (Mak, 2015, p. 381). Such fictional image of the consumer permeates and influences policy-making
processes as an agent that benefits from, promotes or participates in economic and social exchanges that are object of regulation.
In EU consumer law, two main conceptualisations of the
consumer inform the rules that govern the relationship between “persons acting as consumer in the marketplace and
their counter-parts, the businesses” (Wilhelmson, 1998). On
one side, the “paternalistic model”, developed in the 60 s and
70 s (Cseres, 2005, p. 321), sees the consumer as a vulnerable
subject who needs legal protections against violations of their
rights, interests and safety in the context of asymmetrical
contractual relationships with businesses. On the other, the
neoliberal, rational, empowered consumer acts as a “sovereign
market actor” (Helberger et al., 2013, p. 7), as long as she is
granted the necessary information and bargain power to do so.
The latter assumes that free market competition produces the
best conditions for consumers to exercise their economic decisions, and invokes a laissez-fair approach with minimal state
intervention, as opposed to the more interventionist paternalistic approach (Cseres, 2005, p. 322).
Recent developments in EU law demonstrates that the digital economy induced a reappearance of the earlier conceptualisation, revealing the shortages of the neoliberal dogma according to which free market competition and consumer interest go hand in hand. The EU Commission 2020 New Consumer Agenda4 stands in sharp contrast to the previous 2012
European Consumer Agenda5: whereas the older document
cites the “digital revolution” as a source of economic gains
for consumers, the 2020 document recognizes how digital
transformation limits the effectiveness of consumer protection rules. The latter, in fact, states that in digital commercial applications “the underlying data collection and processing combined with analysis of consumers’ behaviour and their
cognitive biases can be used to influence consumers to take
decisions that may go against their best interests” (EU Commission, 2020, p. 10).
The need for a more interventionist agenda resulted in
the adoption of several consumer protection-related legal instruments specifically addressing issues of the digital economy. The specificity of the position of consumers in the digital space was recognised with the Digital Content Directive6
(Helberger et al., 2013, p. 8) and the Directive on Better Enforcement and Modernisation of Consumer Law.7 Recently, a
decisive signal has been given with the proposal for a Dig4 EU Commission, Communication From The Commission To
The European Parliament And The Council New Consumer
Agenda Strengthening Consumer Resilience For Sustainable Recovery Com/2020/696 Final (New Consumer Agenda). 5 EU Commission, Communication From The Commission To
The European Parliament, The Council, The Economic And Social Committee And The Committee Of The Regions A European Consumer Agenda - Boosting Confidence And Growth /∗
Com/2012/0225 Final (European Consumer Agenda). 6 Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the
Council on certain aspects concerning contracts for the supply of
digital content. COM/2015/0634 final - 2015/0287 (COD). 7 Directive (EU)2019/2161 of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 27 November 2019 amending Council Directive
93/13/EEC and Directives 98/6/EC, 2005/29/EC and 2011/83/EU of
the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the better enforcement and modernisation of Union consumer protection
rules (OJ L 328, 18.12.2019, p. 7).
6 computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687
ital Services Act,8 aimed at creating “a safer online experience for citizens […] and ensuring the protection of fundamental rights” online. Importantly, the DSA recognizes the
power imbalances between platforms (especially “very large
online platforms”) and their users (including both business
users and consumers); hence, it establishes a “transparency
and accountability framework for online platforms”, setting
out oversight and enforcement mechanisms to contrast manipulative and unfair practices of digital intermediaries.9
The peculiarity of users’ status in digital environments depends on the conditions under which users interact with and
within digital ecosystems. Digital environments work in ways
that are obscure and non-transparent to their users, creating
inherent information asymmetries. Users engage with digital
environments based on technical affordances, tasks and patterns that are predefined by the provider of the digital ecosystem; the algorithmic processes that determine the provision
of services are concealed behind friendly interfaces.10 This inherent information asymmetry, cumulated with the informational power that digital companies derive from data, creates
opportunities for service providers to speculate on users’ personal vulnerabilities. Personal and behavioural data, in fact, is
used to nudge users behaviour and influence users’ decisionmaking through, for instance, personalised offers and prices
(Janssen et al., 2020, p.13).
Information asymmetries and risks of manipulation –
which are inherently present in commercial digital applications (Sax, 2021) - undermine the image of the consumer
which is foundational to a liberal approach to consumer protection. The consumer as a sovereign, rational, active market actor gives way to a vulnerable, passive user in need
of protection. Updating existing legal frameworks as to address the challenges of digitisation requires, therefore, a reconceptualisation of the digital consumer as an agent whose
choices are nudged and technically pre-determined by the
techno-social system that surrounds him.
The push toward the digitalization and platformisation of
the payment ecosystem is a push toward both the liberalization of the market and the integration of the new service
industry at the EU-wide level. Processes of liberalization are
traditionally justified as means to realize the interest of consumers (Micklitz and Weatherill, 1993): according to the neoliberal axiom, increased competition will bring down prices
and increase the possible choices for consumers. Not surprisingly, the realization of consumer interest is a core justification in the policy agenda here analysed. But what image of the
consumer is mobilized? A strong, free market player or a vul8 Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of
the Council on a Single Market for Digital Services (Digital Services
Act) and amending Directive 2000/31/EC. 9 For instance, by establishing transparency obligations regarding online advertising (Art. 24) and regulating the use of recommender systems (Art. 29). 10 The relevance of information exposure on platforms’ interfaces is recognized by the DSA, at Recital 62: “A core part of a very
large online platform’s business is the manner in which information is prioritized and presented on its online interface to facilitate and optimise access to information for the recipients of the
service”.
nerable actor? Which needs, priorities and interests are taken
into consideration?
The present paper investigates which image of the consumer is mobilized by European policymakers to justify the
liberalization of the digital payment industry, and which sociotechnical imaginaries influence the fabrication of such image.
4. Methodology
Discourse analysis as a method of enquiry is aimed at looking at “discourse” as a “specific ensemble of ideas, concepts,
and categorizations that are produced, reproduced and transformed in a particular set of practices through which meaning is given to physical and social realities” (Hajer, 1995). This
methodology is devoted to the question of how collective systems of meaning are built, which power relationships they
constitute, which knowledge, practices, literacies they imply
and produce.
The boundaries of discourse as an object of analysis are
fluid. Identifying the material which forms the object of the
analysis and selecting one way of reading and interpreting
such material are choices which remain open to criticism.
Whichever variation of the method we select, it can never exhaust the possible paths of interpretation, association, deconstruction and contextualization and even delimitation of what
we identify as discourse. In my analysis, I choose to focus on
official documents produced and published by European institutions and publicly invested bodies involved in the making of
the European payment infrastructures.
4.1. Corpus of documents
The methodology of this paper consists in a systematic qualitative analysis of policy documents issued by EU institutions in the area of FinTech and, more specifically, digital payments. The most significant policy documents setting a general agenda for Fintech developments within the EU are the
European Parliament 2017 Fintech Resolution and the Commission 2018 Action Plan on Fintech, with annex publications.
Moreover, I analyse a selection of documents produced by the
European Banking Authority (EBA) and by the ECB, both of
which are involved in the design of the digital payment infrastructure and its legal framework. The latter documents have
been chosen either by virtue of reference from other documents, or through a snowball search on the institutions websites using the keyword “digital payment(s)”.The results of the
search (which produced 403 results for EBA; 1224 for EBA) have
been automatically sorted by relevance and manually scanned
in order to select a manageable and representative sample of
relevant documents representing the positions of the two institutions on the issue at stake in the years taken into consideration for the purpose of this study. As it concerns EBA, particular attention is paid to the Working Group (WG) on APIs
under the PSD2.
The corpus also comprises documents produced by two expert groups specifically tasked with “fostering the integration,
innovation and competitiveness of euro retail payments in the
European Union” (ECB, 2021): the Euro Retail Payments Board
computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687 7
(ERPB)11 and the European Forum for Innovation in Payments
(EFIP) .
12 These two multi-stakeholders technical bodies are
relevant as forums where substantial, technical issues concerning the development and governance of the digital payment infrastructure are discussed.
The PSD2 is the legal instrument which regulates the provision of digital payment services within the EU. The current debate and policy-making activities regarding digital payments,
consequently, evolve around the implementation and the potential need to update the PSD II and/or implement other regulatory measures to facilitate a pan-European, integrated digital payment infrastructure. Notwithstanding its importance
within the regulatory framework, the PSD2 has been excluded
from the corpus as the goal of the study is to investigate the
discourse after and beyond the PSD2 – how the industry and
the institutional discussion seeks to move further.
The corpus is therefore composed of 41 documents, from 6
institutions, covering the period from 2017 until the first half
of 2021 (see Annex 1). With this selection, the intention is to
provide a representative picture of the dominant discourse on
digital payments as it is made publicly available by the institutions that are involved in designing its legal framework. To be
comprehensive of all the relevant documents is beyond my capabilities and resources; therefore, I acknowledge the limited
scope of the enquiry and the possibility of having overlooked
material that should have been taken into consideration.
4.2. Coding
All the documents have been analysed using the qualitative
content analysis software Atlas.ti. The process involved the
full reading of each document and simultaneous manual annotation and coding of the text. After all documents have
been analysed, the codes have been reorganized, merged into
groups and put in relation to each other to find patterns of associations and threats within the discourse. This exercise implied a process of repeated back and forth reflection between
the authors’ annotations,the codes and the text itself. The list
of the code groups, and the relative sub-codes associated with
each group, can be found in Annex 2.
Circumscribing narrow areas of discourse and identifying
key terms,the coding process helped understanding the structure of the discourse across the various institutions and document types. Using the coding tree, it was possible to find discursive patterns, overlaps or interrelations of concepts and
terminology to identify the various issues around which the
analysis is structured. A limitation of this methodology is the
unavoidable influence of the researcher’s goals and perspective, her sensibility to some topics, or words, rather than others. This limitation is partially overcome by coding the text as
comprehensively as possible, regardless of whether the information is deemed to be more or less relevant for the analysis.
11 See: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/groups/erpb/html/
index.en.html. 12 See: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/groups/efip/html/
index.en.html.
5. Findings
In this section I expose the findings of the analysis. First, I illustrate the sociotechnical imaginaries of digital payments as
they emerge from the corpus of selected documents (5.1). I
organize this section by identifying the most relevant issues
emerging from the corpus of documents and systematizing
them under different subsections;the organization under separate topic areas serves the clarity of the exposition; these topics areas are, in reality, intertwined and co-dependant from
each other. In 5.2, I retrace the notion of consumer interest
that is mobilized in the policy discourse to justify the process
of platformisation of payment services, identifying two main
conceptualizations of such notion (empowered vs weak consumer/user).
5.1. Socio-technical imaginaries of digital payments
5.1.1. Data commodification
European institutions have put the construction of a European
digital payment infrastructure at the core of the digital finance
strategy.This is stressed in several documents which highlight
the strategic role of digital payments for the contemporary EU
economy.
“Once relegated to the back-office, payments have become strategically significant. They are the lifeblood of the European economy”
(CommComm2020).
The value of the digital payment industry is boosted by the
monetisation of transaction data; this implies that the payment service industry is reorganising itself as a data-intensive
technological industry, with the breaking up of pre-existing
value chains. Regulators understand that technological companies, interested in the data generated by financial transactions, have infiltrated and reshaped the market. As the technical infrastructures and the logics of value production governing the digital payment market evolve around data monetisation, the networks of actors involved in the provision of
payment services moves dynamically and beyond the agency
of regulators, remodelling services through new technologies:
“Technology is contributing to breaking up previously integrated
value chains […] as new entrants adopt new business models leveraging technology such as application programming interfaces (APIs)
and platforms” (CommCons2021).
Data produced in the context of financial transactions is
highly informative on people private life, taste, behaviours,
movements. Because of the sensitive nature of financial data,
its strategic role for law enforcement, and the economic opportunities attached thereto,the governance of the technological system underpinning payment networks becomes a primary concern for policymakers. For this reason, the structuring of the backbone infrastructure, the licensing rules for service providers, and the data-access requirements governing
financial networks are to be determined by the policy agenda.
The need for institutional control, however, is counterweighted by a highly neoliberal attitude aimed at exploiting
the economic opportunities offered by digital payments data
flows.
“to scale up innovative finance in Europe a free flow of data within
the Union is needed” (EPRes2017).
8 computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687
Annex 1 – List of analysed documents.
Institution Year Document title Code name
EU Parliament 2014–2019 FinTech: the influence of technology on the future of the financial
sector
EPFin2014-19
EU Parliament 2017 Resolution on Fintech EPRes2017
EU Commission 2018 Press release: Payment services: Consumers to benefit from cheaper,
safer and more innovative electronic payments CommPress2018
EU Parliament 2021 Legislative Train (Action plan on fintech including a strategy on an
integrated EU Payments market).
EPTrain2021
EU Commission 2017 Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament,
the Council, the European Central Bank, the European Economic and
Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions Consumer
Financial Services Action Plan: Better Products, More Choice
CommCons2017
EU Commission 2018 Fintech Action Plan
CommFin2018
EU Commission 2018 Press release: FinTech: Commission takes action for a more
competitive and innovative financial market CommPress2018(2)
EU Commission 2018 Press Release (Fintech Action Plan)
CommPress2018(3)
EU Commission 2018 Factsheet (Fintech Action Plan)
CommFacts2018
EU Commission 2018 Annex to Fintech Action Plan
CommAnnex2018
EU Commission 2018 Payment services: Consumers to benefit from cheaper, safer and more
innovative electronic payments CommPay2018
Eu Commission 2019 Your rights when making payments in Europe (leaflet)
CommRights2019
EU Commission 2019 Payments Services Directive (PSD2): The European Commission
welcomes the adoption of a Joint Statement by three European Credit
Sector Associations (ECSAs)1 and representatives of two Third Party
Providers organizations2 on PSD2 implementation.
CommPSD22019
EU Commission 2020 Communication on a Retail Payments Strategy for the EU
CommComm2020
EU Commission 2021 Consultation on a new Digital Finance strategy
CommCons2021
EU Commission 2021 Request to EBA, EIOPA and ESMA for technical advice on digital
finance and related issues CommReq2021
EU Commission,
ECB
2021 Joint statement by the European Commission and the European
Central Bank on their cooperation on a digital euro CommECBjs2021
EBA 2017 Report on innovative uses of consumer data by financial institutions EBARep2017
EBA 2019 Opinion of the European Banking Authority on the elements of strong
customer authentication under PSD2
EBAOp2019
EBA 2019 EBA responses to issues XXI to XXVI raised by participants of the EBA
Working Group on APIs under PSD2
EBAResp2019
EBA 2019 EBA clarifications to issues I to III raised by participants of the EBA
Working Group on APIs under PSD2
EBACla2019
EBA 2019 EBA responses to issues IV to VII raised by participants of the EBA
Working Group on APIs under PSD2 EBAResp2019(2)
EBA 2019 EBA responses to issues VIII to XIII raised by participants of the EBA
Working Group on APIs under PSD2 EBAResp2019(3)
EBA 2019 EBA responses to issues XIV to XX raised by participants of the EBA
Working Group on APIs under PSD2 EBAResp2019(4)
EBA 2019 EBA report on the impact of fintech on payment institutions and
e-money institutions’ business models
EBARep2019
EBA 2021 Opinion of the European Banking Authority on supervisory actions to
ensure the removal of obstacles to account access under PSD2
EBAOp2021
ECB 2020 Press Release: ECB welcomes initiative to launch new European
payment solution
ECBPress2020
ECB 2020 Interview Christine Lagarde: The future of money – innovating while
retaining trust
ECBInt2020
ECB 2021 Interview Fabio Panetta: Evolution or revolution? The impact of a
digital euro on the financial system
ECBInt2021
ECB 2021 The Eurosystem’s retail payments strategy ECBStra2021
(continued on next page)
computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687 9
Annex 1 (continued)
Institution Year Document title Code name
ECB 2021 Eurosystem report on the public consultation on a digital euro ECBRep2021
ERPB 2014–2015 Annual report ERPB2014-15
ERPB 2015–2016 Annual report ERPB2015-16
ERPB 2016–2017 Annual report ERPB2016-17
ERPB 2017–2018 Annual report ERPB2017-18
ERPB 2018–2019 Annual report ERPB2018-19
ERPB 2020 ERPB reaction to the Commission’s consultation on a retail payments
strategy for the EU ERPBreact2020
EFIP 2017 Statement following the first meeting of the European Forum for
Innovation in Payments held on 29 November 2017
EFIP2017
EFIP 2019 Statement of the second meeting of the European Forum for
Innovation in Payments held on 25 November 2019
EFIP2019
Annex 2 – Codebook - code groups and the relative sub-codes associated with each of the groups.
Feelings/attitude
acceleration, acceptance, awareness, boosting innovation, complexity, confidence,
convenience, fitness/preparedness/readiness for digital age, good will,
impetus/momentum, need for action, reassurance (need of), reluctance, uncertainty,
urgency, welcoming new developments.
Change/transformation becoming the new normal, Brexit, catalyst for change, change of market structure,
change of payment instruments, changing business models, changing consumer
habits/preferences, changing our lives, COVID-19, digital euro as natural evolution,
digitalization, digitalization of economy, digitalization of payments, digitalization of
public services, future (-orientated/-proofness), impact of technology in finance,
innovation, modernization, momentum, natural evolution of PSD2, new technologies,
new types of actors, shift in payment preferences, socioeconomic changes.
Risk/obstacles biases and errors, concentration of power, counterfeiting and technical mistakes,
dependency on technologies governed elsewhere, disabilities and old age, financial
disruption, geographical limitedness, illicit activities, instability, internet coverage,
obstacles/barriers, protection of central bank money, risks, speculation, stablecoins,
targeted pricing, tax evasion, threat to sovereignty, vulnerability to international
developments.
Benefits fintech investments, businesses interests, consumers/citizens/societal interests and
needs, cross-border payments, efficiency, EU financial autonomy, improve contractual
terms for customers, inclusion, increase consumer choice, lower costs, meeting the
mutual interest of stakeholders, opportunities of fintech innovation, stability,
strengthening the banking industry, sustainability, targeted pricing, trust.
Market acquisition of fintech firms by institutions, capital market union, change of market
structure, changing business models, competing with cash and cards, competition,
concentration of power, customer ownership, digital single market, e-commerce,
economic impact of CBDC, global competition, global reach and impact of digital euro,
impact of technology in finance, international role of the euro, investment, network
effects, open asset sharing economy, open banking, open finance, private money, PSP’s
independence from banks.
Regulation/enforcement/supervision
adaptation of regulation to innovation, AML/CTF, authorization and licenses, balancing
of interests, best practices, boosting innovation, breaking of supervisory silos,
certificates, clarity of technical requirements, competition law, compliance, compound
risk/holistic approach to regulation, consent, consistency of implementation,
consolidated supervision, consumer and investor protection, consumer rights,
cross-border cooperation, cybersecurity, data localization rules, difference of rules for
banks and tech companies, DMA, e-IDAS, European Financial Transparency Gateway,
formalization of payment security requirements, GDPR, governance arrangements,
green deal data/environmental data, incentives, industry-led solutions, ISO, market-led
standardization, money as a public good, no regulatory intervention, proprietary
standards, PSD2, regulatory sandboxes, Regulatory Technical Standards, regulatory
uncertainty, regulatory updates (need of), risk-based approach, same business same
rule, sectorial regulation, service providers responsibility, spending limits,
supervision/monitoring, technology neutral regulation, testing, uniformity of rules
across EU, voluntary commitment.
(continued on next page)
10 computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687
Annex 2 (continued)
Feelings/attitude acceleration, acceptance, awareness, boosting innovation, complexity, confidence,
convenience, fitness/preparedness/readiness for digital age, good will,
impetus/momentum, need for action, reassurance (need of), reluctance, uncertainty,
urgency, welcoming new developments.
Knowledge awareness of disadvantages, consumer awareness, education, engagement with
companies, familiarity, financial and digital literacy, information gathering,
knowledge/understanding of technology, list of service providers, public consultation,
research/preparatory work, supervision/monitoring, take-up of technical solutions.
Technological design access to payers’ account, access to payment systems, accessibility of payment
infrastructure, anonymity, attractiveness, availability (to users), cash-like features,
confidentiality, consumer-centric, efficiency, frictionless, integration, interoperability,
large-scale processing, offline usability, openness, personalization, programmability,
PSP’s independence from banks, safe/secure, seamless (user experience), simplicity,
speed, transparency, trust, usability, user-friendliness.
Actors API evaluation group, ASPSPs, banking sector, BigTech, EU fintech laboratory, EU forum
for innovation in payment, EU observatory and forum on blockchain, expert groups,
financial institutions, intermediaries, mobile service providers, national authorities,
new types of actors, NGOs, out of EU jurisdiction service providers, Payment
Information Management Systems (PIMS), Payment Initiation Services (PIS), platforms,
social media, start-ups, tech companies, third-party payment service providers.
Services account information services (AIS), additional features and services, authentication,
cloud services, cross-currency payments, crowdfunding, electronic signatures, instant
payments, insurance, marketing, out of EU jurisdiction service providers, outsourcing of
services, P2P mobile payments, payment initiation services (PIS), remittances,
value-added services.
Infrastructure access to payment accounts, accessibility of payment infrastructure, additional
features and services, API, authentication, banks stepping in the back, cash (availability
of), CBDC/digital euro, cloud computing infrastructure, communication infrastructure,
complementarity (of payment methods), cross-border payments, decentralized
infrastructure, dematerialization (of money), digital identity, distribution networks,
easy provider switching, fragmentation (avoidance of), geographical limitedness/local
solutions, information exchange, information repository, integrated data pools,
integration, intermediation, interoperability, large-scale processing, multi-party
infrastructure, open banking, outsourcing of services, pan-European
reach/interoperability, pan-European data access, platforms, point-of-sale
/point-of-interaction, request-to-pay functionality, SCT Inst scheme, SEPA, SEPA API
access scheme, SEPA Proxy Lookup, standardization, technical migration, technological
barriers (absence of).
Technologies AI, algorithms, automation, behaviour prediction, big data analytics, blockchain/DLTs,
Bluetooth, cloud computing infrastructure, crypto-assets, cryptography, generic QR
code, hardware solutions/devices, interfaces, IoT, mobile technologies, plastic cards,
proximity technologies, RegTech, remote identification techniques, risk-based
authentication, robo-advice, stablecoins, strong costumer authentication.
Data abuse of personal information for commercial purposes, access to consumer data,
automated data processing, biases and errors, big data analytics, biometric data,
common financial data space, consent, data-driven innovation/business models, free
flow of personal data, GDPR, green deal data/environmental data, integrated data pools,
money as (digital) memory, pan-European data access, personal data, privacy/data
protection, selective privacy.
European policymakers are, therefore, first and foremost
concerned with creating the conditions for European technology companies to profit from this growing data market; this
market-orientated attitude is reflected in the PSD2, the aim of
which is to enable data flows from banks to technology companies.
5.1.2. Liberalisation and competition
EU institutions envision a competitive market where fintech
companies can grow and provide users better and cheaper payment services, interoperable and reachable across national
borders.
“[…]enhancing competition and leading to more choice, better
services, as well as lower prices for over 500 million consumers”
(CommCons2017).
Payment services’ EU-wide reach is a central prerogative for the policy agenda: enabling cross-border transactions without additional fees, and generating EU-wide data
value chains is necessary for EU companies to compete
with non-European large platforms serving European citizens.
To this aim, the policy agenda seeks to eliminate national
computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687 11
constraints to cross-border transactions and facilitate panEuropean reach with the imposition of common standards.
For example, the documents stress the need to guarantee
technology companies access to payers’ accounts data according to rules and mechanisms that are valid across the whole
Union.
The policy documents emphasize the role of the private
sector, in particular technology companies, in shaping the
digital payment ecosystem of the future. Private entities are
tasked with developing critical technological infrastructures
providing payment functionalities to users and businesses
across the EU.
“The Eurosystem will continue to support private initiatives for
retail payments […]” (ECBPress2020).
The documents are confident in the development of European payment solutions through the establishment of a liberalized, innovation-friendly market which would leverage on
the potentialities of platforms’ - i.e. the bundling of multiple
services and service providers within a single technical infrastructure. While guaranteeing European autonomy from foreign actors in the short term, a competitive European digital
payment ecosystem can, in the long run, gain global reach, increasing European geopolitical influence.
“[…] five key objectives: pan-European reach, customer friendliness, cost efficiency, safety and security, European identity and governance, and, in the long-run, global reach" (ECBPress2020).
The role upheld by EU institutions is, therefore, that of facilitating this privately-led “digital (re)evolution”, coordinating and supervising the development of the industry, while
safeguarding the fundamental interests of the Union. Bringing payment services up to date with the digital transformation occurring in other domains demands efforts to ensure
that various risks - “in terms of money laundering, financing of terrorism, cyber-attacks, as well as operational and liquidity risks for
financial institutions” ” (CommComm2020) - are tackled with supervision and adequate legal safeguards, including consumer
protection and risk mitigation measures. This precautionary
approach is needed to establish consumers’ trust in technological solutions, as necessary for their widespread uptake.
“If not appropriately identified and addressed, these risks may
undermine the confidence of consumers and merchants using instant
payments, potentially hindering their full rollout as the new normal”
(CommComm2020).
5.1.3. Platformisation
As organisational structures that conjoin a plurality of services and markets, the concept of platform is central to the
policy agenda on Fintech. European policymakers envision the
realisation of a pan-European digital payment platform, capable of connecting EU-based financial and non-financial service
providers operating across member states.
In todays’ global internet-based economy, payment services must be able to interconnect multiple services, industries and markets; they must be infrastructures with a tentacular reach, giving users the ability to interact (purchase,transact, receive money) with any party from a single interface and
mobile device. Being by definition two-sided or multi-sided
markets, payment services in the digital commerce ecosystem
are prone to be organized as platforms.
“According to the EBA, a digital platform/platform enables at
least one financial institution directly (or indirectly using a regulated
or unregulated intermediary) to market to customers, and/or conclude with customers contracts for, financial products and services
within the EEA” (CommReq2021).
The documents acknowledge that the payment industry is
undergoing a process of platformisation; this is intended both
as the organisation of financial data networks around banks’
APIs, and as the merging of payment services with the broader
ecosystem of technology platforms – and their data streams
- that operate in and structure digital markets in other domains.
“[…] importance of APIs, as a complement to other tools that can
be used by the consumer, in providing new actors with access to financial infrastructure” (EPRes2017).
Platformisation is, therefore, a change occurring at the infrastructural level: an organisational model shaping networks
of relationships and distribution of power amongst the actors
moving in the financial sector. It also entails the centrality of
data as main revenue source of the industry, with data access being the first requisite for market entrance, and data
availability the condition to compete. By positioning mobile
applications between financial networks and users, moreover,
platformisation entails a particular type of literacy and affordances for the users of payment services.
The infrastructural precondition for the realisation of a digital payment platform connecting the European market is EUwide standardisation of tools and processes for digital payments. This requires ensuring service providers’ compliance
to common standards and adherence to uniformly applied
rules, under the supervision and control of financial supervisory authorities. Key for cross-European standardisation is
the uniform development and implementation of APIs. An API
is defined as “a set of rules and specifications followed by
programmes to communicate with each other, and an interface between different programmes that facilitates their interaction” (CommReq2021). The role of APIs is that of linking services and applications and establishing connectivity
of products with customers and partners by managing data
access. APIs are key nodes in platform ecosystems whereas
they enable the “bundling of various financial services, often from various service providers such as payments services,
payment accounts, lending, investment, and insurance products” (CommReq2021).
Determined to “unlock the potential of open banking beyond PSD2”, the ERPB seeks to concretize the vision of a panEuropean digital payment platform bundled through the establishment of a “Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) Application Programming Interface (API) access scheme encompassing services beyond the (mandatory) scope of PSD2 by following a non-regulatory, coordinated approach aim at addressing the mutual interests of the stakeholders” (ERPBreact2020).
As infrastructural, non-regulatory intervention providing concrete benefits for industry stakeholders, this is considered by
institutions, including the Commission and the EBA (CommComm2020) a key instrument for the removal of obstacles to
the realisation of open banking as envisioned by the PSD2.
APIs are the gates that define rules of access to service
providers’ databases. Which data is transmitted depends on
the components of digital identity and authentication require-
12 computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687
ments standards – another priority area of the policy agenda.
Also on this matter, the primary concern is to establish panEuropean harmonisation: cross-national and cross-sectorial
recognition of authentication requirements and techniques.
Financial institutions are called to ensure interoperability and
ease of use of digital identity and authentication techniques
(CommComm2020). The interoperability requirement is necessary for the uptake of mobile payment services and for the
linkage of payments to other services within digital platforms:
users must be able to interact with their finances using, instead of IBANs, credentials that are readily available through
third parties’ services (EFIP2019).
The uptake of European payment solutions, however, faces
one fundamental obstacle that the free-market logics followed by the Commission are not able to circumvent. The
Commission recognises that large technology companies located abroad are already ahead in the process of introducing payment functionalities within their platform’s environments. Non-European large technology companies can exploit
their market dominance to overtake the provision of payment
services within the EU, further consolidating their platform
monopolies. The Commission voices the concern that these
companies might establish themselves as dominant players
in the field of digital payments in the EU. They could, in fact,
profit from network effects and global reach to gain a dominant position in the EU market, stifling competition with European technology providers.
“Large technology providers can use their customer data and network effect advantages to enter the payments sector, leveraging their
market power from social media or search services” (CommComm
2020).
According to the European institutions, large technology
platforms pose regulatory challenges for two reasons: first,
they are likely to pose competition issues; second, as they perform both regulated and unregulated activities, they require
the supervision of different authorities and cross-sectorial, coherent oversight efforts
“Need to break down supervisory silos across sectors, and recommends close cooperation by financial sector supervisors with other
relevant national and European bodies that have the required technological expertise” (EPRes2017)
Developing a domestic digital payment ecosystem is,
therefore, also a protectionist, defensive strategy against
the spectrum of foreign BigTech and “technologies governed
abroad”, which threaten to undermine European sovereignty
and the protection of individual rights.
“The expansion of big tech companies could make us dependant
on technologies governed elsewhere” (ECBInt2021)
However, little is said about how domestic companies will
effectively be favoured over foreign ones. Promoting wide
scale and transnational reach, in fact, the policy ultimately
favours bigger technology providers over smaller local ones,
and does nothing to challenge the strategic position held by
US-based companies (PayPal, Google, Apple) which already
provide payment functionalities to EU citizens. The dependence on US-based companies might turn out to be a hardto-eradicate feature of the payment industry (think of plastic
cards as well).
“In a world increasingly dominated by digital platforms, large
technology providers are taking advantage of their vast customer
base to offer front-end solutions to end-users. Their entry into finance may consolidate the network effects and their market power”
(CommComm2020).
5.1.4. Technological transformation
Technological development is depicted as an exogenous, unstoppable phenomena which will inevitably impact the way
financial transactions are performed and managed. The technological revolution has already started: the technological affordances provided by dominant market players are here to
stay, and they already inform the needs of citizens, as well as
the future direction of the industry.
“Customers’ expectations of ‘seamless’ payments, ongoing consolidation and the redesign of payment platforms and market infrastructures contribute to a transformation in payments”
(EBARep2019).
The digitalization of money and payments is depicted as a
“natural evolution” in the context of a ubiquitous digitalization of commerce and communication.
“A digital euro represents a natural evolution in response to this
transformation” (ECBInt2021).
Changes in business models and market structures, entrance of new actors (technology providers not previously engaged with the financial service industry) and shifts in the
governance of money are unavoidable, as means of payment
need to adapt to the surrounding socio-technical ecosystem.
Policy makers can only acknowledge and participate as facilitators of the process; try to steer it within the parameters of
what is deemed desirable according to European regulatory
principles. In this perspective, incentivising the emergence of
a European digital payments industry through liberalisation
and regulatory incentives is a strategy to bring technological
development in the proximity of EU institutions, to keep it
closer to their domain of agency.
There is a considerable dose of techno-solutionism in the
way policymakers surrender to the imperative of technological evolution. Their view seems to subscribe to an ageless Californian ideology according to which governments
should “stay off the backs of resourceful entrepreneurs”
(Barbrook and Cameron, 1996) who will enable useful technological progress in a competitive marketplace. The struggle,
then, is to reconcile this ideology with European values and
the commitment to make technological services inclusive and
democratic.
The goal of the liberalisation process is to pave the way to
an innovative and competitive digital payment market providing services based on cutting edge technologies:
“A number of factors are expected to contribute to a further acceleration of this innovation […] the development of new technological innovations such as Big Data analytics, artificial intelligence and
robo-advice” (EBARep2017).
Technological development will allow the creation of a digital payment ecosystem that is accessible, inclusive, and interoperable across borders. A number of technologies are expected
to reshape the ways we transact and interact with our finances: AI, robotics, blockchain, cloud and mobile technologies are amongst the most quoted. These technologies are
meant to support faster, cheaper, safer means of payments and
enable frictionless interactions with financial incumbents.
computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687 13
Technological applications will provide cash-like functionalities;
they will be consumer-centric, user-friendly, seamless.
Payments are foreseen to be performed mostly via mobile
devices, through proximity and contactless technologies. Authentication techniques will increasingly rely on biometrics
rather than passwords. Automation and robotics will improve
compliance processes and multiple aspects of the relationship
with consumers. Institutions are also enthusiastic about the
possibilities of data analytics to personalise products, financial offers and service conditions based on the specific needs
of consumers.
This enthusiasm for technological innovation is not always counterbalanced with inquiries about the limitations
of these technologies. No mention is made, for example, of
the well documented technical limitations of blockchain and
distributed technologies.13 Institutions mention, rather superficially, issues associated with the application of AI for automated decision-making for the management of personal
finances,14 including discrimination and unfair pricing, but
their potential benefits seem to overweight such risks. The political and legal problems related to the international nature
oftechnological artifacts’ supply chains (for instance,that mobile technologies are mostly produced in China and in the US)
are omitted from the discussion, as well as the effects of digitisation on labour conditions (Jones, 2021) and policies.
5.1.5. Regulation and supervision
The policy-making agenda collected for the purpose of the
present discourse analysis is highly future-orientated: it envisions and depicts a digital payment infrastructure that is yet
to be fully materialized. The role of regulation is that of facilitating the materialization of that vision.
The declared goal of European institutions is that of ensuring that the Union will benefit from the affordances of cutting
edge, data-intensive technologies and the economic possibilities offered by them. Policymakers are committed to enable,
through various regulatory and technical interventions, the
growth of the digital payment industry. Institutions’ intent is
to set the direction for the private sector to modernize and optimize the ways payments are performed through information
technologies, riding the momentum of fintech, pursuing a vision
of development and change.Their approach is aimed at ensuring the preparedness, fitness, readiness of Europe for the digital
age. Technological progress is unstoppable and unavoidable;
hence, the task of institutions is to set a framework within
which new technologies can flourish.
“Today’s Action Plan envisages to enable the financial sector to make use of the rapid advances in new technologies, such
as blockchain, artificial intelligence and cloud services” (CommPress2018).
13 See: Monrat et al. (2019) "A Survey of Blockchain rom the
Perspectives of Applications, Challenges, and Opportunities," in
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 117134-117151, reporting the shortages of
blockchain technologies in terms of scalability and performance,
interoperability, privacy, energy consumption, security and legal
compliance.
14 See: Eubanks (2017). Automating inequality: how high-tech tools
profile, police, and punish the poor. New York: St. Martin’s Press, about
the far-reaching negative consequences of automated decisionmaking in public services.
“Importance of boosting financial innovation in Europe”
(EPRes2017).
The policy agenda is characterized by a pressing tone, resembling an accelerationist manifesto stressing the need to
harness, reap, untap, boost, accelerate, fuel the benefits of FinTech
and of digital transformation of finance. Urgency and speed
are the core temporal elements in the policy-agenda. Institutions must catch up with the technological revolution, moved
partially by genuine optimism about the affordances of new
technologies, partially by a “fear of missing out” on changes
that will overwhelm them.
One could wonder about the rationale of this strategy:
delegating digital payments to a liberalized marketplace of
technology companies equates to the self-destruction of preexisting legal structures and of the national monopoly on
money circulation. At a closer look,the chosen policy direction
must be read within the frame of a presupposed technological
determinism which forces institutions to adapt to an ongoing
technological disruption. Digitalization and liberalization are
unavoidable choices if the EU economy wants to survive the
fierce global competition amongst tech corporations to harvest the data of a globally wired population.
The need for regulation to “reap the benefits of fintech
innovation” translates into precise regulatory principles and
key actions. First of all, regulation in the financial domain
needs to maintain an innovation-friendly outlook, encouraging industry-led solutions and allowing spaces for selfregulation.
“The purpose of the digital finance strategy is to ensure that the
EU regulatory framework for financial services is fit for the digital
age. This includes enabling the use of innovative technologies and
making the framework compatible with prevailing best practice in
software production and deployment” (CommComm2020).
This translates in soft regulatory measures such as innovation hubs and regulatory sandboxes, as well as in regulatory frameworks for the use of specific technologies such as
AI and Cloud Computing – all measures aimed at favoring the
adoption of new technologies from financial sector’s service
providers. Importantly, key for the realization of the policy is
the correct implementation and appropriate amendment of
the PSD2. The EU Commission, in fact, is committed to facilitate, with legal and technical guidance,the correct implementation of the rules regarding data flows as set out in the directive.
“The Commission aims to ensure through regular legislative reviews and interpretative guidance that the EU regulatory framework
for financial services neither prescribes nor prevents the use of particular technologies while also ensuring that regulatory objectives
continue to be met”(CommComm2020).
Another principle that is often mentioned is that of
technological-neutrality, meaning the idea that regulation
must tackle activities and services, not technologies. In
other words, “same activity, same risks, same rules” (CommComm2020).
“Ensuring a technology-neutral and innovation friendly EU financial services regulatory framework” (CommCons2021).
This principle seems to be at odd with some of the proposals of the policy agenda, such as that of issuing a regulation
on crypto-assets and blockchain-based tokens – technologies
14 computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687
which still have to stabilize their use, function and legal relevance.
The issue with regulating rapidly changing technological
solutions for the financial sector, as it emerges in several
documents, is, first of all, a temporal one. It is, in fact, often stressed that rules, guidelines, interpretations cannot be
static, but must be updated on a regular basis. This is the so
called “future-proofness” of the regulatory agenda: in order
not to hamper innovation, regulation must be constantly retailored and re-clarified based on the latest, ongoing technological developments.
“Through regular reviews, the Commission will ensure that potential material regulatory obstacles to innovation stemming from
legislation on financial services are removed. It will regularly provide interpretative guidance on how existing legislation on financial
services is to be applied to new technologies” (CommComm2020).
One of the elements imposing regular regulatory updates
is the rapid change not only of technologies but also of the
actors and their functions within the ecosystem: “the financial ecosystem is becoming increasingly complex with a more
fragmented value chain. The payments chain involves many
players (some regulated, others not) and increasing levels of
complexity and inter- dependency” (CommComm2020). A crucial point in the policy agenda is, therefore, that of establishing clear licensing and authentication schemes, bringing up
to date the list of actors that are covered by the PSD2.
“As payment services increasingly rely on the provision of ancillary services by or on outsourcing arrangements with unregulated entities, the Commission considers it indispensable to assess, in
the context of the PSD2 review, whether some of these services and
providers should be brought into the regulated sphere and be made
subject to supervision” (CommComm2020).
A counternarrative to the “boosting innovation” approach
incorporated in these regulatory principles is the emphasis
on the risks brought by technological change. Without abandoning the innovation-friendly mindset that illuminates the
whole agenda, institutions recognize that the complexity and
variegated nature of the emerging ecosystem requires to balance different interests:
“While regulation must guarantee a level playing field, promote
fair competition and low barriers to entry and spur innovation, it
must also uphold users’ rights and protect the overall ecosystem from
financial and operational risks. To achieve these objectives, the regulatory perimeter needs to be well balanced” (CommComm2020).
Specifically, it is argued that “the increased use of customer
data or big data by financial institutions” and “the increasing combination of personal data and algorithms”, while they
“may lead to benefits to consumers”, can also cause “systemic
risk and harm consumers, for example through increasing exclusion” (EPRes2017).To such risks, and to issues deriving from
“errors or biases in algorithms or in the underlying data”, as
well as the “misuse/non-disclosed use of data”, the main solution that is identified is “to ensure that adequate regulation
was in place and enforced to protect individuals” (EPRes2017).
Mention is particularly made to the GDPR, and to the rights
enshrined thereto:
“The provisions of the GDPR, which grant the data subject the
right to obtain an explanation of a decision reached by automated
processing and to challenge this decision; […] guarantee that incorrect data can be changed and that only verifiable and relevant data
are used; calls on all stakeholders to increase efforts to guarantee the
enforcement of these rights; […]consent given to the use of personal
data needs to be dynamic and that data subjects must be able to
alter and adapt their consent” (EPRes2017).
The prudential approach is translated in enhanced supervision and oversight of the payment ecosystem; because of
the pace of technological change – the Commission explains -
supervision requires appropriate skills and constant training
of the supervisors.
“Supervision and oversight of the relevant actors in the payments
chain has become increasingly complex,taking into account the emergence of many new business models and group structures. The potential supervisory implications became apparent in a recent case involving a technology company providing payment-related services”
(CommComm2020).
Such skills and training critically require cooperation between “regtech providers, financial players and regulators”
(CommComm2020). Supervision becomes complex because
the entrance of non-financial actors in the industry breaks
up traditional supervisory silos and causes different areas of
competences to spill over each other.
“Players in the payments chain may be under the supervision or
oversight of different entities” (CommComm2020).
“Large technology companies offer a wide range of services and
have elevated intra-group dependencies, for instance on integrated
data pools, operating systems and processes, and customer access.
They may use their vast amount of customers’ data to support the
provision of financial services giving rise to questions about conduct
and prudential risk management, which have not been present so far
in traditional mixed activity groups. These taken together suggest
that they pose risks of a more systemic dimension. Hence a holistic
approach to their supervision may be necessary” (CommReq2021).
This cooperative and cross-sectorial approach, referred to
as “multidisciplinary supervision” (CommCons2021), implies supervisors’ dependence from the tech industry expertise. Supervisors’ training needs to rely on the private actors responsible for technology development and implementation. This
raises questions regarding the capacity of supervisors to critical assess, for example, the real necessity of a technological
feature, the risks it entails and its future development.
5.2. The fabrication of consumer interest
Beside appeals to future imaginaries, policy choices are motivated through arguments of necessity and benefits, pragmatic
considerations which justify the efforts towards the materialisation of that particular future. Justifications are key to institutional discourse as they legitimise policy choices. By identifying both future imaginaries and the arguments that are
deployed by policymakers to justify a given direction of action, this analysis serves to highlight the links, the overlaps
and mutual influences between the two discursive elements.
In the policy documents, we identify the realization of consumer interest - declined either as consumer empowerment
or as consumer protection - as central justification for policy
choices.
5.2.1. Consumer technological empowerment
The policy agenda encourages the entrance of technology
companies within the financial domain, so that, though fair
computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687 15
competition, a digital payment industry can develop and offer
products which best meet consumers’ needs and expectations
with regard to digital payments.
Mobilising the realisation of consumer interest as a justification for policy action implies developing a precise notion of what is needed or desired by a hypothetical model
of consumer. In the documents, there seem to be precise
assumptions on which technological features correspond to
consumers’ needs and desires when it comes to payment
technologies: “faster, cheaper, more tailor- made, more inclusive, more resilient and more transparent and better financial
services” (EPRes2017). These expectations are shaped by the
technological affordances that digital technology providers
have established as default options for digital environments:
personalization, friendly interfaces, interoperability amongst
services within a single platform.
“Customers now demand fast, cheap, easy, smooth and secure
payments at any time and from anywhere, and seek more options
and choices” (EBARep2019)
Consumers are assumed to desire the latest, most advanced technological solution offered by the market. Meeting consumers’ needs, therefore, amounts to enabling them
to make use of the technological solutions offered by tech
companies, establishing a co-dependency between the latter
and the traditional financial sector. In other words,technology
companies are better suited to provide what consumers need.
There is, therefore, an assumption that a liberalized market
populated by competitive tech companies, making the best
use of financial data, will produce what is in the best interests
of consumers.
This line of reasoning serves as a justification for the promotion of collaborations between new technology providers
(such as Account Information Services and Payment Initiation
Services) and banks (“Access to more customer data would
also enable service providers to offer more personalised services that are better tailored to customers’ specific needs” -
CommComm2020). It is also the rationale behind the transition of “consumer-ownership” from the banks to technology providers: the latter provide the interfaces, defining users’
modes of interaction with their finances, determining the
types of literacies that are necessary for using financial technologies.
But the rhetoric of consumer empowerment through increased datafication responds to well to the interest of technology companies. Many fintech applications adopt freemiums
models15 and exploit data for various commercial purposes
(marketing, insurance, credit scoring, etc.) (Ferrari, 2020). The
‘user-experience’ in digital apps is designed with the goal of
multiplying the data points linked to users, and informed by
the algorithmic personalisation of services and advertising
(Janssen et al., 2020, p.13). A “better”, personalized user experience,therefore, is not only aimed at responding to consumer’s
needs - as policy-makers seem to understand - but it is, first
of all, functional to the data-intensive business models that
technology companies adopt.
15 Monetization models in which the app is free to download and
use, but users can pay to enhance their experience through inapp purchases or subscriptions; often, this model also relies on
advertising as source of revenue. See: Sax, 2021.
5.2.2. Consumer protection
The consumer/user plays a central role in the rhetoric used to
justify the policy agenda in two ways: on one hand, as seen
above, as market actor interested in market efficiencies and
empowered by innovations; on the other hand, as vulnerable
actor to be protected from the negative externalities of digital
services.
While companies claim to be using data analytics to optimise the digital environment in order to respond to the
needs of individual users, “data could be mis-used to target
vulnerable consumers; companies can exploit data in nontransparent ways to apply dynamic pricing techniques or encourage, through personalised offers, frivolous spending or
hyper-consumerism ”(EBARep2017).
The main threats demanding a focus on consumer protection in the development of the digital payment industry relate
to data protection, cybersecurity and digital illiteracy. With regard to the first, it is acknowledged that digital financial transactions entail the production and management of highly informative personal data, and these data are likely to be abused
for commercial purposes.
“The abuse of personal information for commercial or other purposes could endanger privacy and harm competition” (ECBInt2020).
This position seems to be at odd with the rest of the
agenda, which promotes data-intensive business models as
essential economic strategies. Moreover, the line between legitimate commercial use and abuse of personal data is not
clearly drawn. Linking to the GDPR modus operandi, mention
is made to the necessity of user consent to the processing of
personal data. However, in the context of an essential service
such as digital payments, using consent as discriminating criteria for legit data processing misses the point. In fact, as digital means of payments are increasingly becoming the exclusive option for financial transactions, users will be left with
no alternative but disseminating sensitive data points across
digital payment intermediaries.
Similarly to data protection, cybersecurity risks are framed
as potential technical issues, untangled from the political,
institutional, trust-related questions that they arise. In the
emerging digital payment industry, cybersecurity matters
are assigned to a “public- private partnership […] launched
by the Commission with the participation of the industry”
(EPRes2017). The goal of increasing cybersecurity translates,
once again, into incentives for companies to develop and implement more advanced technologies; for example, with regard to authentication, the Commission stresses that payment service providers “should rely on the most secure authenticating factors”, i.e. biometrics, “moving away, where
possible, from transmittable elements (e.g. static passwords)
and from older technologies and communication channels
that are prone to attacks (e.g. SMS text messages)” (CommComm2020). Cybersecurity, therefore, becomes an industry
within an industry, which further strengthen the role of private actors in determining design, affordances and data protection standards of digital payment networks.
A proposed solution to these data protection and security risks is the promotion of consumer awareness, literacy
and education about the functioning of financial technologies.
There is awareness that regulatory frameworks might not suf-
16 computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687
fice to protect consumers from potential abuses of data. To
avoid risks of manipulation leading, for instance, to “hyperconsumerism” and “misselling practices” consumers must be
aware of how their personal data are used for profit maximisation.
“raise consumer awareness as regards both the opportunities and
the risks related to innovative uses of consumer data (such as the risk
of hyper-consumerism or misselling practices)” (EBARep2017).
While recognising the vulnerability of consumers/users of
digital payment applications, institutions shift the responsibility of protection from the legal framework to users themselves. In the analysed policy agenda, the recognition of the
consumer/user as an actor to be protected does not translate into regulatory measures; the policy, in fact, favours dataintensive business models without questioning its long-term
harm on individual choices and social dynamics. The awareness of potential threats, in fact, merely motivates the need
to re-educate the consumer for her to fit the ideal of the free
and informed market player who can benefit from competition and innovation.
6. Critique
The analysis provided in this paper highlights how, according to policymakers, the digitisation of payments realises and,
at the same time, threatens the interests of consumers. The
dominant image – the one that is coherent with the future
imaginaries depicted in the analysed documents – is, however,
that of a consumer who is empowered by technological innovation and benefits from a competitive digital market. While
the goal of protecting consumers falls in the background, the
mission of institutions is that of facilitating competition and
the uptake of new technologies, creating a regulatory environment that allows technology companies to penetrate the financial sector, first and foremost opening access to financial
data.
The notion of user empowerment is grounded on the rhetoric
– promoted by the private sector – that through digital technologies individuals can better themselves and their lives.
Hence, the consumer/user plays a role as a market player that
is interested in the development of a fertile market for financial technologies, for the sake of its own self-empowerment.
This interpretation implies conceptualising the consumer as
a free and rational actor which can enjoy full autonomy in her
economic decisions and benefit from the opportunities provided by the tech-industry. Also, it is based on the assumption
that further digitisation and technological development is desirable and necessary.
In the reasoning underlying the policy agenda, specific
technological features – speed, usability, seamless experience,
personalization, etc. – and technologies - AI, big data analytics, biometrics, etc. - are assumed to correspond to what
consumers desire and need when it comes to digital payments. In a nutshell, the interest of consumers is tightly tied
to a notion of technologically-empowered consumer which
in turn is grounded on a very precise sociotechnical imaginary about the future of payment technologies - one which
mirrors the characteristics of emergent business models in
the industry and disregards important consideration on consumers/users’ vulnerability vis a vis digital applications (see:
Dieter and Tkacz, 2020).
The technologies that are painted as desirable or necessary in the evolution of digital payments are the same in
which – based on data reported in the 2019 EBA “Report on
the impact of fintech on payment institutions’ and e-money
institutions’ business models” - technology companies have
been investing and experimenting the most in recent years
(EBARep2019). In the 2021 EU Commission Consultation on a
new Digital Finance strategy,the involvement of citizens in determining what is desirable for the future of digital payments
is scarce if not completely absent; only 5 responses came from
EU citizens, while 125 came from representatives of the industry (Commission, 2021, p.3). Hence, it can be affirmed that –
notwithstanding the centrality of consumer interest as rhetorical catalyst for change - consumers had little to no role in the
definition of what is deemed desirable and needed in terms of
technological change.
Arguably,features such as speed, personalization and userfriendliness are far from being an obvious preference for users
of payment services. Banks’ costumers,for instance,might appreciate their institutions based on matters oftrust,loyalty,interpersonal trust, familiarity; they might be reassured by prudent, accountable burocratic procedures for handling financial transactions. Crypto-assets users, on the other hand, priorities confidentiality over usability; they value technological
creativity and the possibility of avoiding marketing and financial surveillance.Therefore,the technologies that are here portrayed as desirable seem to be the product of a rather partial
view, reflecting particular economic interests and discursive
strategies.
“Consumer associations fear that algorithms may discriminate against those who are less willing to share their data
online” (EBARep2017). Close monitoring of users’ financial
history and credit trustworthiness can lead to financial exclusion and prevent financial mobility. “Non-transparent dynamic pricing techniques” and “personalised offers [that] encourage frivolous spending or hyper-consumerism” make it
questionable whether the cost reductions generated through
data analytics and automation “would be passed on to consumers” (EBARep2017). The dominant argument of consumer
empowerment could then be well turned around: the transformation of payment services into a data-intensive platformbased industry, may – rather than empowering them - make
consumers more vulnerable, less informed, less autonomous
than the classical market player assumed in EU consumer law.
Technological companies, on the other hand, have tools at
their disposal to “nudge” users’ preferences in terms of products and technological choices (Thaler and Sunstein, 2008).We
move in a dangerous area in which the biopolitics of money
can merge with the biopolitics of data. Hong masterfully exposes the “contradictions between technologies of datafication and the liberal ideal of open and transparent information”, as well as the power of digital technologies to intimately
reshape our relationship with ourselves and our needs. Highlighting how technologies of surveillance are also technologies of self-surveillance, Hong denounces how mobile health
applications shape new sensibilities and new forms of selfjudgment, and self-obsessions, which in turn demand more
tools for continuous self-tracking. The arguments he brings
computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687 17
forward in relation to health apps can well be transposed to
the mobile financial applications that are the focus of this policy agenda. Digital technologies offer us knew epistemological tools through which we monitor and manage our selves;
self-exposure as data subjects, thus, is made compulsory by
the inner push toward self-empowerment, and by the external conditions of wealth distribution systems which make it
unaffordable to stay untracked and unoptimised (Hong, 2020,
p. 110).
Another critical point is the monopolistic and everexpanding tendencies of platform economies. The possibility to choose amongst a variety of services is often prevented
by the winners-take-all consequences of platforms network
effects, which is likely to leave users little chance of opting out from mainstream dominant payment applications.
Hence, the market-based assumptions that free competition
will ultimately favour consumers may be far-fetched. The traditional neoliberal axiom on the efficiency of market competition is gainsaid by the platform logics; “the competitive struggle amongst surveillance capitalists produces the compulsion
toward totality” (Zuboff, 2019, p. 497). The payment data market is not an exception to the tendencies shown by platform
economies in other domains of activities: network effects are
likely to hamper competition, with bigger technological companies establishing hard-to-eradicate monopolies.
The documents recognize the need to “address conduct
and competition risks” (CommReq2021); reference is made
to the applicability of the Digital Market Act legislative proposal16 (“most of the large technology companies which are
currently offering financial services are likely to fall into
the scope of the proposal” - CommCons2021) which specifically addresses issues deriving from excessive market power
gained by dominant digital platforms. Yet, in the policy
agenda, the business models and the economic paradigm of
platformisation is not put into question, its unwanted externalities are not critically analysed.
The banking sector is likely to undergo the same process occurred in the telecommunications in the early 2010s,
whereas globally dominant mobile platforms, iOS and Android become dominant players of the mobile sectors, transforming telecoms “from the mediators of commerce to what
are often called the “dumb pipes””(Steinberg, 2019, p. 16). Similarly to national telecoms giants, banks are likely to fall into
the background of the payment ecosystem, leaving costumer
relationship and “data ownership” to fintech companies providing digital services and mobile interfaces.The alternative is
for banks to become themselves digital platforms capable of
providing competitive user interfaces; this option would ensure a more decentralised market, but the evident obstacle
remains that of interoperability, whereas a unifying payment
service infrastructure should bound together all banks’ payment applications.
The evident risk, looking at the telecoms example, is to
end up with a “de facto global regime of standards and shared
operating systems” (Steinberg, 2019, p. 16) delivered and controlled from elsewhere. The issues deriving from this shift
16 Commission, 2020, Proposal for a Regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council on contestable and fair markets in
the digital sector.
in the governance of financial networks can hardly be overstated; they range from the geopolitical oddness of delegating
powers to survey and censor financial transactions to foreign
large technology providers, to more subtle, long-term effects
on individuals’ financial behaviour (e.g. hyperconsumerism),
shifts in privacy perceptions and social norms around money.
In conclusion, the policy agenda portraits a vision of the
future of digital payment infrastructures that – whilst being
painted as inevitable and necessary – is informed by precise
narratives of user technological empowerment, which in turn
reflect the interests of technology companies entering and
shaping this new industry. The image of the consumer that
is mobilised in the policy agenda is tied to arguments that reinforce the desirability of that future. The fixation with digitisation and innovation can, at a closer look, be read as the
intention to refurbish a declining service industry as a data
industry, resorting to data commodification and AI to reinvigorate revenues.
As more and more service industries are transformed into
immense infrastructures of data extraction, the desirability of
platformisation as dominant organisational model needs to
be questioned more thoroughly; market regulation must be
informed by considerations on the impacts of platformisation
on geopolitical power balance, labour conditions and individuals rights,to name some.17 Yet, in the policy agenda,the negative externalities of platformisation, as well as alternative sociotechnical imaginaries, remain into the background, not urgent enough to inform political and legal reform.
7. Conclusions
This paper investigates through a qualitative analysis of official documents how certain imaginaries about technology
filter into policymaking, allowing or accelerating the transformation of paymentinfrastructures into the platform economy.
One of the ways in which socio-technical imaginaries filter
into policymaking is, it turns out, by informing an image of
consumer interest which serves to justify measures for the
realization of a desired future. Attributing to consumers the
need and desire for particular technologies and technological affordances, and portraying competition as the best way
to ensure them, policymakers appeal to consumer interest to
justify their policy choices.
The thesis of this paper is that the policy agenda in
question relies on a notion of technologically-empowered
consumer which is grounded on partially constructed sociotechnical imaginaries about the future of payment technologies, and conceals important consideration on consumers/users’ vulnerability vis a vis digital payment platforms/infrastructures.
The image of the future digital payment infrastructure portrayed in the policy documents is problematic for two reasons.
First, the technologies and technological affordances that are
assumed to meet consumer interest mirror emergent busi17 See: Panel for the Future of Science and Technology
(STOA) (2021), Online platforms: Economic and societal effects, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/stoa/en/document/
EPRS_STU(2021)656336.
18 computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687
ness models and products offered by the industry. Second,the
assumption that more competition leads to the availability of
more and better services – central to the whole policy agenda
- is flawed, as the platformisation process that the digital payment industry is undergoing entails the same risks of monopolization, dominance from foreign companies, and consequent geopolitical imbalances that are occurring in other domains. The notion of technologically-empowered user which
is linked to this vision is, therefore, partial. Important considerations on the negative externalities of platformisation, and
their implications for individuals, must be given greater consideration when determining the desired future of digital payments. Policymakers should look at other digital industries to
be better understand the risks entailed by the platformisation
of critical infrastructures, and open their imagination to alternative possible futures.
Policy documents
Commission, Communication From The Commission To The
European Parliament And The Council New Consumer Agenda
Strengthening Consumer Resilience For Sustainable Recovery
Com/2020/696 Final.
Commission, Communication From The Commission To
The European Parliament, The Council, The Economic And Social Committee And The Committee Of The Regions A European Consumer Agenda - Boosting Confidence And Growth /∗
Com/2012/0225 Final.
Commission, Communication from the Commission to the
European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic
and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on a
Digital Finance Strategy for the EU (2020).
Commission, 2021, Summary - Consultation on a new Digital Finance strategy.
Commission, 2020, Proposal for a Regulation Of The European Parliament And Of The Council on contestable and fair
markets in the digital sector.
Commission, Request To Eba, Eiopa And Esma For Technical Advice On Digital Finance And Related Issues.
EU Parliament, Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on certain aspects concerning contracts for the supply of digital content. COM/2015/0634 final -
2015/0287 (COD).
EU Parliament, Directive (EU)2019/2161 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 27 November 2019 amending Council Directive 93/13/EEC and Directives 98/6/EC,
2005/29/EC and 2011/83/EU of the European Parliament and of
the Council as regards the better enforcement and modernisation of Union consumer protection rules (OJ L 328, 18.12.2019,
p. 7).
EU Parliament, Proposal for a Regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council on a Single Market for Digital Services (Digital Services Act) and amending Directive
2000/31/EC.
EU Parliament, Directive (EU) 2015/2366 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on payment services in the internal market, amending Directives
2002/65/EC, 2009/110/EC and 2013/36/EU and Regulation (EU)
No 1093/2010, and repealing Directive 2007/64/EC (Payment
Service Directive II).
EU Parliament, European Parliament resolution of
17 May 2017 on FinTech: the influence of technology
on the future of the financial sector (2016/2243(INI))
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/TA-8-
2017-0211_EN.html.
Panel for the Future of Science and Technology
(STOA) (2021) Online platforms: Economic and societal
effects, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/stoa/en/document/
EPRS_STU(2021)656336.
Web pages
Commission, “Payment services”. See: https://ec.europa.
eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance/
consumer-finance-and-payments/payment-services/
payment-services_en#documents. Last visited: August 2021.
Commission, 2016, “European Commission sets up an internal Task Force on Financial Technology”, https://ec.europa.
eu/digital-single-market/en/blog/european-commissionsets-internal-task-force-financial-technology-.
European Parliament, “Legislative Train Schedule – A
Europe Fit for the Digital Age”; https://www.europarl.europa.
eu/legislative-train/theme-a-europe-fit-for-the-digital-age/
file-fintech-action-plan/06-2021.
EBA, 14 August 2019, “EBA publishes clarifications to
the fifth set of issues raised by its Working Group on APIs
under PSD2”, https://www.eba.europa.eu/eba-publishesclarifications-to-the-fifth-set-of-issues-raised-by-itsworking-group-on-apis-under-psd2. Last visited: August
2021.
ECB, “Euro Retail Payments Board”, https://www.ecb.
europa.eu/paym/groups/erpb/html/index.en.html. Last visited: August 2021.
Annexes
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Data Availability
Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgment
The present research has been conducted with financial support received by the European Research Council (ERC) under
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme under grant agreement No 759681.
computer law & security review 45 (2022) 105687 19
references
Barbrook R, Cameron A. The Californian ideology. Sci Cult
1996;6:44–72. doi:10.1080/09505439609526455.
Bellanova R, de Goede M. The algorithmic regulation of security:
an infrastructural perspective. Regul Gov 2021.
doi:10.1111/rego.12338.
Berber LK, Atabey A. Open banking & banking-as-a-service
(BaaS): a delicate turnout for the banking sector. Glob Privacy
Law Rev 2021;2:59–82 Issue 1, pp
https://kluwerlawonline.com/journalarticle/
Global+Privacy+Law+Review/2.1/GPLR2021009.
Bernard N, Campbell-Verduyn M. Understanding technological
change in global finance through infrastructures. Rev Int. Polit
Econ 2019;26(5):773–89. doi:10.1080/09692290.2019.1625420.
Cohen JE. Between truth and power: the legal constructions of
informational capitalism. Oxford University Press; 2019.
Cseres K. What has competition done for consumers in
liberalised markets? Comp Law Rev 2008;4(2):77–121 2008.
Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1273611.
Cseres KJ. Competition law and consumer protection. Kluwer Law
Int BV 2005;49.
Dieter, M., Tkacz, N., (2020) The patterning of finance/security: a
designerly walkthrough of challenger banking apps,
computational culture 7. Available at:
http://computationalculture.net/the-patterning-of-financesecurity.
Donnelly M. Payments in the digital market: evaluating the
contribution of payment services directive II. Comput Law
Secur Rev 2016. doi:10.1016/j.clsr.2016.07.003.
Eubanks V. Automating inequality: how high-tech tools profile,
police, and punish the poor. New York: St. Martin’s Press,
about the far reaching negative consequences of automated
decision-making in public services; 2017.
Ferrari V. Crosshatching privacy: financial intermediaries’ data
practices between law enforcement and data economy. Europ
Data Protect Law Rev 2020;6(4):522–35.
doi:10.21552/edpl/2020/4/8.
Hajer M. The politics of environmental siscourse: ecological
modernization and the policy process. Oxford: Oxford
University Press; 1995.
Haupt J. Facebook futures: Mark Zuckerberg’s discursive
construction of a better world. New Media Soc
2021;23(2):237–57. doi:10.1177/1461444820929315.
Helberger N, Loos MBM, Guibault L, et al. Digital content contracts
for consumers. J Consum Policy 2013;36:37–57.
doi:10.1007/s10603-012-9201-1.
Hong S. The limits of knowledge in a data-driven society. NYU
Press; 2020.
Janssen H, Cobbe J, Singh J. Personal information management
systems: a user-centric privacy Utopia? Internet Policy Rev
2020;9(4):1–25. doi:10.14763/2020.4.1536.
Jasanoff S, Kim SH. Containing the atom: sociotechnical
imaginaries and nuclear power in the United States and South
Korea. Minerva 2009;47:119. doi:10.1007/s11024-009-9124-4.
Jones P. Work without the worker - labour in the age of platform
capitalism. Verso; 2021 October ISBN 9781839760433.
King MR, Nesbitt RW. The technological revolution in financial
services: how banks. Fintechs, and Customers Win Together,
University of Toronto Press; 2020.
Langley P, Leyshon A. The platform political economy of FinTech:
reintermediation, consolidation and capitalisation. New Polit
Econ 2021;26(3):376–88. doi:10.1080/13563467.2020.1766432.
Larkin B. The politics and poetics of infrastructure. Annu Rev
Anthropol 2013;42:327–43 https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/
abs/10.1146/annurev-anthro-092412-155522.
Liao T, Iliadis A. A future so close: mapping 10 years of promises
and futures across the augmented reality development cycle.
New Media Soc 2021;23(2):258–83.
doi:10.1177/1461444820924623.
Lynggaard K. Discourse analysis and european union politics.
Palgrave Studies in European Union Politics; 2019.
Mager A, Katzenbach C. Future imaginaries in the making and
governing of digital technology: multiple, contested,
commodified. New Media Soc 2020.
doi:10.1177/1461444820929321.
Mak, V.. (2015) The consumer in European Regulatory private law.
Dorota Leczykiewicz and Stephen Weatherill (eds), The Image
of the Consumer in EU Law: Legislation, Free Movement and
Competition Law (Hart Publishing, 2016) 381-400, Tilburg
Private Law Working Paper Series No. 05/2015, Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2600474.
Markham A. The limits of the imaginary: challenges to
intervening in future speculations of memory, data, and
algorithms. New Media Soc 2020.
doi:10.1177/1461444820929322.
Mattila J, Seppälä T, Lähteenmäki I. Who holds the reins? – Banks
in the crossfire of global platforms; 2018 ETLA Report No 86.
https://pub.etla.fi/ETLARaportit-Reports-86.pdf.
Mejias UA, Couldry N. Datafication. Internet Policy Rev 2019;8(4).
doi:10.14763/2019.4.1428.
Micklitz HW, Weatherill S. Consumer policy in the european
Community: before and after maastricht. J Consum Policy
1993;16:285–321 Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Monrat A, Schelén O, Andersson K. IEEE Access; 2019.
p. 117134–51.
Mukerji C. The territorial state as a figured world of power:
strategics, logistics, and impersonal rule. Sociol Theory
2010;28(4):402–24 Retrieved August 2, 2021, from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/41057690.
Mützel S. Unlocking the payment experience: future imaginaries
in the case of digital payments. New Media Soc
2021;23(2):284–301.
Plantin JC, Lagoze C, Edwards PN, Sandvig C. Infrastructure
studies meet platform studies in the age of Google and
Facebook. New Media Soc 2018;20(1):293–310 2018.
doi:10.1177/1461444816661553.
Poell T, Nieborg D, van Dijck J. Platformisation. Internet Policy Rev
2019;8(4). doi:10.14763/2019.4.1425.
Reisch LA, Micklitz HW. Consumers and deregulation of the
electricity market in Germany. J Consum Policy
2006;29:399–415. doi:10.1007/s10603-006-9016-z.
Sadowski J. When data is capital: datafication, accumulation,
and extraction. Big Data Soc 2019.
doi:10.1177/2053951718820549.
Sax M. Between empowerment and manipulation: the ethics and
regulation of for-profit health apps; 2021 Kluwer, Amsterdam.
Steinberg M. The platform economy. How Japan transformed the
consumer internet. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press; 2019.
Thaler RH, Sunstein R. Nudge: improving decisions about health,
wealth, and happiness. Yale University Press; 2008.
van Dijck J, Nieborg D, Poell T. Reframing platform power.
Internet Policy Rev 2019;8(2). doi:10.14763/2019.2.1414.
Vidan G. Checks and balances: publics, interests, and the
development of electronic fund transfers in 1970s US. IEEE
annals of the history of computing. Computing Capitalisms;
2020. p. 11–25 vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 11-25, 1 July-Sept.
doi:10.1109/MAHC.2020.3008921. [Preprint PDF available here].
Part of special issue on "Computing Capitalisms.".
Westermeier C. Money is data – the platformization of financial
transactions. Inf Commun Soc 2020.