computer law & security review 41 (2021) 105502
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/CLSR
Comment
The regulatory framework for the protection of
critical infrastructures against cyberthreats:
Identifying shortcomings and addressing future
challenges: The case of the health sector in
particular
Dimitra Markopoulou∗
, Vagelis Papakonstantinou
Faculty of Law & Criminology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (LSTS), Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
a b s t r a c t
The concept of “Critical Infrastructures” is constantly evolving in order to reflect current concerns and to respond to new challenges, especially in terms of (cyber)security and resilience. Protection of critical infrastructures against numerous threats has therefore developed
into a high priority at national and EU level. During the last two decades a new type of threat has prevailed in the Critical Infrastructure
threat landscape, that of cyberattacks; Protection against them is the primary focus of this paper. In order to do so the analysis first aims
to drop some light into the differences between Critical Infrastructures and Critical Information Infrastructures, terms that are often
confused, and to indicate possible inadequacies in the applicable protection regulatory regime. Finally, the health sector has been chosen
as a sector-specific case in an effort to demonstrate how protection of a Critical Infrastructure, challenged as it has been with a constantly
increasing number of cyber incidents, could be sufficiently protected in the new digitalised era.
© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
1. Introduction
The concept of “Critical Infrastructures” is constantly evolving in order to reflect current concerns and to respond to new
challenges, especially in terms of security and resilience. At
the same time, over the last decades, the number and variety of Critical Infrastructures have increased significantly,
whereas their protection against numerous threats and the
safeguarding of their uninterrupted operation has developed
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: Dimitra.Markopoulou@vub.be (D. Markopoulou), Evangelos.Papakonstantinou@vub.be (V. Papakonstantinou).
into a high priority at national and EU level. Disruption or destruction of their operation may be the result of natural disasters (earthquakes, floods), mechanical failures, poor design
and human actions ranging from a simple theft or arson to
a terrorist attack. Operators of Critical Infrastructures, both
public and private entities, have, over the years, taken measures to protect their Critical Infrastructures against different
types of attacks. The complexity of the attacks and the vulnerabilities of the infrastructures, however, indicate the need for
constant alert from both operators and governments in order
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2020.105502
0267-3649/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
2 computer law & security review 41 (2021) 105502
to develop and implement updated policies for the protection
of their Critical Infrastructures.1
The 9/11 terrorist attacks demonstrated the vulnerability
of the USA’s Critical Infrastructures to the threat posed by
a terrorist attack of this magnitude. The catastrophic consequences that these attacks had in the operation of Critical
Infrastructures and the provision of critical services resulted
to the birth of Critical Infrastructure protection as a distinctive policy area in the US and provided significant motivation
to all stakeholders worldwide to review their Critical Infrastructures Protection policies in order to strengthen the existing instruments. It was the 9/11 attacks that attributed a
national security element to the definition of critical infrastructures, taking it a step forward from the traditional public sector approach. At European level, the first coordinated
steps to this direction were made in 2004, following the terrorist attacks in Madrid, when the Commission published its
Communication on Critical Infrastructure Protection in the
fight against terrorism,2 followed by the release in 2006 of
the first European Programme for the Protection of Critical
Infrastructure.3
During the last two decades a new type of threat has prevailed in the Critical Infrastructure threat landscape, that of
cyberattacks. Recent years have seen a dramatic increase in
the volume of cyber threats, as well as a diversity in both their
nature and complexity. This new enemy brought to the surface the need to protect the Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) that constitute the backbone of Critical Infrastructures.4 The term used, when referring to these
underlying systems and technologies is “Critical Information
Infrastructure”. Either as direct targets of a cyber threat or as
a vehicle used by the cyber offender in order to reach the final targets, namely the Critical Infrastructure itself, Information and Communication Technologies constitute a vulnerable target. Safeguarding the uninterrupted operation of these
systems and technologies is crucial for the uninterrupted operation of the Critical Infrastructures they support. Therefore,
their protection, their availability and resilience against any
kind of threats, has been placed in the centre of national and
EU interest.
The first part of this paper examines the differences between Critical Infrastructures and Critical Information Infrastructures. The two terms appear, in many cases, to be used interchangeably despite their conceptual and actual differences.
The EU applicable regulatory framework for the protection of
Critical Infrastructure and Critical Information Infrastructure
will also be addressed in this analysis. Even though the current
1 See, for example, ENISA’s CIIP Governance in the European
Union Member States (Annex), January 2016 https://www.enisa.
europa.eu/topics/critical-information-infrastructures-and-services/
ciip-governance-in-the-eu-annex 2 See Communication from the Commission to the Council and
the European Parliament - Critical Infrastructure Protection in the
fight against terrorism, COM/2004/0702. 3 See Communication from the Commission on a European Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection, COM/2006/0786. 4 On the emergence of cyberattacks see also Onyeji I. Bazilian M.
& Bronk C., Cyber Security and Critical Energy Infrastructure, The
Electricity Journal, Volume 27, Issue 2.
protection regime adopts an “against all-hazards approach”,
this paper focuses on the protection of the infrastructures
against cyber threats and examines the effectiveness of the
existing regulatory measures. Findings of the above analysis
are subsequently exemplified in the second part of this paper while focusing on a specific field, that of the health sector.
The health sector has been identified as one of the most important Critical Infrastructures, that has also been the target
of a continuously increasing number of cyber incidents. Consequently, an assessment of its regulatory framework with an
emphasis on security-related matters is expected to demonstrate in practice how specific measures and EU legislation
on Critical Infrastructures apply in practice and help mitigate
ever-increasing cyber threats.
2. The distinction between critical
infrastructure (CI) and critical information
infrastructure (CII): The role of industrial control
systems (ICS)
2.1. Defining critical infrastructures: What does “critical”
mean?
What do we mean by “Critical Infrastructures”? An official introduction to the term was made by the Commission in its
Communication on Critical Infrastructure Protection in the
fight against terrorism that was published in 2004 :
5 “Critical infrastructures consist of those physical and information technology facilities, networks, services and assets which, if disrupted
or destroyed, would have a serious impact on the health, safety,
security or economic well-being of citizens or the effective functioning of governments in the Member States. Critical infrastructures extend across many sectors of the economy, including banking and finance, transport and distribution, energy, utilities, health,
food supply and communications, as well as key government services”. Following the Commission’s Communication, similar
definitions on CIs may be found in different EU documents,
all of which follow the same pattern. The definition that prevailed, however, and is used broadly until today, is the one
included in the Council Directive 2008/114/EC6: “critical infrastructure means an asset, system or part thereof located in Member
States which is essential for the maintenance of vital societal functions, health, safety, security, economic or social well-being of people,
and the disruption or destruction of which would have a significant
impact in a Member State as a result of the failure to maintain those
functions”.
A close look at the definitions provided above indicates
that the characterisation of an infrastructure as “critical” is
subjective and rests, to a large extent, to the Member State
that suffers the consequences of a CI’s failure. What therefore constitutes a CI in a Member State, may not be identified as such in another one, since not all sectors are relevant for all countries. Furthermore, based on the special char5 See above footnote 2. 6 See Council Directive 2008/114/EC, of 8 December 2008, on the
identification and designation of European Critical Infrastructures
and the assessment of the need to improve their protection.
computer law & security review 41 (2021) 105502 3
acteristics of each country, the list may need to be enriched
with new sectors. While this divergence is justified, the freedom afforded to Member States entails a risk that ranges from
overregulating sectors that do not need additional protection,
with any inflexibility that this may cause, to underregulating
others, where stricter security requirements would be critical
for the continuity of their operation. The introduction therefore of some EU-wide standards and of a CI identification process that would be used as a guide by all Member States was
deemed necessary.7
In this context the most frequently listed examples of CIs
in EU documents, with some variations in terminology, encompass the sectors of banking and finance, government services, telecommunication and information and communication technologies, emergency and rescue services, energy and
electricity, health services, transportation, logistics and distribution, and water supply.The list is,however, indicative. As regards the next step, namely the identification and designation
by Member States of specific national CIs within their territories, guidelines are provided in order to achieve uniformity at
EU level to the greatest extent possible. Therefore, each Member State must do so based on national predefined criteria,
which however must be developed with minimum requirements in mind as these are included in official EU guidance.
The Commission’s Communication on a European Programme
for Critical Infrastructure Protection,for instance, suggests the
application of qualitative and quantitative effects of the disruption or destruction of a particular infrastructure as indicative for its characterisation as “Critical”: The scope (meaning the extent of the geographic area which could be affected
by its loss or unavailability) and severity in terms of public
effect (eg. number of population affected), the economic effect (significance of economic loss and/or degradation of products or services), as well as, the environmental effect, political effects, psychological effects, or public health consequences.8 The 2008 Directive on the identification of European
Critical Infrastructures (ECIs)9 also attempts to set some basic standards as regards identification and designation of ECIs
through the adoption by all Member States of a common procedure.10 However, the provisions of the Directive have a limited scope because they refer exclusively to ECIs, as these are
defined in its text, thus leaving national infrastructures outside its scope. The NIS Directive,11 on the other hand, has a
broader application as it applies to all Operators of Essential
Services; In practice, it describes the process Member States
7 See also Coroiu V, European Critical Infrastructures, European
Journal of Public and National Security, Issue 6, (2 of 2015)/Volume
II.
8 See Communication from the Commission on a European Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection, COM/2006/0786 final.
9 See Council Directive 2008/114/EC of 8 December 2008 on the
identification and designation of European critical infrastructures
and the assessment of the need to improve their protection 10 A specific procedure is included in the Directive’s Annex III. 11 See Directive (EU) 2016/1148 of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 6 July 2016 concerning measures for a high common
level of security of network and information systems across the
Union.
should follow for the identification of Operators of Essential
Services12 in an effort to introduce uniformity.13
2.2. Defining critical information infrastructures
There is no straightforward approach when it comes to defining a “Critical Information Infrastructure”. From a legal perspective at least, the differences between the two terms are
not obvious, and, until today, even though definitions of both
terms can be found in official documents, there are few clear
references regarding their relationship. On the contrary both
terms are sometimes used interchangeably and when this is
not the case,there is a considerable amount of overlap in their
use.14 According to Brunner and Suter “The definition of exactly
what should be subsumed under CI, and what should come under
the heading of CII, is another question: Generally, the CII is that part
of the global or national information infrastructure that is essentially
necessary for the continuity of a country’s critical infrastructure services. The CII, to a large degree, consists of, but is not fully congruent
with, the information and telecommunications sector, and includes
components such as telecommunications, computers/software, the
internet, satellites, fibre-optics, etc. The term is also used for the totality of interconnected computers and networks and their critical
information flows”.15 Dunn, refers to CI and CII as follows: “That
the two concepts are closely interrelated is apparent from the current
debate in protection necessities: the debate jumps from a discussion
of protecting critical physical infrastructure to talk of protecting data
and software residing on computer systems that operate these physical infrastructures. This indicates that the two cannot and should
not be discussed as completely different concepts. Rather CIIP seems
an essential part of CIP: While CIP comprises all critical sectors of
a nation’s infrastructure, CIIP is only a subset of a comprehensive
protection effort, as it focuses in the critical information infrastructure”.16
Definitions of both terms can be found in different EU official documents. ENISA refers to Critical Information Infrastructure Protection in its 2016 report on the protection of CII.17
18 ENISA understands CII as part of a CI and more particu12 See article 5 of the NIS Directive and relevant analysis in
Section 3.3 below. 13 On the definition of CI see also Cedervall Lauta K., Regulating a
Moving Nerve-On legally defining Critical Infrastructure, European
Journal of Risk Regulation, 176 (2015) 14 See Hyslop M., Critical Information Infrastructures, Resilience
and Protection, Springer 2007. 15 See Brunner E & Suter M, International CIIP Handbook
2008/2009: An Inventory of 25 National and 7 International Critical
Information Infrastructure Protection Policies, CSS ETH Zurich. 16 See Dunn Cavelty M, The socio-political dimensions of Critical Information Infrastructure Protection (CIIP), The International
Journal of Critical Infrastructures 1 (2/3): 258-268, January 2005. 17 See ENISA’s report on Stocktaking, Analysis and
Recommendations on the Protection of CIIs, January 2016, https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/
stocktaking-analysis-and-recommendations-on-the-protectionof-ciis
18 ENISA in particular states that “CIIP can be seen as an essential
part of the comprehensive efforts for CIP. While CIP covers the protection
of a nation’s infrastructure across various sectors, CIIP focusses on the
protection of the underlying information infrastructure. CII is comprised
of a physical component (networks, wires, satellites, computers etc.) and
4 computer law & security review 41 (2021) 105502
larly as the underlying information infrastructure. Another
definition is introduced by the Commission’s Green Paper.19 20
The OECD, on the other hand, in its 2008 Recommendation,21
defines CII as “those interconnected information systems and networks, the disruption or destruction of which would have a serious
impact on the health, safety, security, or economic well-being of citizens, or on the effective functioning of government or the economy”.
What may be concluded by these definitions is that CIs are
complemented by CIIs, which are perceived as a sub-segment
of CIs, in particular as the ICT systems that support their operation.
The realisation that ICT systems, services and networks
form a vital part of the European economy and society placed
the ICT sector’s protection high on the European priorities’
agenda early on. As early as 2005 the ICT sector was perceived
as a CI, when the Commission published its Green Paper and
the ICT was listed as one of the CI sectors that should fall under the European protection programme.22 ICTs could either
be perceived as CIs themselves, through provision of essential goods and services, or as the underpinning platform of
other CIs. In either case their protection is of the essence. The
need to give a priority to the ICT sector was also identified by
the Commission’s Directive on European Critical Infrastructures.23 In its text it is stated that, in the event of considering
of adding additional sectors under the Directive’s scope during the review process, the ICT sector should be first in the list
– however the Directive is still under review. The Commission
needed however another four years (since the Green Paper)
to move from these simple references to specific legislative
measures that addressed CIs’ protection separately.24 This effort led eventually to the adoption of the NIS Directive and the
implementation of a more consistent European approach on
the protection of network and information systems.
In practice, the argumentation regarding the differences or
overlaps between the two terms should not be limited to a
theoretical evaluation of their contents. A more precise and
consistent reference to each in the relevant EU and Member
State documentation could contribute to better identification
an immaterial component, which is the actual information transported by
and through the physical components” 19 See Green Paper on a European programme for critical infrastructure protection, COM/2005/0576 final, https:
//eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:
52005DC0576&from=EN
20 In the Green Paper Critical Information Infrastructure is defined as “Information and Communication Technology systems (ICT)
that are critical infrastructures for themselves or that are essential for
the operation of critical infrastructures (telecommunications, computers/software, Internet, satellites, etc.). The same document defines
Critical Information as “specific facts about a critical infrastructure asset, vitally needed to plan and act effectively, so as to guarantee failure or
cause unacceptable consequences for critical infrastructure installations”. 21 See OECD Recommendation of the Council on the Protection of
Critical information Infrastructures, C (2008) 35. 22 See footnote 18. 23 See footnote 5. 24 See Communication from the Commission to the European
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, on Critical Information
Infrastructure Protection, COM/2009/149, https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2009:0149:FIN:EN:PDF
by operators of CIs and/or CIIs respectively ofthe risks their infrastructures are up against. Ultimately, it would contribute to
a more targeted implementation of protection measures depending on their recipients, based on whether these are the
physical facility and asset or the information technology facility that supports it. This is exemplified in Part 4 of this analysis: The eHealth sector is an example of lack of uniformity,
whereby lack of clarity is noted as early as regarding its own
identification as a CII. Even in these cases where the eHealth
sector has indeed been identified as a critical sector, still ongoing debates question whether it should be considered a CII
itself or part of another CI, such as the broader health sector
or, even, the ICT sector.25
2.3. Integration of industrial control systems into critical
infrastructures: Why are these systems so vulnerable?
Most CIs nowadays such as energy, oil and gas, water, transportation systems, manufacturing facilities are controlled and
monitored by Industrial Control Systems (ICS). ICS is a general term describing industrial automation systems responsible for data acquisition, visualization and control of industrial
processes, often found in various industrial sectors and CIs.
ENISA notes in a report released in 2015 that “the ICS-SCADA
environment is the fundamental component of European and national Critical Infrastructures”.26 Over the last years a constantly
increasing number of cyberattacks against these systems has
been identified, which has highlighted the security of ICS as
a high priority area among CIs’ operators.27 At the same time,
their complexity and the high level of preparedness of the cyber offenders are additional parameters that raise concerns as
regards their safety.28
There are basically two factors that have contributed to the
targeting of ICS. The first is directly related to the indispensable contribution of ICSs to the operation of CIs and the severe consequences a successful attack could have. The bigger
the damage the stronger the motivation for a cyberattack. The
other refers to the vulnerabilities of the ICS, which, in many
cases, make them a soft target. More specifically, ICS currently
use open architectures and are often connected to external
systems such as office systems. From being isolated systems
running proprietary software and control protocols, thus having little resemblance to traditional information systems,they
have begun to resemble the more traditional information systems. Increasingly, ICS use the same commercially available
hardware and software components, which is translated to
significantly less isolation from the outside world, introduc25 See below 4.2.4. 26 See ENISA’s report on Analysis of ICS-SCADA Cyber Security
Maturity Levels in Critical Sectors, December 2015, https://www.
enisa.europa.eu/publications/maturity-levels
27 According to Symantec in 2015, there were at least 135 public vulnerabilities reported, a significant increase considering that
in 2014 only 35 ICS-related vulnerabilities were disclosed. Also,
Kaspersky labs released Threat Landscape for H1 2018, according
to the report the attacks increased by 41% percentage targeting
ICS computers attacked when compared to H1 and H2 of 2017,
https://gbhackers.com/ics-systems-attacks/ 28 The Aurora vulnerability and Stuxnet are examples of advanced and well-prepared attacks.
computer law & security review 41 (2021) 105502 5
ing many of the same vulnerabilities that exist in current networked information systems.29 As noted by ENISA “Today ICS
products are mostly based on standard embedded systems platforms,
applied in various devices, such as routers or cable modems, and they
often use commercial off-the shelf software. All this has resulted in
reduction of costs, ease of use and enabled the remote control and
monitoring from various locations. However, an important drawback derived from the connection to intranets and communication
networks, is the increased vulnerability to computer network-based
attacks”.30
Despite, however, the above realisations, ICS have not attracted the EU interest as far as regulatory initiatives are concerned, as this will be demonstrated in the relevant section
that follows.
3. The protection policies for CIs and CIIs
against cyberattacks. What is the protection
regime for industrial control systems?
3.1. Setting the regulatory landscape
Critical Infrastructures and their protection have been in the
centre of EU regulatory efforts since 2004. The severe consequences a possible disruption or manipulation of CIs may
cause has motivated all involved stakeholders to contribute
to their protection against cyberattacks by reducing their vulnerabilities and enhancing their resilience. The first official
step to this direction was taken in June 2004, when the European Council asked the Commission to prepare an overall
strategy to protect CIs. At that time, the main concern was
the protection against terrorist attacks.31 The Commission responded immediately by publishing a Communication to the
Council and the European Parliament.32 The official definition of CIs, as well as the framework for implementing a European Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection were
included in this document. The Communication was followed
by a Green Paper that was adopted by the Commission in
November 2005.33 Main purpose of the Green Paper was to receive feedback concerning a possible European Programme on
Critical Infrastructure Protection policy options by involving a
broad number of stakeholders. The Green Paper introduced
29 For vulnerabilities of Industrial Control Systems see also Alcare
C. & Zeadally Sherali, in Critical Infrastructure Protection: requirements and challenges for the 21st century, International Journal
for Critical Infrastructure Protection 8 (2015), 53-66. 30 See ENISA’s report on Protecting Industrial Control Systems, Recommendations for Europe and Member States, https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/
protecting-industrial-control-systems.-recommendationsfor-europe-and-member-states. 31 See also Coman I., Cross-Border Cyber-Attacks and Critical Infrastructure Protection, International Journal of Information Security and Cybercrime, 6(2), 47 (2017) 32 See Communication from the Commission to the Council and
the European Parliament - Critical Infrastructure Protection in
the fight against terrorism, COM/2004/0702 final, https://eur-lex.
europa.eu/legal-content/GA/TXT/?uri=celex:52004DC0702. 33 See Green Paper on a European programme for critical infrastructure protection, COM/2005/0576 final, https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A52005DC0576.
the notion of EU CIs, thus paving the way for the adoption of
the main legislative EU instrument on this matter, the Directive on European Critical Infrastructures.34
An overall policy approach and the framework for Critical
Infrastructure Protection activities in the EU was presented
by the Commission in its EPCIP Communication issued in December 2006.35 The European Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection (EPCIP), while recognising the threat from
terrorism as a priority, aimed to respond to all kind of threats,
including criminal activities as well as natural disasters and
other causes of accidents,using an “all-hazards” approach.Together with the Communication,the Commission presented a
proposal for a Directive on the identification and designation
of European Critical Infrastructures and a common approach
to assess the need to improve their protection.36 The Directive
was officially published in December 2008 and it will be briefly
presented in the section that follows.
Even after adoption of the Directive, however, protection
of CIs and of CIIs remained in the centre of the Commission’s interest. In 2009, the Commission adopted a Communication on Critical Information Infrastructure Protection setting out a plan (the CIIP Action Plan) to strengthen the security
and resilience of vital Information and Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructures. The Communication focused on
strengthening the security and resilience of CII, thus turning
the interest to the information society.37 38 The emphasis on
the security of CIIs was consistent with the debate launched at
that time at the request of the Council and the European Parliament, to address the challenges for network and information security, a debate that, several years later, resulted in the
NIS Directive.39 In 2011 a new Communication was released
by the Commission, which focused on the evaluation of the
achievements and next steps of the CIIP Action Plan.40 A new
34 See Council Directive 2008/114/EC of 8 December 2008 on the
identification and designation of European critical infrastructures
and the assessment of the need to improve their protection, https:
//eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex:32008L0114. 35 See Communication from the Commission on a European Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection, COM/2006/0786 final, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX:
52006DC0786). 36 See Proposal for a Directive of the Council on the identification and designation of European Critical Infrastructure
and the assessment of the need to improve their protection,
COM/2006/0787, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/BG/TXT/
?uri=CELEX:52006PC0787. 37 See Communication from the Commission to the European
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, on Critical Information
Infrastructure Protection, COM/2009/149, https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2009:0149:FIN:EN:PDF. 38 See also Satola D. & Luddy W.J., The potential for an international legal approach to Critical Information Infrastructure protection, Jurimetris 47, no 3, (2007) 39 Directive (EU) 2016/1148 of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 6 July 2016 concerning measures for a high common level of security of network and information systems across
the Union, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=
uriserv:OJ.L_.2016.194.01.0001.01.ENG&toc=OJ:L:2016:194:TOC 40 See Communication from the Commission to the European
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on Critical Informa-
6 computer law & security review 41 (2021) 105502
approach on the EPCIP plan, was incorporated in the Commission’s Staff Working Document, that was adopted in 2013 to
take account of increasing cross-border interdependencies.41
42
3.2. The 2008 directive on European critical
infrastructures
The 2008 Directive is a key pillar of the Commission’s EPCIP
programme. The Directive constitutes a first step in an effort to identify and designate ECIs and to assess the need
to improve their protection. One critical point that needs to
be made before examining the Directive’s specific provisions
concerns its scope. The Directive adopts a sector-specific approach, limiting its implementation to the energy and transport sectors only leaving thus outside its scope several policy
sectors such as the health sector or the drinking water supply
and distribution sector or the financial sector. This limitation
is acknowledged in its text, where it is specifically mentioned
that, by the time of its review, subsequent sectors may be identified, with a priority to be given to the ICT sector.43 Given that
both the Green Paper and the Proposal for the Directive include in their Annexes a list of eleven different CI sectors, it is
interesting to note that the regulator decided against a more
extensive list. A possible explanation could be that these two
sectors were selected on a trial basis and that the list would be
expanded together with the Directive’s review which was due
for the year 2012.44 However, even though the process of reviewing commenced in 2012, it has not been completed until
today.
Another issue that needs special attention is that the Directive focuses specifically on European Critical Infrastructures, namely infrastructures that are critical from a European
perspective, i.e. where their disruption or destruction would
have a significant impact on at least two Member States. In
other words, not all CIs fall under the Directive’s scope but
rather a limited category that fits its definition.45 While it is
indeed true that the Directive was perceived in the context
of the European Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection, thus aiming protection at EU level, nevertheless it is also
true that it ended up being a regulatory instrument of a very
limited scope, that eventually left national CIs unregulated at
EU level until such a late time as in 2016, when the NIS Directive came into force.46
tion Infrastructure Protection ‘Achievements and next steps: towards global cyber-security, COM/2011, 163 https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2011:0163:FIN:EN:PDF
41 See Commission Staff Working Document on a new approach
to the European Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection
Making European Critical Infrastructures more secure, SWD/2013,
318, https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/
20130828_epcip_commission_staff_working_document.pdf 42 See also Pursiainen C., The Challenges for European Critical Infrastructure Protection, Journal of European Integration, 31:6, 721-
739
43 See article 3 par.3 of the 2008 Directive 44 See article 11 of the 2008 Directive 45 See also van Asselt M, Vos E. & Wildhaber I. in “Some Reflection on EU Governance of Critical Infrastructures Risks”, European
Journal of Risk regulation (EJRR), 6(2), 185-190 46 See footnote 10.
As far as the specific provisions of the Directive are concerned, the Directive requires each Member State to identify
the CIs that may be designated as European Critical Infrastructures within its territory. The identification procedure is
described in Annex II of the Directive. Once an ECI is identified, the Member State needs to communicate it to any other
Member State which may be affected by its disruption in order
to reach an agreement regarding its designation. The process
may be initiated by a Member State which believes that is significantly affected by a potential European Critical Infrastructure but has not been identified as such by the Member State
on whose territory the same is located. As a next step, the Directive requires a specific set of actions to be taken by the CI’s
owner/operators in order to develop an Operator Security Plan.
Minimum requirements for such a plan are incorporated in
Annex III of the Directive. Provisions for establishment of a
Security Liaison officer are included in the Directive: The Security Liaison officer is to function as the point of contact for
security related issues between the owner/operator of the CI
and the relevant national authority.47
Despite therefore its innovative character the Directive introduces a generic approach regarding protection of CIs. Its
efficiency is examined in the Commission Staff Working Document published in June 2012.48 The document presented a
strong perception by Member States that implementation of
the Directive did not result in sufficiently clear and tangible
improvements to ECIs security levels. Basic fact supporting
this view was that few European Critical Infrastructures had
been identified and very few Operator Security Plans had been
produced until then. Despite though however the existence of
contradicting opinions on the actual improvement of security,
Member States reached a near consensus on the added value
of side-effects of the Directive, such as increased awareness
and cooperation. Furthermore, it was supported that the very
existence of a legal instrument nurtured policies on the protection of national CIs.
Same conclusions were adopted in the Commission’s evaluation roadmap on the Directive that was released in March
2018.49 among others, it was observed that, even though the
Directive was quickly transposed in the national laws of Member States, its application remained limited. Furthermore,
wide discrepancies in the application of the Directive among
Member States were pointed out: For instance, at the time of
publication of the evaluation the vast majority of CIs were
designated by two Member States only (approximately 60%
of the total number of designations), and primarily in the energy sector. As of August 2018, the Member States had designated ninety-three European Critical Infrastructures; Of these,
47 See also Lazari A & Simoncini M., Critical Infrastructure Protection beyond compliance. An analysis of National Variations in the
implementation of Directive 114/08/EC, Global Jurist 267 (2016) 48 See Commission’s Staff Working Document on the review
for the European Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection, SWD/2012, 190, https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/
sites/homeaffairs/files/pdf/policies/crisis_and_terrorism/
epcip_swd_2012_190_final.pdf 49 See evaluation roadmap, Evaluation of the 2008 European Critical Infrastructure Protection Directive
computer law & security review 41 (2021) 105502 7
eighty-eight were in the energy sector and five in the transport
sector.
On July 2019 the Commission published its latest evaluation of the Directive.50 Among the conclusions presented were
that the Directive appears to have partial relevance in view
of recent technological, economic, social, policy/political and
environmental developments and the challenges they entail.
Also, the limited sectoral scope of the Directive means that it
does not fully account for growing cross-sectoral interdependencies. As regards its effectiveness,the evaluation concluded
that the Directive has been partially effective in achieving its
stated objectives, namely the establishment of a common ECI
identification and designation procedure. It remains therefore
to be seen, once the process of reviewing the Directive will
have been concluded, how these challenges will be addressed
in the updated document.51
3.3. The NIS directive and the role of Enisa in protecting
critical infrastructures against cyberthreats
When it comes to cyber resilience and protection of CIs
against cyberthreats, in particular of the network and information systems that support their operation,the NIS Directive
should be taken into consideration. The NIS Directive does not
make any explicit reference to CIs, it makes use however the
term “Essential Services” which should be considered equivalent. Operators of Essential Services, as recipients of the Directive’s requirements, include all public or private entities that
provide a service which is essential for the maintenance of
critical societal and/or economic activities.52 The type of entities that fall under the definition of the NIS Directive for Operators of Essential Services, more or less, coincides with the
indicative list of Critical Infrastructure sectors included in the
relative European documents on Critical Infrastructure Protection. A thorough analysis of the NIS Directive’s scope and
provisions lays beyond the purpose ofthis document; Here itis
enough to be noted that the NIS Directive, which was adopted
in 2016 and entered into force in May 2018, currently is the
main EU cybersecurity legal instrument addressed to Member
States in order for them to warrant high levels of protection
for network and information systems supporting, among others, the operation of CIs and the provision of critical/essential
services.
ENISA, from its part, has recognised the significant impact
cyberattacks may have on CIIs and related services. ENISA
shares the opinion that identification of a CII is the first step
in the process to secure and protect the availability of critical assets. In this context, it has published several reports on
50 See Commission’s Staff Working Document Evaluation of Council Directive 2008/114, SWD/2019/310,
https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/sites/homeaffairs/files/
what-we-do/policies/european-agenda-security/20190723_
swd-2019-308-commission-staff-working-document_en.pdf 51 See also Lazari A., European Critical Infrastructure Protection,
Springer International Publishing, 2014. 52 See Article 4(4) of the NIS Directive.
the identification of CIIs and their protection ;
53 54 In addition,
ENISA has developed a series of guidelines in order to assist
Member States to implement the NIS Directive, including a
tool that maps security measures for Operators of Essential
Services to international standards,55 as well as, a report on
mapping of Operators of Essential Services’ security requirements for specific sectors, including the health sector that will
be thoroughly presented below.56 ENISA’s role in supporting
the NIS Directive’s implementation and in contributing to increasing cybersecurity capabilities at Union level was further
reinforced by the Cybersecurity Act.57 Among the objectives
of the new Regulation, which came into force on 27th June
2019, is the strengthening of ENISA’s role by granting to it a
permanent mandate and the development and implementation of Union policy on cybersecurity certification of ICT products, ICT services and ICT processes.
3.4. Protection of industrial control systems
As seen above, CIs and CIIs have been extensively addressed
at EU level and different policy areas have been developed to
this effect. ICS’ protection, however, is not addressed explicitly in any of the EU’s relevant official documentation. Given
the critical role of ICS in the uninterrupted operation of many
European and national CIs, the lack of specific measures that
could contribute to their protection is considered a significant
omission.58
ENISA, having identified this regulatory gap, published in
2011 a study on protecting ICS.59 The study aims to identify
threats, risks and challenges in the area of ICS protection, as
well as, to recognize national, European and international initiatives on ICS security. The first challenge identified in the report is the lack of specific initiatives on ICS security in combination with the lack of a European reference with regard to se53 See ENISA’s report on Stocktaking, Analysis and
Recommendations on the protection of CIIs, January 2016, https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/
stocktaking-analysis-and-recommendations-on-the-protectionof-ciis
54 See ENISA’s report on methodologies for the identification of Critical Information Infrastructure assets and services, February 2015, https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/
methodologies-for-the-identification-of-ciis 55 See https://www.enisa.europa.eu/news/enisa-news/
enisa-launches-oes-tool-to-map-security-measures 56 See ENISA’s report on mapping of OES Security Requirements
to Specific Sectors, January 2018, https://www.enisa.europa.eu/
publications/mapping-of-oes-security-requirements-to-specificsectors
57 See Regulation (EU) 2019/881 Of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 17 April 2019 on ENISA (the European Union
Agency for Cybersecurity) and on information and communications technology cybersecurity certification and repealing Regulation (EU) No 526/2013 (Cybersecurity Act) 58 See also Piggin R., Are industrial control systems ready for the
cloud?, International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection,
9 (2015), 38-40 59 See ENISA’s report on Protecting Industrial Control Systems, Recommendations for Europe and Member States, https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/
protecting-industrial-control-systems.-recommendationsfor-europe-and-member-states
8 computer law & security review 41 (2021) 105502
curity standards and guidelines. The report goes on to recommend actions that need to be undertaken in order to achieve
the required level of ICS protection, such as reviewing the concept of ICS and their role when embedded into CIs, reviewing
the threats that could affect these systems from a multitude
of perspectives, describing the main differences between ICS
and regular IT systems, listing the challenges to ICS security,
summarising the current policy context under which the protection of ICS should be framed at EU level and in the US, and
analysing the different technical solutions that are currently
applied for protecting ICS.
4. Making the healthcare sector more resilient
against cyber incidents: Emerging vulnerabilities
and the applicable regulatory framework for its
protection
4.1. Hospitals under attack: Setting the (cyber) threat
landscape
Over the last years the healthcare sector has been challenged
with a constantly increasing number of cybersecurity incidents. Ransomware, medjacking,60 phishing (through targeting email addresses of physicians), medical devices tampering, denial of service,61 and, even, cyberespionage are some
examples of malicious actions targeting healthcare organisations and their ICT systems. These threats, if successful, may
have disastrous consequences not only to the provision of
healthcare services but also to the broader social and financial welfare. The Wannacry ransomware, for instance, devastated the UK NHS in 2017, hit international shipper Fedex
and infected more than 300.000 computers in 150 countries.
In the SingHealth attack, Singapore’s worst cyberattack, hackers infiltrated the data bases of SingHealth, the largest group
of healthcare institutions in the country, that eventually led
to the theft of personal data of 1,5 million patients. The cyberattack against Anthem Insurance in 2015 had also serious
consequences: As a result of this data breach, 79 million personal records were affected, including names, birthdays, medical IDs, and social security numbers.62
There are specific vulnerabilities and particularities of the
healthcare industry that make it more attractive to cyber offenders and at the same time constitute it a soft target. First
and foremost, the personal data that hospitals and healthcare
organisations store in their systems consist mainly of heath
data. Given the monetary value and the high sensitivity of
medical data, many cyber offenders are motivated by finan60 The difference between cryptojacking and medjacking is basically the kind of hardware involved. In the firstcase we are talking
about general purpose IT infrastructure and in the second we are
referring to IT-basedmedical equipment 61 Denial of Service is a very common cyberattack that can take
down servers at a healthcare organisation, especially because they
are usually reluctant to use public cloud infrastructure, so the capacity of servers is limited. The impact can be high, depending on
the type of systems affected 62 See also Cashwell G., Cyber-Vulnerabilities & Public Health
Emergency Response, Journal of Health Care and Policy, 21(1), 29-
58.
cial gain, whereas others seek to obtain intellectual property
or consumer information. Data theft therefore is one of the
main cyberthreats health institutions are facing. According to
research findings, healthcare data security incidents ranked
second for the health services industry in 2016.63 Another factor that contributes to the increase in the occurrence of cyber incidents targeting the health sector refers to the technological advancements. The health sector is becoming increasingly connected, whereas the integration of ICT systems in the
health services and infrastructures has increased significantly
over the last decades. In this rapidly advancing technological environment, traditional hospitals move to a smart hospital environment, thus introducing new capabilities in patient
healthcare.64 Furthermore, modern healthcare is dominated
by an extensive network of connected medical devices, the
use of which has changed the ICT landscape in the healthcare
industry worldwide. ENISA mentions in its Guidelines for Cybersecurity in Hospitals that medical technology companies
currently manufacture more than 500,000 different types of
medical devices, such as wearables, implantable and stationary medical devices. The Internet of Medical Things market in
Europe alone is expected to grow from 11 billion in 2017 to 40
billion in 2022, while the European medical technology market
was estimated at roughly 115 billion in 2017.65
In addition, so-called “eHealth” is another digital development which has, during the past few years, developed into an
important segment of the provision of health services overall. eHealth denotes the use of ICT in support of health and
health-related services. The term is widely used to describe
the interaction between patients and health-service providers
ranging from patients’ online access to basic data on their
treatment to national schemes, like ePrescription services or
cross border eHealth information sharing. Similarly, so-called
“Mobile health” (mHealth) is a rapidly developing component
of E-Health that covers “medical and public health practice supported by mobile devices, such as mobile phones, patient monitoring devices, personal digital assistants, and other wireless devices”.66 It particularly includes the use of mobile communication devices for health and well-being services and information purposes, as well as, mobile health applications.
Over 97,000 mHealth apps are currently available across multiple platforms on the global market; Of these, 70% target consumers and fitness while 30% target health professionals.67 68
63 Symantec’s 2017 Internet Security Threat Report (ISTR) found
that reported breach incidents increased by 22 percent last year,
rising to 328 from 269 in 2015 64 “A smart hospital is a hospital that relies on optimised and automated processes built on an ICT environment of interconnected
assets, particularly based on Internet of things (IoT), to improve
existing patient care procedures and introduce new capabilities”. 65 See ENISA’s Procurement guidelines for cybersecurity in
hospitals, Good practices for the security of Healthcare services February 2020, https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/
good-practices-for-the-security-of-healthcare-services 66 See Commission’s Green paper on mobile Health (“mHealth)”,
COM/2014/219, https://ec.europa.eu/transparency/regdoc/rep/1/
2014/EN/1-2014-219-EN-F1-1.Pdf 67 See https://research2guidance.com/wp-content/uploads/
2015/08/Mobile-Health-Market-Report-2013-2017-Preview.pdf 68 See also Niezen M., Unobtrusiveness in mHealth Design and
Use: A Systematic Literature Study, in Adams S., Purtova N &
computer law & security review 41 (2021) 105502 9
Digital transformation of healthcare and the use of electronic means to acquire, transfer or store healthcare related
information and to provide services used by health professionals and patients/consumers has improved the provision
of health services and is anticipated to increase the well-being
of millions of citizens. At the same time the increased pace of
digitalisation opens up “opportunities” for cyberattacks and
consequently new challenges for cybersecurity. The adoption
of a comprehensive and consistent EU regulatory framework
that will address these new challenges and will introduce EUwide standards for the provision of health services is therefore
necessary. The EU has been intensively working to this effect
since 2004, as elaborated in the section that follows.
4.2. The regulatory framework to address (cyber)security
requirements in the health sector
The following analysis focuses on the main regulatory instruments applicable to the health sector, with a particular emphasis on those addressing (cyber)security issues in the provision of health services and the operation of health infrastructures. The regulatory framework presented here consists
of both regulation of a horizontal scope which applies to the
broader health sector, as well as, sector-specific legislation. As
regards the first category, healthcare is, without exception, listed as
a CI in all relevant EU official documentation. Consequently, the regulatory framework on the protection of CIs, as elaborated in the first
part of this analysis, finds full application on the health sector as
well. At the same time, the provision of healthcare services is continuously dependent upon an ICT environment. Increased ICT deployment inevitably leads to greater ICT dependency and, in turn,
to greater need for information security. Protection of the underlying
information infrastructure of the health sector falls under the protection regime for CII, as this will be explained below where the perception of eHealth as a CII is being considered.. Accordingly, healthcare
providers have been identified as Operators of Essential Services, in the context of the NIS Directive, while eHealth has
been characterised as a CII by most Member States. In addition to the general framework for the protection of CIs, the
NIS Directive is the main regulatory instrument available to
hospitals and healthcare organisations in order to minimise
the security risks posed to their network and information systems. The General Data Protection Regulation69 is also applicable (see the analysis that follows): Processing of health data
is extensively addressed in its text, which introduces security
requirements and specific obligations applicable to healthcare
organisations, as data controllers.
At the same time the EU has been working on sectorspecific legislation. In this context, two Regulations have been
recently adopted by the Commission to strengthen the European regulatory framework for medical devices and in vitro diagnostic medical devices. Reference in this analysis to these
Leenes R (Editors), Under Observation: The Interplay Between
eHealth and Surveillance, Springer, 2017. 69 See Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General
Data Protection Regulation) .
Regulations is considered necessary for two reasons: First,
they constitute an inseparable part of the EU regulatory framework on the health sector; Second, the increased dependency
of their subject-matter (medical devices) on ICT and their exposure to cyber threats makes the discussion on their protection against cyberattacks relevant. Furthermore, a short presentation of the initiatives adopted at EU level on eHealth has
been included in this paper. Even though there is no specific
security parameter of the applicable framework in eHealth (including mHealth), this was considered necessary for picture
completeness purposes, especially taking into account the ongoing discussion on the identification of eHealth as a CII, as
this will be elaborated below.
4.2.1. Health sector security requirements in the NIS directive
As see above under 3.3. the NIS Directive constitutes, at the
time being, the main legislative EU cybersecurity legal instrument at Member States’ disposal in order to warrant a high
level of protection for network and information systems that
support, among others, the operation of CIs and the provision
of critical/essential services. As regards the health sector, in
particular, healthcare providers are listed among the entities
identified in the NIS Directive’s Annex as Operators of Essential Services.70 As a result, hospitals and healthcare settings
must implement the NIS Directive’s security and notification
requirements. In particular, they need to take appropriate and
proportional technical and organisations measures to manage the risks posed to the security of network and information systems that they use in their operations and to prevent
and minimise the impact of incidents affecting the security of
such systems. The obligation to notify the competent authority of incidents having a significant impact on the continuity
of the essential services they provide complements the set of
obligations set under the NIS Directive for all entities operating within the health sector.
ENISA, in the same context as above, assisting Member
States and organisations to implement the NIS Directive, has
published a number of reports and guidelines for the health
sector: Having recognised the significance of digital health
networks as CII, it has developed actions focusing on the security challenges and risks faced by the health sector in Member
States.71 ENISA has also launched an “eHealth Security Experts Group” with the aim to create an active community to
share information and exchange knowledge on this field.
4.2.2. Health sector security requirements in the general data
protection regulation
The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is particularly
relevant in the health sector because essentially all or most
of health data or medical records are “personal data” in the
context of its provisions.72 While a comprehensive analysis
70 This is explicitly included in the types of entities that fall under
the definition of operator of essential services. As further specified hospitals and healthcare settings and healthcare providers as
defined in point (g) of Article 3 of Directive 2011/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council 71 See Security and resilience in eHealth Infrastructures and Services, December 2015 and cybersecurity and resilience for Smart
Hospitals, November 2016 72 See article 4.1. of the GDPR
10 computer law & security review 41 (2021) 105502
of health-related personal data processing under the GDPR
lies beyond the purposes of this analysis, here it is only noted
that hospitals and healthcare providers should, when processing patients’ data, comply with the processing principles and
other obligations provided in the GDPR. In essence, they must,
as data controllers, take all appropriate technical and organisational measures to ensure and be able to demonstrate that
the requirements of this Regulation are met, including the security of the processing.
In brief, as regards health data in particular, the GDPR aims
to strike the right balance between the protection of individuals in relation to the processing of their personal data, which
are by nature particularly sensitive, and the social welfare, in
particular in the context of the management of health or social care services and systems. In this context, hospitals are
excluded from the general rule of Article 9 of the GDPR, which
prohibits any processing of special categories of data, on the
grounds that processing of such data is carried out for certain
health-related purposes by persons subject to a legal obligation of professional secrecy.73 At the same time, however, the
processing of special categories of personal data entails high
risks for the data subjects. On these grounds, the GDPR provides a set of additional obligations to controllers that are engaged, among others, in processing on a large scale of special
categories of data pursuant to Article 9, such as hospitals and
healthcare providers.These organisations must therefore designate a Data Protection Officer,74 carry out a data protection
impact assessment75 and notify a personal data breach likely
to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of individuals.76
Security of processing is another obligation that burdens both
the controller and the processor of personal data. According
to Article 32 of the Regulation, the controller and the processor shall implement appropriate technical and organisational
measures to ensure a level of security appropriate to the risk,
such as pseudonymisation, encryption, ability to ensure confidentiality and to restore the availability etc.
The rapid development of eHealth, including mHealth, creates new challenges in terms of safeguarding the lawfulness
of processing of the personal data collected through health
apps and platforms and through the provision of digitalised
health services as a whole. Exchange of personal data through
the eHealth Digital Service Infrastructure for Cross-Border
eHealth Information Services has been addressed in the Commission’s Implementing Decision. In particular, it has been
clarified that, as regards such processing, the Commission
shall be regarded as data processor for patients’ personal data,
whereas the Member States shall be regarded as controllers.77
4.2.3. The medical devices regulations
It is undisputable that medical devices have dominated the
health sector and that their use for the provision of health ser73 See article 9 par. 2 (h) 74 See article 37 of the GDPR 75 See article 35 of the GDPR. 76 See article 33 of the GDPR. 77 See article 7 of Commission Implementing Decision 2019/1765
of 22 October 2019 providing the rules for the establishment, the
management and the functioning of the network of national authorities responsible for eHealth, and repealing Implementing Decision 2011/890/EU .
vices is constantly increasing. Therefore, implementing regulatory schemes for medical devices is deemed necessary for
the protection of public health and patient’s safety. At the
same time medical devices have developed a significant dependence on ICT systems for their operation, which makes
them even more vulnerable to security risks, thus turning
their safety into a priority for all involved stakeholders.78
Medical device cybersecurity is a growing concern in light of
the increasing number of cybersecurity incidents and data
breaches. The new regulatory framework for medical devices
aims to address these concerns by laying down a set of rules
concerning the placing on the market, making available on
the market or putting into service of medical devices for human use and accessories for such devices in the EU. The two
new Regulations on medical devices and on in vitro diagnostic medical devices, Regulation 745/2017 (MDR) and Regulation 746/2017 (IVDR) entered into force in May 2017. The new
Regulations will replace the existing regulatory framework for
medical devices that consists of Directives 90/385/EEC and
93/42/EC. The MDR has a transition period of three years and
will fully apply from 26 May 2020. The IVDR has a transition
period of five years and will fully apply from 26 May 2022.79
As regards security issues in particular, the Regulations
introduce specific provisions related to IT security for all
medical devices. These security requirements are included in
Annex I of the Regulations and deal with both pre-market
and post market aspects. In particular, the Regulations make
explicit reference to devices that “incorporate electronic programmable systems and software that are devices themselves”. For
these medical devices, manufacturers need to comply with
specific design requirements in order to ensure repeatability,
reliability and performance in line with their intended use.80
Furthermore, whenever software is incorporated into medical devices it must be developed and manufactured in accordance with the state of the art, taking into account the
principles of development life cycle, risk management, information security, verification and validation.81 Another obligation imposed upon manufactures is to set out minimum requirements concerning hardware, IT networks and IT security
measures, including protection against unauthorised access,
necessary to run the software as intended.82 As regards postmarket measures, manufacturers need to implement a postmarket surveillance system proportionate to the risk and appropriate to the type of device.83 A notification obligation is
78 See Williams P. & Woodward A.,Cybersecurity vulnerabilities in
medical devices: a complex environment and multifaceted problem, Medical Devices: Evidence & Research, 20 July 2015. 79 It is noted that safety aspects addressed by Directive
2014/30/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council are an
integral part of the general safety and performance requirements
laid down in this Regulation for devices. Consequently, this Regulation should be considered a lex specialis in relation to that Directive.
80 See article 17.1 of Annex I of the MDR and article 16.1 of Annex
I of the IVDR 81 See article 17.2 of Annex I of the MDR and article 16.2 of Annex
I of the IVDR 82 See article 17.4 of Annex I of the MDR and article 16.4 of Annex
I of the IVDR 83 See article 83 of the MDR and article 78 of the IVDR
computer law & security review 41 (2021) 105502 11
also provided under the new Regulations, according to which
manufactures have to report any serious incidents involving
devices made available on the EU market.84 85
4.2.4. E-health as a critical information infrastructure
eHealth86 has been in the centre of the EU agenda since 2004,
when the first eHealth action plan was adopted.87 Since then,
the Commission and the Member States have been developing
initiatives aimed at incorporating eHealth into their healthcare systems. Global statistics published by the WHO show
that 58% of the Member States have an eHealth strategy, 55%
of them have introduced legislation to protect electronic patient data and 87% of the same group of countries report having one or more national initiatives under development on
mHealth. Improving cross border exchange of health data in
particular and achieving interoperability of national eHealth
systems have been treated as a priority at European level. Both
initiatives are mainly supported by Directive 2011/24.88 To attain its objectives the Directive established the eHealth network; The rules for the establishment, the management and
the functioning of the eHealth Network were further clarified
by the Commission’s Implementing Decision 2019/1765.89 In
2012 the Commission published the eHealth Action Plan 2012–
202090 in an effort to remove the barriers to deployment of
eHealth that continued to exist until that point.
The latest developments in the eHealth field include the
Commission’s Communication on the transformation of digital health and care, which was released in April 2018.91 One
84 See article 87 of the MDR and article 82 of the IVDR 85 See also https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/38941 86 eHealth is the use of ICT in health products, services and processes combined with organisational change in healthcare systems and new skills, in order to improve health of citizens, efficiency and productivity in healthcare delivery, and the economic
and social value of health. eHealth covers the interaction between
patients and health-service providers, institution-to-institution
transmission of data, or peer-to-peer communication between patients and/or health professionals (see https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52012DC0736&from=EN). 87 See Communication from the Commisision tro the Council,
the European Parliament, the European Economi and Social Committee and the Comitte of the Regions e-health-making healthcare better for European coitizens: An action plan for a European –Health Area, COM (2004), 356 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2004:0356:FIN:EN:PDF
88 Directive 2011/24/EU of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 9 March 2011 on the application of patients’
rights in cross-border healthcare, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legalcontent/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32011L0024 89 See Commission Implementing Decision 2019/1765 of 22
October 2019 providing the rules for the establishment, the
management and the functioning of the network of national authorities responsible for eHealth, and repealing Implementing Decision 2011/890/EU, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legalcontent/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32019D1765. 90 See Communication from the Commission to the European
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on eHealth Action
Plan 2012-2020 - Innovative healthcare for the 21st century,
COM/2012/0736.
91 See Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament , the Council, the European Economic and
Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on enof the initiatives presented in the Communication was the
development by the Commission of the eHealth Digital Service Infrastructure for the facilitation of the interoperability
of European eHealth systems and the exchange of patients’
health data. Currently two electronic cross-border health services are operational, e-prescription, which allows citizens in
Europe to retrieve their medication in a pharmacy located in
another European country, and patient summary, which provides information on important health-related aspects of each
individual.92 The first cross-border exchanges started in 2019.
By 2021, both services will gradually be implemented in 22 EU
countries. In the longer term, the Commission is working towards a European electronic health record exchange format
accessible to all EU citizens. The plan is that a full Health
Record will become available across the EU.
As regards mHealth in particular, the Commission published a Green Paper on mobile Health in 2014.93 The Green
Paper was announced in the eHealth Action Plan 2012–202094
and its objective was to launch a broad stakeholder consultation on existing barriers and issues related to mHealth.
A wide range of stakeholders (industry, national and regional authorities, health professionals, research community,
non-governmental organisations,patient associations etc.) responded to the consultation and provided their input on several issues relating to the uptake of mHealth in the EU, such
as data protection, big data, applicable legal framework, patient safety, liability and others.95 The Green Paper was accompanied by the Commission’s Staff Working document to
raise app developers’ awareness of EU rules on data protection, medical devices and consumer directives.96
There is no doubt that eHealth has attracted significant legislative attention as regards both its definition and regulation.
However, there is no official reference to eHealth as a CII. Even
though ENISA has acknowledged the significance of eHealth97
not only as a major contributor to the societal and financial
welfare but, more specifically, as a CII, most Member States
have not developed a specific methodology or legislation for
the identification of critical eHealth infrastructures. In many
cases eHealth is identified as part of a critical sector such as
Heath care and/or ICT. Therefore, the approach that has been
adopted until today by the majority of Member States is that of
identifying and protecting eHealth infrastructures in the conabling the digital transformation of health and care in the Digital Single Market; empowering citizens and building a healthier society, COM/2018/233 finalhttps://eur-lex.europa.eu/legalcontent/EN/TXT/?uri=COM%3A2018%3A233%3AFIN 92 The digital Patient Summary is meant to provide doctors with
essential information in their own language concerning the patient, when the patient comes from another EU country and there
may be a linguistic barrier. 93 See footnote 50. 94 See footnote 73. 95 For the summary report on the Public Consultation on the Green Paper on Mobile Health see
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/
summary-report-public-consultation-green-paper-mobile-health
96 See Commission Staff Working Document on the existing EU
legal framework applicable to lifestyle and wellbeing apps accompanying the document Green Paper, COM (2014) 219. 97 See https://www.enisa.europa.eu/topics/critical-informationinfrastructures-and-services/health
12 computer law & security review 41 (2021) 105502
text of the general regulation and strategy for CIIP. ENISA in
its report on Security and Resilience in eHealth,98 in an effort
to treat eHealth as an CII, lists a number of assets that, based
on feedback received by interviewees, are considered as critical. The list includes, among others, Health Information systems, Laboratory Information Systems, Patient Health Record
services, Authentications server etc.The report places emphasis upon two systems that were considered critical by all interviewees, namely the Electronic Health Record System (EHR)
and the e-Prescription system. The discussion on the identification of eHealth as an independent CII may still be found at
an early stage, however it is foreseeable that the constantly increasing use of eHealth services and their contribution to the
operation of the healthcare sector overall, combined with the
security challenges emerging in eHealth, will accelerate this
process.
5. Conclusion
Critical Infrastructures constitute the backbone of our societal
and economic well-being. Improving their resilience against
different kind of attacks has therefore become a priority for
the authorities around the globe. The list of risks and threats
that CIs encounter has expanded over the last decades to include anything from traditional risks such as natural disasters and human errors to emerging and unpredictable threats,
such as cyberattacks. At the same time the constantly growing dependence of CIs on ICT for their operation has placed
the protection of CIIS firmly into the EU and national agendas. This high dependence on CIIs, their cross-border connectivity and interdependencies with other infrastructures in
combination with the sophistication and the volume of cyberthreats targeting them have developed into a challenging
task for both operators of these infrastructures and legislators. As regards the legislative effort undertaken to this effect,
itis undisputable that Europe has placed substantial resources
into implementing an EU-wide regulatory framework for the
protection of CIs and the underlying network and information
systems that support them, with the NIS Directive being at the
spearhead of this effort.
There is of course still plenty to be done in terms of promoting cooperation at EU and international level, enhancing
preparedness for better response to the constantly emerging
new threats and adapting to the new challenges that the continuous integration of digital technologies in CIs brings along.
As regards the current regulatory approach, it is expected that
the upcoming review of the Directive on the Protection of European Critical Infrastructures, will acknowledge the shortcomings of the first draft and will adequately address the new
98 See ENISA’s report on Security and Resilience in eHealth
Infrastructures and Services, https://www.enisa.europa.
eu/publications/security-and-resilience-in-ehealth-infrastructuresand-services
developments and emerging challenges in the field. As the Directive is, at the moment, the main legislative instrument for
the protection of CIs at EU level, it is expected that the revised
document will live up to these expectations. When it comes to
protection of network and information systems that support
CIs,the NIS Directive assumes the role of the applicable mechanism for protection against cyberattacks. Given that the NIS
Directive came into force in 2018, it remains to be seen how
the Member States and the Operators of Essential Services will
make use of its provisions in practice. Both the Commission
and ENISA are expected to contribute to this effort by further
clarifying the security and notification requirements provided
in the NIS Directive and by assisting all involved parties in implementing them. Last but not least, protection of CIs seems
incomplete without a regulatory framework for the protection
of Industrial Control Systems. Even though ENISA identified
this regulatory gap since 2011, this issue remains pending.
The health sector in particular offers an example of how
digitalisation opens up new transformative opportunities.
While the quality of services and therefore the safety and
well-being of patients have been drastically improved as a result of the extensive use of ICT in the provision of health services, from medical devices and smart hospitals to eHealth
and mHealth, at the same time the sector has been extremely
vulnerable to cyberattacks. Taking into consideration what is
at stake, from human lives due to a device malfunction to violation of privacy as a result of a personal data loss or theft,
safeguarding the protection of this CI has been treated as a
high priority by all involved parties. In this context, a number of regulatory instruments have been introduced that consist of legislation of a horizontal scope together with sector
specific measures. Nevertheless, lack of clarity and uniformity
in terminology risk creating misunderstanding and,therefore,
warranting a decreased level of protection.
Digitalisation has transformed the lives of individuals and
the organisation and functioning of the society, as a whole.
Living in the digital era promises a more qualitive and comfortable life to the majority of the word population. At the
same time,however, digitalisation comes with a price. Protecting our CIs and other assets against threats that did not exist
before has been turned into a speed and endurance race that
demands alertness, flexibility, preparedness and substantial
effort by all the parties involved.
Declaration of Competing Interest
This research has been funded under the European Commission’s H2020 project SPHINX – A Universal Cyber Security
Toolkit for Health-Care Industry, Grant Agreement 826183.