Technological Forecasting & Social Change 180 (2022) 121664
Available online 26 April 2022
Industry 4.0 in the European union: Policies and national strategies
Jos´elia Elvira Teixeira, Ph.D. a,1,*
, Ana Teresa C.P. Tavares-Lehmann, Ph.D. b,2
a PPGADM-UNICENTRO, Department of Economics-UNICENTRO, Salvatore Renna 875, Guarapuava-PR, Brazil b CEF.UP, FEP-U.Porto, Dr. Roberto Frias 464, Porto, Portugal
ARTICLE INFO
JEL:
L52 (industrial policy)
L88 (government policy)
O33 (Technological Change)
Keywords:
Industry 4.0
Government programs
Industrial policy
National strategies
European Union
ABSTRACT
All across the European Union (EU), Member States are implementing policies in order to stimulate the adoption
of technologies associated to Industry 4.0. This paper provides the most comprehensive comparative analysis so
far done of such EU Government programs. At the supranational level, the EU has adopted policies geared to the
EU-wide digitalization of industry, aiming also to motivate countries to establish digitalization strategies at the
national level. National strategies and plans have been the result of multiple actions involving the interaction of
different stakeholders. We identified 25 national Industry 4.0-focused plans between 2011 and 2020. There was
considerable asymmetry in the conditions for implementation of policies, and in the assimilation by the market in
different EU countries.
1. Introduction and synthesis of the relevant literature
1.1. Industry 4.0: The concept and a brief presentation of the
phenomenon
Industry 4.0 combines the cyber-physical realms and is revolutionizing the production and the supply of goods and services, through the
interconnection between products, processes and consumers (Lee,
2015). It is characterized by the use of a host of emerging technologies
(Zhang and Chen, 2020) such as Internet of Things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence, Cloud Computing, Autonomous Robots, Sensors, among
others (Xu, 2020). Complementary to those Technologies, Big Data and
Blockchain are deployed to provide better digital services (Rejikumar
et al., 2019). That impacts on all the value chain with the association of
other technologies services in real time (Fuchs, 2018).
Industry 4.0 has been considered a “Fourth Industrial Revolution”
(Schwab, 2016; Morrar et al., 2017; Kosacka-Olejnik and Pitakaso,
2019; Hoyer et al., 2020; Zhang and Chen, 2020), which is a term by no
means consensual in academia (Liao et al., 2017).
The three first industrial revolutions emerged, respectively, as a
result of mechanization, electricity and information technology (IT)
(Kagermann et al., 2013). The progress in IT, manifested in the use of
advanced manufacturing technologies, should be emphasized, as such
technologies are more recent and directly relevant for the industrial
revolution under way (Agostini and Nosella, 2019). Industry 4.0, hence,
is the expression used to identify this Fourth Industrial Revolution,
which combines the advances in the Smart Factory with Cyber-Physical
Systems, connecting people, machines and other devices simultaneously
and in real time (Ciffolilli and Muscio, 2018). According to the European Commission, (2018), the Fourth Industrial Revolution involves the
physical, digital and biological spheres and the new technologies associated in all the value chain. Zhang and Chen (2020) note that Industry
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: joseliateixeira@unicentro.br (J.E. Teixeira), atavares@fep.up.pt (A.T.C.P. Tavares-Lehmann). 1 Resum´e: Assistant Professor, Department of Economics of UNICENTRO (Brazil); Professor of the Postgraduate Program in Administration (PPGAdm - UNICENTRO); Postdoctoral Researcher, FEP-Univerty of Porto. Ph.D. in Public Policies by Federal University of Parana ´ (UFPR - Brazil). Worked in several projects in the
area of innovation for SMEs. Author of publications in peer-reviewed journals. Currently is Visiting Research at School of Economics and Management – University of
Porto (Portugal) and research about Industry 4.0 and Internationalization. 2 Resum´e: Associate Professor, CEF.UP, FEP-U.Porto. Ph.D in Economics, University of Reading. Former State Secretary of Industry, Portuguese Government, VicePresident of Portugal’s North Regional Development Authority, Pro-Vice Chancellor U.Porto. Consultant to international organizations in the areas of International
Business, Innovation and Public Policy. Author of numerous publications in peer-reviewed journals. Serves on the Editorial Boards of the Journal of International
Business Policy and of Competitiveness Review, on the Supervisory Board of EIT Manufacturing, and on the Advisory Boards of Orkestra-Basque Institute of
Competitiveness and on the Competitiveness Institute of the University of Fribourg.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Technological Forecasting & Social Change
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/techfore
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2022.121664
Received 4 August 2021; Received in revised form 15 January 2022; Accepted 2 April 2022 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 180 (2022) 121664
2
4.0 will be consolidated in the future in a new manufacturing paradigm
enabling significant improvements in performance and, in particular, in
productivity.
Schwab (2016) identifies technologies enabling Industry 4.0,
dividing them into three categories: i) physical: autonomous vehicles;
3D printing, advanced robotics and new materials; ii) digital: Internet of
Things (IoT), data, blockchain, sensors, identification by radiofrequency
(RFID), digital platforms; and iii) biological: including the evident advances in research in biology, genetics and nanotechnology.
The combination of these three categories may disrupt an entire industry and its associated production, distribution and consumption
systems (Schwab, 2016). According to Lepore & Spigarelli (2020), the
evolution of such Industry 4.0-related technologies is a real challenge to
industrial policy formulation – notably as it implies the reallocation of
productive factors and a new dynamic of the workforce; it also creates
social and economic divisions in regional and international terms. These
aspects will be explored in the next section.
1.2. Benefits and concerns/challenges related to industry 4.0
Industry 4.0 adopts disruptive innovations increasing the efficiency
and effectiveness of operations in the socioeconomic system (Slusarczyk, 2018). Digitalization affects directly the markets, the labor
market and the social structures (Kagermann, 2015). Technological
advances observed in the manufacturing industry and the digitalization
and reconversion observed in manufacturing towards the smart factory
has been a growing and undeniable process in the last decades (Madsen,
2019). Manufacturing industry is at the forefront of transformations
occurred in the domain of Industry 4.0 - and products, processes and
supply chains will all be impacted by such technologies (Majstorovic and
Mitrovic, 2019).
It is appropriate at this stage to identify the benefits and also the
challenges and concerns that a complex and dynamic reality such as
Industry 4.0 may entail.
Different potential benefits of Industry 4.0 have been identified in
relevant literature (Fonseca, 2017) - for a good and updated synthesis
see Table 3 in Fonseca et al. (2021). The new organizational business
models and practices implied by Industry 4.0 (Mariani and Borghi, 2019;
Linde et al., 2020; Flor´en et al., 2021); see also Fonseca et al. (2021) on
the EFQM 2020 model stimulate organizational efficiency, overall productivity and long term competitiveness (Horv´
ath and Szabo, ´ 2019).
Moreover, enhanced integration of processes and improved flow of data
promote agility, flexibility (to adapt to a rapidly changing environment)
and opportunities to further innovation and more efficient customization (Oesterreich and Teuteberg, 2016), notably taking into account
customer experience and feedback - fostering knowledge sharing and
collaboration. This allows also to shorter lead times, and to producing
goods with increased quality and with no defects (Ferreira et al., 2018).
A special reference in this regard should be made to the link between
I4.0 and sustainability (in the “Triple Bottom Line” sense, involving
economic, social and environmental sustainability) - including the circular economy. Jabbour et al. (2018a), Bigerna et al. (2021), Ford and
Despeisse, 2016, Horvath ´ and Szabo, ´ 2019) and Olah ´ et al. (2020) assess
possible links and synergies between I4.0 and sustainable
manufacturing. It is argued that the new organizational models and
technologies implied by Industry 4.0 may impact positively on sustainability (environmental and social) (Jabbour et al., 2018a) and on
promoting the circular economy, e.g. by reducing waste, material and
energy consumption (World Economic Forum, 2018; Fonseca et al.,
2021). Hence, costs can be significantly reduced, while Jabbour et al.
(2018b) propose a research agenda linking those topics. Other studies
emphasize the sustainability aspects of the implementation of the industry 4.0 are Kiel et al. (2017), Müller et al. (2018).
On the challenges, Marcucci et al. (2021) note that the implementation level of I4.0-related technologies impacts perceived performance and organizational resilience. I4.0 demands new leadership
styles, work ethics, and management systems (World Economic Forum,
2018). A very important and frequently noted challenge is to understand
and promote the right mix of competencies and skills for the new I4.0
reality (Sanders et al., 2016). Human resources and social interactions
are key, as I4.0 is not only a technological phenomenon, but also a
human and social phenomenon (particularly important in the light of
the recent Industry 5.0 approach promoted by the European Commission, (2021). This makes the issue of upskilling and reskilling critical,
given the potential mismatch of qualifications and the difficulties that
less qualified workers may experience (Horvath ´ and Szabo, ´ 2019),
which can threaten social cohesion (Vacek, ´ 2017). I4.0 may lead to job
losses, notably with automation (World Economic Forum, 2016). This
may cause a resistance to change (Brous et al., 2020). Horvath ´ & Szabo ´
(2019) note the potential disadvantage of SMEs in the implementation
of I4.0, and also identify other barriers to I4.0.
Another very important concern is on legal, privacy and (cyber)security issues associated with the adoption of digital technologies and
automation, as well as with data ownership and protection (Dwivedi
et al., 2021). These authors analyze the issue of standards and regulations, in particular when data and information are incomplete.
Luthra and Mangla (2018) evaluate challenges to I4.0 for supply
chain sustainability.
1.3. Industry 4.0 initiatives and the adoption of industry 4.0 as a focus of
government policies
The term Industry 4.0 was coined in Germany in 2011, in the most
important event in industrial technologies worldwide – the Hannover
Messe (Buchi et al., 2020). Officially, it has been incorporated in the
strategic plan of the German Government in 2013 (Xu, 2020). Such
initiative prompted several other governmental plans focused on industry, adopting the same principles and technologies (Mariani and
Borghi, 2019). Almost simultaneously to the German initiative, the USA
also launched recommendations contained in a strategic plan (Executive Office of the President National Science, Technology Council USA,
2012) geared to stimulate the next generation of manufacture, designated Advanced Manufacturing Partnership (AMP) (Liao et al., 2017).
Other examples of governments that launched such initiatives are:
Australia (“The Next Wave of Manufacturing”), South Korea
(“Manufacturing Innovation 3.0 Strategic Action Programme”, 2013),
India (“Make in India”, 2014), Japan (“Industrial Value Chain Initiative”, 2015), China (“Made-in-China 2025′′, 2015), Singapore
(“Research, Innovation and Enterprise 2020 Plan”, 2016), Brasil (“Plano
de CT&I para Manufatura Avançada no Brasil – ProFuturo”, 2017),
Russia (“Digital Economy 2024, 2017) and South Africa
(“Manufacturing Indaba”, 2018). As Majstorovic and Mitrovic, (2019)
argue these plans tend to embrace the same principles and technologies.
In the EU, aspects related to Industry 4.0 have been already added to
the objectives of the European Union’s Strategies for Smart
Specialization-S3, established for the period 2014–2020 – aiming to
promote innovation and competitiveness of the Member States (Lepore
and Spigarelli, 2020). However, the promotion of the use of Industry 4.0
facilitating/enabling technologies has been especially strong from 2016
onwards, with the digitizing European Industry Initiative of the European Commission (European Commission, 2018). In Europe, Industry
4.0 gained traction and space as a strategy for the reconversion of
manufacturing, above all to recover the Jobs lost in the competition with
countries with lower labor costs and taxes, as well as through the utilization of automation and robotic technologies to replace the less
qualified tasks. Industry 4.0 is reconfiguring the system as we know it
and integrating data and manufacturing processes throughout all the
value chain (Ciffolilli and Muscio, 2018).
Manufacturing is a nevralgic axis for advanced economies, given its
relevance in value creation, in innovation and technological development. European countries, in the strategic discussions with the economic
J.E. Teixeira and A.T.C.P. Tavares-Lehmann 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 180 (2022) 121664
3
actors concerned, have stressed the relevance of the development and
deployment of high value added technologies - Industry 4.0 being
considered in recent years a core element of innovation policy (Ciffolilli
and Muscio, 2018). Notwithstanding, evident asymmetries persist
among EU Members regarding the process of digitalization and on the
implementation of the main pillars of Industry 4.0 (Atik and Unlu,
2020).
1.4. The need for further research in public policies focused on industry
4.0
Industry 4.0 changes the paradigm of centralized to decentralized
production, though new technologies that will replace the traditional
production mode (GTAI, 2014). As mentioned above, the reconfiguration of manufacturing, operated by the incorporation of emerging
technologies, which characterize Industry 4.0 (Lu, 2017), has been
accompanied by the formulation and implementation and policies
directed to this objective (Castelo-Branco et al., 2019). Concomitantly,
Industry 4.0 started to occupy an increasingly relevant place in academic studies, in Governments’ agendas and in manufacturing-related
strategic planning – as well as considered of relevant impact on all
economic and productive sectors (Hoyer et al., 2020). Despite this
growth in attention and relevance, Industry 4.0 may still be understood
as a discourse in construction by distinct actors, such as companies,
governments and universities; such discourse is oriented to innovation
in manufacturing (Reischauer, 2018). This discourse aims, ultimately, to
institutionalize innovation involving business, academia and policy integrated in an innovation system in the framework of the Triple Helix
theory.3 In other words, the discourse on Industry 4.0 incentivizes the
mobilization of the actors to innovate in a collaborative way. The
deployment and use of Industry 4.0 technologies are in the process of
alignment among a multiplicity of actors and, as such, the involved
actors can shape these changes. Public policy-makers have, thus, an
important yet not exclusive role in the emergence and development of
Industry 4.0. They are relevant shapers of this reality. The intensity of
the focus on this policy area is also contingent on the economic environment in which the actors operate.
Despite the above documented growth of initiatives in public policy
related to Industry 4.0, and the growing literature addressing such
programs and measures, authors such as Nazarov and Klarin (2020)
argue that there is still a relative scarcity of research related both to the
formulation of policies and to the results of the investments and of the
overall implementation of such policies.
Given this context, this article aims to make a contribution by presenting the EU policies and strategies designated by the EU to stimulate
Industry 4.0, as well as individual initiatives of EU countries, offering a
comprehensive comparative analysis which highlights the similarities
and asymmetries among them along different criteria. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the most wide-ranging comparative study specifically
at EU level, with 28 national programs analyzed. Former relevant contributions were Majstorovic and Mitrovic (2019), which studied 18 EU
countries initiatives (among other non-EU programs) and European
Commission, (2018a), which mentioned 15 public policy initiatives
aiming to stimulate the adoption and implementation of Industry 4.0.
2. Methodology
This research is exploratory, with a bibliographic and documental
focus. It does not purport, however, in any way, to represent a bibliometric exercise, with quantitative techniques involved, as the references
are not in large numbers, and most are contained in national or EU
reports.
Fig. 1 below presents the organization / flow of the research supporting the subsequent discussion of the characteristics and results of
Industry 4.0 focused policies in the EU.
We started by conducting a search in leading bibliographic databases
such as Web of Science and Scopus, and also in Google Scholar. After
reading the titles and abstracts, the main articles were included.
The most significant part of the data collection in order to discern the
details on the main policies focused on Industry 4.0 in the EU was performed via the webpage of the European Commission. The Commission
maintains a webpage specifically dedicated to the monitoring of the
initiatives of the member countries, and the main strategies are
compiled in the Digital Transformation Monitor. The EU currently includes 27 member countries, after Brexit. Among these countries, 19
reports were found, focused on monitoring national strategies for digital
transformation in the following countries: Germany, Austria, Belgium,
Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, The
Netherlands; despite its recent exit from the EU, the monitoring report
for the United Kingdom was also included, as it was available on the
referred webpage. For the following other countries: Bulgaria, Cyprus,
Estonia, Finland, Greece, Ireland, Malta, and Romania we used the
digital monitoring reports elaborated by Valdani Vicari and Associati –
Economics & Policy (VVA) and WIC Consult (European Commission,
2019). For Bulgaria, we analyzed also the digital transformation report
for the period 2020–2030 (Transformation Bulgaria 2020–2030) authored by the Ministry of Transport, Information, Technology and Communications (Ministry of Transport, Information, Technology and
Communications, 2021). Ireland also presents a specific government
report for Industry 4.0 for the period 2020–2025, also included.
These reports present a synthesis of several relevant aspects about
the main strategies and initiatives in distinct countries (European
Commission, 2020a). In order to facilitate a systematic comparison,
based on non-subjective criteria, we selected and put on a table the
following data: Country; Name of the Initiative/Policy/Strategy/Plan/
Program; Year of launching; Entity responsible for launching; Target
actors; Strategic Axes; Measures; Funding (public, private,
public-private); Type of policy (bottom up or top down).
The data collected contribute to answer the following questions:
Q1: What are the main national initiatives in the EU to stimulate the
implementation of Industry 4.0 and the digitalization of EU
economies?
Q2: What are the main measures considered strategic to promote the
implementation of Industry 4.0 in EU countries?
Q3: What is the target public of the EU’s Industry 4.0 policies?
Q4: What type of funds support these policies?
Fig. 1. Research flow/scheme.
3 The Triple Helix concept was developed originally by Henry Etzkowitz and
Loet Leydesdorf (1995) (Cai, 2020). The approach to innovation by the angle of
the Triple Helix is centered on the interactions and partnerships between
universities-governments-companies (Etzkowitz & Leydesdorff, 2000).
J.E. Teixeira and A.T.C.P. Tavares-Lehmann 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 180 (2022) 121664
4
For the elaboration/grouping of clusters (in the next section), we
considered the most recurring axes / dimensions of Industry 4.0
strategies and policies adopted by countries.
3. Policies at the EU level and national initiatives for industry
4.0 in the EU
3.1. EU-level policies directed at the implementation and strengthening of
industry 4.0
This section’s objective is to present, analyze and compare the EU’s
supranational programs aiming to stimulate the implementation of Industry 4.0. According to the study of the European Parliament (Smit
et al., 2016), from the EU perspective, Industry 4.0 may be part of a
defensive strategy (as it may contribute to maintain its manufacturing
industry), but also of a proactive approach (as it can help Europe to
increase its productivity and access to new markets).
The main actors in the manufacturing industry ecosystem and in
academia agree that, for the successful development of high value added
technologies, the EU should put Industry 4.0 at the core of its strategic
documents (such as the Innovation Union. In this way, Industry 4.0 would
be at the center of Innovation Policy, with a focus in strategic subdomains like sustainable manufacturing (Ciffolilli and Muscio, 2018).
In the 1990s, the understanding of public policy formulation by
governments and public policy decision-makers to stimulate innovation
and enhance technological capacity already considered the importance
of an integrated vision – like the one implied by the concept of “national
system of innovation” (Lundvall, 1992). The success of the implementation of advanced manufacturing technologies depends on the
well-articulated and coherent connection between national policies of
different types – including industrial policy, development policy and
others, in such a holistic vision (Park, 2000). In line with the work of
Hervas-Oliver et al. (2020), the analysis of policies and strategies for the
transition towards Industry 4.0, in the regional domain, is justified by
the fact that innovation is an interactive learning process happening in
the local/regional realm.
Considering the implementation of programs and public and private
policies geared to Industry 4.0 in the EU member countries, in 2016 the
European Commission together with the EU member States sought to
establish a governance framework in order to stimulate the stakeholders
and support the coordination of such initiatives, thereby launching the
Digital Single Market. The main strategy of that package was to conduct
the EU countries towards the adoption of digitalization of industry
practices (European Commission, 2018a), this leading to the digitizing
European Industry initiative, which includes the following pillars
(identified in Fig. 2 below).
The “Digital Single Market” refers to the policy framework adopted to
promote the Digital Agenda established in 2010 by the European
Commission (at the same time of the launch of the Strategy Europe
2020). Besides the plan for a Single Digital Market, the strategy included
the other components, such as Horizon 2020 and Regulatory Fitness and
Performance Program (REFIT) (Hervas-Oliver et al., 2020).
One of the most important pillars of the digitizing European Industry
initiative are the so-called Digital Innovation Hubs (DIH), which are
one-stop-shops for the digitalization of firms that aim to enhance their
competitiveness through the use of digital technologies. Those digital
innovation centers provide local support to firms to digitalize their operations in order to improve their positioning in their value chains. The
DIH may also act as a broker between users and suppliers of digital innovations in all the value chain, stimulate connection with training
agents, and facilitate access to funding for digital transformation. The
Digital Innovation Hub Catalogue is an online tool (European Commission, 2020). DIHs are supported and consistent with the Smart
Specialization Strategy of the European Commission (European Commission, 2020b). In 2019, there were 519 DIH all over Europe, 483 of
which in the EU member countries. 360 DIHs were already in operation,
and 159 were still being prepared. The countries with more DIH
recognized by the EU were: Spain (68), Germany (55), Italy (51) and
France (56). That initiative also impacted on the national policies for
digitalization of countries like the UK, which replicated it in the UK
Catapult initiative (Hervas-Oliver et al., 2020).
The results presented by Hervas-Oliver et al. (2020) about the
implementation of DIH in Spain note that the DIH program constitutes a
policy model to help regional policy-makers to launch digitalization
initiatives. DIHs also include crucial elements of the regional innovation
system, promoting also the incorporation of new elements. These authors recommend that policy-makers take into consideration local needs
and that they adapt DIH to the local context, as this is a unique program
that does not see asymmetries among countries, like the regional innovation system (RIS), knowledge produced, among other factors.
The European Platform of National Initiatives was created in March
2017 to congregate such national initiatives aiming to stimulate digitalization. Furthermore, in order to attain the objective of a greater
coordination of the digitizing European Industry process, a forum was
established (European Stakeholder Forum) in order to promote contact
between different initiatives, to promote financial support and to
structure regulation and coordination and, in this way, to create opportunities for new sectoral investments. The European Commission
suggested countries to try to frame their digitalization policies within
the opportunities of the European structural and investment funds
(European Commission, 2018a).
The strategy of the European Commission also focused on creating
leadership through large-scale public-private partnerships and through
digital industrial platforms (European Commission, 2018b). A dynamic
implementation of Industry 4.0 in the EU implies a policy constructed on
a strong stakeholder involvement, in the already mentioned Triple Helix
framework (Lepore and Spigarelli, 2020). The creation of digital platforms to share experiences, research and best practices relies on a
strategy to provide support and funding to pan-European initiatives, as
individual member countries’ initiatives may be insufficient (Smit et al.,
2016).
Another important pillar refers to regulation, considering the new
digital technologies and their implications. In the domain of the Digital
Single Market, the European Commission already proposed several
measures to update regulation in essential areas, like cybersecurity and
free flow of data.
Another crucial topic, as referred in the Introduction to this article, is
on the qualifications of the workforce, both in terms of upskilling and
reskilling. The adoption of digital technologies will impact largely the
Fig. 2. The 5 Main Pillars of the digitizing European Industry initiative (DEI).
J.E. Teixeira and A.T.C.P. Tavares-Lehmann 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 180 (2022) 121664
5
workforce. Hence, there is a need to anticipate this impact and to prepare the human resources to the new demands, challenges and opportunities. The reconversion of European industry will largely depend on
how successful this area will be tackled. Hence, the EU strategy must
create policies and instruments with a focus on lifelong learning and
constant update of qualifications (European Commission, 2018b). The
study of the European Parliament (Smit et al., 2016) cites the results of
the paper of the European center for International Political Economy
(ECIPE), which note that the EU industrial policy needs to promote a
reform in the labor market and strengthening education and training,
which are key to the successful implementation of Industry 4.0.
The European Union’s Strategy for Smart Specialization-S3 includes
these challenges for the European innovation plan for the period
2014–2020, with the aim to stimulate innovation and increase the
competitiveness of the EU countries, allocating EU Structural Funds to
this objective. It is expected that the next revision of this strategy will
give more importance to Industry 4.0, in order to favor this transition
(Lepore and Spigarelli, 2020).
The RIS3 strategy also offered a S3 platform to connect EU countries
and regions, facilitating the interaction among potential partners and
the inter-regional cooperation. At the moment, there are 19 countries
and 178 regions registered in the S3 platform (European Commission,
2020c). Several tools were created to support RIS3 implementation,
among which: i) (the already cited) Digital Innovation Hubs; ii) Eye@RIS3: an online database about the RIS3 priorities; iii) ESIF-Viewer: a
tool identifying investments established by European structural and
investment funds (ESIF) and containing data on the EU Operational
Programs; iv) a tool to monitor Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), contributing to search data on Structural Funds and other
data to favor planning in the area of ICT; v) Regional Benchmarking: an
interactive tool allowing comparative analysis at the regional level,
permitting to identify similar cases in the EU; vi) EU Trade: an interactive web-based application to visualize and analyze data on
inter-regional trade and on Europe’s competitive position; e vii)
Regional R&D Observatory: this tool allows to visualize and compare the
investments on R&D financed by different EU funds and programs,
through different channels, such as Eurostat’s economic indicators, investments on R&D identified by ESIF, as well as Horizon 2020 funds
competitively awarded to stakeholders (European Commission, 2020b).
The S3 strategy has innovation at its core, stimulating related public
policies, programs and instruments, as well as financial support aiming
to increase the EU’s competitive position, offering solutions to reduce
competitive asymmetries in the EU countries. Although the digitalization initiatives promoted by the EU have stimulated the implementing of
Industry 4.0 enabling technologies, it is fair to say that in these plans
Industry 4.0 was not a critical element in the EU strategy (European
Commission, 2018c). More recent proposals on digitalization will promote areas such as high performance computing, artificial intelligence,
cybersecurity and advanced digital competencies, trying to amplify their
use in the economy and in society at large. The focus will be on
improving efficiency and the quality of the services in the areas of public
interest like health, justice, consumers’ rights, public administration and
support to digital transformation of small and medium enterprises
(SMEs) (European Commission, 2018c).
The asymmetries at the level of the digitalization of the economies
among EU Member States risk to be more evident without public policies
helping this process. According to the European Commission (European
Commission, 2020e), European institutions and governments may need
to contribute approximately € 75.000 million Euro in ICT investment in
the next decade to reduce these asymmetries and conduct EU member
States that are less advanced I this area towards the level of the most
digitally advanced members. This is considered essential to capture the
potential value of these high impact technologies. According to the same
source, it has been estimated that education and training (upskilling and
reskilling) of the workforce due to digital transition may demand investments of about € 42.000 Euro per year.
Already in 2012, it was defended that a more assertive strategic
approach of the European Union was needed in order to implement an
industrial strategy to maximize the impact of 4.0 technologies and to
prepare the workforce for the new challenges (Foray et al., 2012). The
proposal of the European Parliament for the EU digitalization program
has been included in the 2021–2027 Multi-Annual Financial Framework
(MFF) (European Commission, 2018c), stressing the strategic importance of Industry 4.0 for the competitiveness of European
manufacturing. According to the European Commission (2020d), the
European Commission, the European Parliament and the European
Council signed on November 11th 2020 the agreement on the MFF and
on the “Next Generation EU” package. The total budget is €1.824,3
trillion Euro. €100.000 million are allocated to the program to promote
R&D and innovation, Horizon Europe (the successor of Horizon 2020).
3.2. Comparison between the national industry 4.0 initiatives in the EU
This section presents the main national Industry 4.0 and
digitalization-related policies adopted by member countries. The study
promoted by the European Parliament on Industry 4.0 (Smit et al., 2016)
suggests that there are differences in the EU and in individual member
countries on how the perceived role of Industry 4.0 initiatives. According to Majstorovic and Mitrovic (2019), Industry 4.0 policies in the
EU tend to be encompassing strategies including R&D, innovation and
industrial policies focused on manufacture.
The digital transformation reports of EU countries available on the
Digital Transformation Monitor webpage (European Commission,
2021a) and the digital monitoring reports of EU countries authored by
Valdani Vicari e Associati – Economis & Policy (VVA) e WIC Consult
(European Commission, 2019) permitted to identify 28 initiatives
launched by EU member countries with the aim of stimulating the
digitalization of the economy. Among these, some are more focused on
Industry 4.0 enabling technologies (like that of Germany) and some are
less encompassing, more narrowly focused on ICT. Table 1 presents the
28 above mentioned national strategies.
Among the 28 reports about EU countries’ digitalization initiatives,
some only refer isolated initiatives but not national programs to promote
digitalization of industry – that is the case of Croatia, Bulgaria and
Latvia. Although the Latvian National Industrial Policy Guideline
2014–2020 is not a program of digitalization of industry, it aims to
promote the digitalization of the economy. It aims to improve the
participation of manufacturing in GDP growth; to increase productivity
of the manufacturing sector and to increase investment in R&D. Bulgaria
had a project for a national digitalization strategy, but the prevision was
to execute it between 2020 and 2030, and an execution report is not yet
available. Therefore, even if 28 initiatives were proposed, only 25 were
effectively put into implementation (with the exception of the above
mentioned initiatives of Croatia, Bulgaria and Latvia).
According to Smit et al. (2016), besides Germany, other countries
demonstrated consistent support to Industry 4.0 implementation – such
as Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Italy, Netherlands,
Portugal, Spain, Sweden and the UK. However, in some of these countries the approach was not as encompassing as in Germany, pioneer in
Industry 4.0 which will be given more attention subsequently.
Germany has one of the most competitive manufacturing industries
in the world, being a reference supplier of equipment throughout all the
supply chain. The use of ICT is relevant for the success of manufacturing
industry - 90% of the production processes being supported by ICT.
While some firms are introducing Industry 4.0 enabled technologies,
others are already further ahead, being fully digitalized companies with
new business models. Industrial policy formulation has to tackle this
complexity and profound changes under way, with a systemic view on
the introduction and on the impact of such new technologies (Kagermann, 2015).
As already noted, the term Industry 4.0 was coined and spread by the
German Government with its strategy to promote employment in high
J.E. Teixeira and A.T.C.P. Tavares-Lehmann 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 180 (2022) 121664
6
tech industry (Lepore and Spigarelli, 2020). That is rooted in the work
done since 2006 by the Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), and
of a consultative group (Industry-Science Research Alliance) which
congregated experts from science and industry for the elaboration of an
interministerial innovation policy (called High-Tech Strategy). In 2011,
the German Government launched the Project of the Future by the group
Alliance of Promoters of Communication of Research in
Industry-Science, in collaboration with the National Academy of Science
and Engineering (ACATECH). A working group Industry 4.0 was
created, and presented the final report, supported by BMBF, in April
2013 (GTAI, 2014).
This report suggests that Germany, when implementing Industry 4.0,
should take advantage of existing technologies and of their economic
potential through a systematic innovation process, in synergy with the
know-how, capabilities and workforce performance. Industry 4.0 should
focus on the horizontal integration in the value chain, digital integration
end to end of engineering in the value chain and vertical integration in
manufacturing network systems (GTAI, 2014). The Industry 4.0 implementation strategy also requires regulation and setting parameters
aiming to harmonize business processes. The strategy is dual: making
Germany the market leader, and the leading supplier. At the same time
that it increases the implementation of cyber-physical systems (CPS),
increasing production, Germany can benefit from the development of
CPS technology and become leader in the exports of machinery and
equipment with such technologies embedded (Kagermann et al., 2013).
The Action Plan High-Tech Strategy 2020 by the German Federal
Government incentivized the launch of the Industrie 4.0 Platform in
2013, articulating with industrial organizations such as BITKOM (digital
industry), VDMA (manufacturing industry) and ZVEI (electronic industry). Industry 4.0 has been consolidating itself through multiple
strategic policies and via the update and continuity of such policies,
including the Digital Agenda launched in 2014. The Digital Agenda was
centered in three axes: a) growth and employment; b) access and
participation; and c) trust and security (Horst and Santiago, 2018).
In 2015, the Industrie 4.0 Platform was broadened with the support
of the Ministry of Economy and Energy and of the Ministry of Education
and Research. The strategy consisted in involving various stakeholders,
both private (entrepreneurial associations, trade unions, research organizations) and public. Until 2017, over 159 organizations were active
in the Platform (European Commission, 2017).
The actors involved in the Industrie 4.0 Platform emphasized the
relevance of international cooperation. The German Ministry of Economy and the Industrie 4.0 Platform supported the European Commission
to promote the implementation of Industry 4.0 in the EU. The challenges
for the consolidation of Industry 4.0 cross borders, as digitalization of
production also occurs across the value chain – hence, international
cooperation is critical in the areas of standards and regulation (European Commission, 2017).
The strategic focus of the German Government envisaged the need of
a global harmonization of the Industry 4.0-related concepts – through
SCI 4.0, supported from 2017 by the funding project GoGlobal Industrie
4.0 of the German Federal Ministry of Economy and Energy (BMWi)
(Federal Ministry Economics For Affairs And Energy, 2019). From that
initiative resulted bilateral cooperation between the German Government and Japan, China, South Korea and the US. In Europe, cooperation
to set standards and general patterns for Industry 4.0 representative
Table 1
National Strategies for Digital Transformation in the EU Member Countries.
Country Policy/Program Year Entity Responsible
Germany Industrie 4.0 2011 Ministry of Education and
Research (BMBF) / Ministry
of Economy and Energy
(BMWI)
United
Kingdom
High Value
Manufacturing Catapult
(HVMC)
2011 Government
Latvia National Industrial Policy
Guidelines 2014–2020
2012 Ministry of Economy / other
Ministries (Ministry of
Education and Science,
Ministry of Environmental
Protection and Regional
Development)
Belgium Made Different –
Factories of the Future
2013 Government and industrial
stakeholders
Sweden Smart Industry 2013 VINNOVA (Swedish
Inovation Agency) and
industrial stakeholders
Ireland Doing more with Digital;
Future Jobs Ireland 2019-
Ireland’s Industry 4.0
Strategy 2020–2025
2013 Department of
Communications, Climate
Action and Environment
(DCCAE).
Austria Industrie 4.0 Oesterreich 2014 Ministry of Transport,
Innovation and Energy
Denmark Manufacturing Academy
of Denmark (MADE)
2014 MADE (Manufacturing
Academy of Denmark)
Netherlands Smart Industry 2014 Government and industrial
stakeholders
Estonia Digital Agenda 2020 2014 Government
Malta Digital Malta Strategy 2014 Parliamentary Secretary of
Financial Services, Digital
Economy and Innovation
(Prime Minister’s Office)
France Alliance pour l’Industrie
du Futur
2015 Government
Luxembourg Third Industrial
Revolution strategy (TIR)
2015 Government
Finland Digitalisation,
Experimentation and
Deregulation (Public
sector ICT).
2015 Department of ICT, Ministry
of Finance
Cyprus Cyprus Digital Strategy –
Action Plan 2015 - 2017.
2015 Minist´erio do Transporte,
Comunicaçoes ˜ e Trabalho.
Croatia National Strategy and
Action Plan for
Cybersecurity (There is
no national strategy for
digitization)
2015 National Security Office
Romania Digital Agenda for
Romania 2020
2015 Ministry of Communications
and Information Society
Slovakia Smart Industry 2016 Ministry of Economy
Spain Industria Conectada 4.0 2016 General Secretary of Industry
Hungary IPAR4.0 National
Technology Initiative
2016 Ministry of Economy and
Hungarian Academy of the
Institute of Computing
Sciences and Control (MTA
SZTAKI)
Lithuania Pramone ˙ 4.0 2016 Government
Poland Initiative and Platform
Industry 4.0
2016 Ministry of Finance and
Development
Czech
Republic
Průmysl 4.0 2016 Ministry of Industry and
Trade
Slovenia Digital Coalition Slovenia
2020
2016 Government
Greece National Digital Policy
2016- 2021
2016 Ministry of Digital Policy,
Telecommunications and
Media
Italy Industria 4.0 2017 Minisry of Economic
Development
Portugal Indústria 4.0 2017 Ministry of Economy and
COTEC (private
entrepreneurial entity)
Bulgaria Industry 4.0 / National
Development Program
2017
Table 1 (continued )
Country Policy/Program Year Entity Responsible
Bulgaria 2030 /National
Program Digital Bulgaria
2025
Ministry of Transport,
Information Technology and
Communication
Source: Own elaboration based country reports, Digital Transformation Monitor
(European Commission, 2021a) and from Monitoring Progress in National Initiatives on digitizing Industry (VVA & WIC Consult, 2019).
J.E. Teixeira and A.T.C.P. Tavares-Lehmann 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 180 (2022) 121664
7
actions was fundamentally trilateral - between Germany, France and
Italy (DIN and DKE, 2020).
The target of EU countries’ policies in this domain is primarily the
manufacturing sector. Among the 28 countries analyzed, 16 direct policies towards implementation focused on manufacturing (Table 2).
However, with the stimulus to the adoption of emerging technologies
facilitating Industry 4.0, the digitalized business models are an option
for the remaining sectors of the economy (Majstorovic and Mitrovic,
2019). Table 2 stresses the target stakeholders of such policy initiatives
adopted in the EU.
In Table 2 we can observe that the main target is manufacturing/
industry stakeholders. Sectorally, ICT and digital solutions firms are also
a very important target – which is corroborated by Majstorovic e
Mitrovic (2019), who refer also policies directed to stimulate the
adoption of IoT and CPS. Even if digitalization has been adopted first by
large firms, SMEs, given their importance for all these countries, are a
strategic target for countries such as Germany, Belgium, Denmark,
France, Sweden, Portugal, Slovakia, Spain, Cyprus and Greece. The
majority of country strategies aims at stimulating the private sector to
implement digitalization measures. Luxembourg, Finland, Slovenia,
Cyprus and Malta established measures strongly geared to the digitalization of the public sector. It can be observed that such policies have
been formulated seeking to involve different stakeholders such as entrepreneurs, policy-makers, researchers, workers and civil society.
Considering that not all EU countries display the same level of
development of manufacturing industry, Industry 4.0-focused policies
are also at different stages and paths (Smit et al., 2016). The results of
the recent Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI), based in 2019
data, show that EU leaders are Finland, Sweden, Denmark and the
Netherlands, having as followers Malta, Ireland and Estonia (European
Commission, 2020a). The countries that stand out as leaders (among the
27 EU members) with more companies with advanced technologies
facilitating Industry 4.0 are Germany, France, Spain and the
Netherlands, (European Commission, 2021).
In EU member countries, Majstorovic and Mitrovic (2019) note that
Italy and Sweden have as strategic axis the delivery of last generation
technologies. Germany and the Netherlands present a greater focus on
the development of new products and on the improvement of industrial
processes. Sectorally, the prevalent strategic focus in these countries is
directed to IoT and CPS. Table 3 highlights the main strategic axes of
Industry 4.0 policies in EU countries.
Countries like Germany, Sweden, Czech Republic, Austria, Slovakia,
France, Ireland, Cyprus and Romania also focused strategically on education. Among the main measures is the implementation of ICT in
education, like measures stimulating the development of skills for a
work environment undergoing digital transformation (Table 3 above).
Fig. 3 below highlights some of the strategic areas of focus of national
policies for implementation of Industry 4.0 in EU countries. We derived
six groupings (clusters) of countries based on these areas of focus. One
country may be represented in more than one cluster, if that territory’s
government policies emphasize different focal areas for the implementation of Industry 4.0.
From left to right, top to bottom, the results of this grouping are as
follows:
The first cluster has a focus on the deployment of ICT to create the
infrastructure underlying the digitalization of the economy, and countries privileging that dimension are: Germany, Estonia, Finland, Greece,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Romania, Slovenia and The Netherlands.
The second cluster has a focus on Research, Development and
Innovation (RDI) related to Industry 4.0-based products and services,
and comprise the following countries: Austria, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Italy, Poland, Slovakia and the United Kingdom.
The third cluster is centered on the implementation of emerging and
facilitating technologies related to Industry 4.0, such as IoT, CPS, new
materials, etc.; countries following this approach are: Belgium, Czech
Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Lithuania, Romania, Slovenia
and Sweden.
The fourth cluster has at its core the digitalization of SMEs, and
comprises EU members like Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Slovenia, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia Spain and Sweden.
The fifth cluster has an emphasis on education and professional
training, in order to ensure that citizens are endowed with the right skills
for the work environment implied by Industry 4.0. This cluster includes:
Belgium, Czech Republic, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Slovakia and Sweden.
Finally, the sixth cluster has a focus on regulation and on standards
for the technologies associated to Industry 4.0, comprising countries like
Austria, Finland, Poland and Sweden.
Table 4. below highlights the types of policy process approach (top
down, bottom-up) and the main funding approach. As can be observed,
most policies are bottom up. Such strategies tend to encompass a holistic
approach, involving often public-private collaboration, the following
Table shows.
Among the EU countries, only Slovenia has a policy framework led
essentially by private initiative. Other countries, such as France, Germany, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Spain, Luxembourg, Portugal,
Poland, the Netherlands, Sweden, Romania and the UK involved several
actors on the elaboration of such strategies, and include a mix of public
and private investments and funding sources (Table 4). The main budgets projected for the execution of digitalization-related policies and
projects are those of France, Italy, UK, Finland and Poland (European
Commission, 2021a). National strategies predominantly relying on
public funds are those of Slovakia, Hungary, Italy, Lithuania, Estonia,
Ireland, Cyprus, Malta, Spain, Finland and the Czech Republic)
(Table 4). The main national policies depend significantly on public
Table 2
Target Stakeholders of Industry 4.0 Policies in EU Countries.
J.E. Teixeira and A.T.C.P. Tavares-Lehmann 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 180 (2022) 121664
8
Table 3
Main Axes of Industry 4.0 Policies in EU Countries.
Country Strategic areas
Austria Six thematic working groups: (1) Norms and standards; (2) Research, development and innovation; (3) Qualification and skills for Industry 4.0; (4) Regional strategies; (5) The human in the digital factory; (6) Smart logistics.
Belgium Emphasis is put on reducing production costs by, inter alia, digitizing operational processes, further integrating cyber-physical systems as well as by upskilling the workforce and lowering energy consumption.
Cyprus A holistic strategy, including ICT infrastructure, digitization of the public sector, and enhancement of digital skills (e-skills), development of the digital entrepreneurship
Czech Republic The focus is on building data and communication infrastructure, the adaptation of the education system, introduction of new tools in the labor market, adaptation
of the social environment and fiscal help for the companies related to the introduction of new technologies and know how.
Denmark The general focus is on companies, universities and organisations seeking to advance their capabilities and strengthen the Danish manufacturing ecosystem. MADE’s research and innovation themes are focused on developing
and implementing advanced manufacturing and Industry 4.0 solutions in the Danish manufacturing sector.
Estonia To create an environment that facilitates the use of ICT and the development of smart solutions in enterprises in general.
Finland Focus on ICT. Digitalisation of public services. With the help of new operating practices, public services will become user-oriented and primarily digital. Principles for the digitalisation of all public services will also be
established and a one-stop-shop service system and information management legislation will be developed.
France IdF’s is structured around five pillars: technological offerings, business transformation, training, international cooperation and IdF promotion. A focus on new and emerging technologies, such as additive manufacturing, IoT,
new materials, high-performance computing, smart objects and artificial intelligence.
Germany Digital innovation and ICT market; transformation of business models and product/service delivery, R&D on IoT and system integration; education and vocational training and the changing nature of workplaces in the ICT
environment;
Greece Focusing on seven areas, two of which relate to digitizing economy and industry (Area 2: Accelerating the digitization of the economy, Area 3: Promoting the ICT
industry in order to develop digital economy and employment).
Hungary The initiative is based on the recent strategy for reindustrialization of Hungary of the Ministry for National Economy. Implementation of the knowledge-economy elements of sectoral industrial strategies.
Italy Take full advantage of opportunities related to the fourth industrial revolution, promoting investments in innovation, intangible assets and R&D, spreading the culture related to “Industry 4.0′′ and developing skills.
Ireland The strategy set out a vision and a number of practical actions and steps to encourage and assist more citizens and small businesses to get online. Phase 1 focused on Business & Enterprise, Citizen Training and Schools &
Education.
Lithuania Digitization of industry, new technologies and standardization in key strategic sectors of the Lithuanian economy. Re-industrialize the economy; creation of public-private partnerships is essential; emphasis on the
involvement of key stakeholders is crucial.
Luxembourg The cross-functional participation was organized across nine working groups, comprised of six sector specific vertical pillars covering energy, mobility, buildings, food,
industry and finance, and three horizontal axes addressing economy wide considerations known as the Smart Economy, the Circular Economy and the Prosumers and Social Model.
Malta The drivers of Malta’s digital strategy are the level of Connectivity and the Use of Internet Services by citizens. Focus in ICT.
Netherlands Focus on high-tech industry, chemical, agro food and logistic sectors.
Poland Investment for innovation and R&D will be addressed by means of new business models, an amenable legal environment for the establishment of new companies,
and a review of legislation governing research institutes. Raising awareness, competence building, infrastructure development, SME support, actions focused across multiple industrial sectors (e.g. manufacturing sector or
technology supplier).
Portugal Industry 4.0 supports the development of skills, new methods and digital applications in 6 strategic pillars: human capital qualification; technological cooperation; start-up i4.0; financing and investment incentive;
internationalization; and standards and regulation.
Romania eGovernment, Interoperability, Cyber Security, Cloud Computing, Open Data, Big Data and Social Media, ICT in education, health, culture and eInclusion, eCommerce, Broadband and Digital Services Infrastructure.
Slovakia Improving awareness and cooperation; R&D activities; Factories of the Future, access to finance; labor market, education and skills; legislative framework adjustments encouraging innovation.
Slovenia This strategy lays down Slovenia’s key strategic development goals in this area and merges the Next-Generation Broadband Network Development Plan until 2020 and the Cyber Security Strategy into a unified strategic
framework.
Spain Focus on supporting the implementation of digital transformation projects by providing support to SMEs and micro enterprises. Industrial sector.
Sweden P2030 concentrates on a variety of focus areas: it seeks to support the uptake of innovative technology and advanced manufacturing practices in businesses and to improve production education.
United
Kingdom
Enabling innovation, commercialization and focused across multiple industrial sectors and 27 key technology areas.
Source: Own elaboration based country reports, Digital Transformation Monitor (European Commission, 2021a) and from Monitoring Progress in National Initiatives on digitizing Industry (VVA & WIC Consult, 2019).
J.E. Teixeira and A.T.C.P. Tavares-Lehmann 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 180 (2022) 121664
9
funding. The total budget for all countries, for the period 2014–2019,
was 34.000 million Euro (Majstorovic and Mitrovic, 2019).
The existing EU programs for the digitalization of the economy seek
to establish synergies between the instruments and funds of different
policies and programs – like Horizon 2020 (now named Horizon
Europe), Connecting Europe Facility, Creative Europe Program
(including Media), InvestEU Fund, COSME, Single Market Program,
European Regional Development Fund-ERDF, European Social Fund
Plus (including Youth Employment Initiative), European Agricultural
Fund for Rural Development-EAFRD, Erasmus, European globalization
Adjustment Fund, Integrated Border Management Fund, Internal Security Fund, Action for the Environment and Climate (including Energy
Efficiency) and European Maritime and Fisheries Fund (European
Commission, 2018c).
The perception by EU member countries of Industry 4.0 policies is
that the approach should be broader, including taking into account social change and new entrepreneurial paradigms developed under the
introduction of new, Industry 4.0-related - technologies. Moreover, as
Industry 4.0 affects potentially all the value chain, firms that own subsidiaries in different EU countries may compensate in their value chains
the distinct stages of implementation and advances in Industry 4.0-
related technologies. On the other hand, the change in paradigm in
the realm of the workforce makes essential to reflect on how more integrated policies may contribute to the education and training of the
workforce in EU countries (Smit et al., 2016).
4. Final considerations and future research directions
The possibility of a reindustrialization of EU countries (emphasized
in the new EU funds package) has focused the attention of policy-makers
and relevant stakeholders on the need to create conditions for the
implementation of Industry 4.0, given the relevance that the
manufacturing industry has in these economies. Germany assumed the
leadership on Industry 4.0, being the pioneer in this regard by ensuring a
convergence between the public and private interests to design and
promote a technological framework that would not only place EU
manufacturing industry on the top of global competitiveness, but also
other economic and productive sectors. On the other hand, the EU also
presented quickly after policies framing the new concepts of digitalization of the economy and that, more critically, would adapt policies
and Structural Funds to the needs of a new competitive framework that
EU member countries were demanding.
Fig. 3. Clusters of focus strategy.
Table 4
Approaches for the Implementation of Policies and Main Origin of Funding.
J.E. Teixeira and A.T.C.P. Tavares-Lehmann 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 180 (2022) 121664
10
Among the key policies aligning efforts to meet the needs of the
implementation of Industry 4.0, are the EU Strategy for Smart Specialization (S3) and the digitizing European Industry Initiative. The
formulation of plans and strategies for the implementation of Industry
4.0 in the EU relies on concepts already incorporated in innovation
models, such as National Innovation Systems (Lundvall, 1992) and
Triple Helix (Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff, 2000).
The role of the State in the induction for the elaboration and
implementation of Industry 4.0 strategies must be emphasized, as well
as in public funding for the execution of such programs; yet, the majority
involves both public and private investment. It is expected that the
process of technological upgrade will spill over to all sectors. However,
manufacturing has been at the top of priorities of most national programs. Even if large corporations are at the forefront of Industry 4.0,
many EU countries adopted specific measures to support SMEs in this
process.
Nevertheless, this is a process not only implying the technological
reconversion and deployment of advanced technologies, mentioned in
this paper, but also a paradigm shift altering the behavior both of supply
and demand, and productive factors such as technology, capital and,
very specifically, labor. In order to enable and implement successfully
digitalization, the upskilling and reskilling of the European workforce is
a critical factor. However, such policies, even if successfully implemented, take considerable time to generate impact and to spill over
throughout the economy and society.
In synthesis, the contribution of this paper consisted of:
a) Identifying supranational EU policies geared to implement measures
to strengthen the Industry 4.0 pillars aiming at the technological
reconversion of the productive system;
b) Identifying national policy initiatives in the EU aiming at promoting
digitalization;
c) Analyzing and comparing such supranational and national policies.
In terms of new research directions, the COVID-19 pandemic created
new global demands, creating new challenges for companies, especially
in the short term. Moreover, the closing of borders as a prophylactic
measure reinforces the idea of producing more near – i.e. emphasizing
more regional value chains, which can be promoted by Industry 4.0.
Even though there was a sudden drop in consumption and income,
which will certainly reflect on the rhythm of implementation of Industry
4.0, on the other hand, the implementation of Industry 4.0 is becoming a
greater and imminent need. Such new demands and challenges, linked
to locating production closer to customers, embracing more sustainable
business practices, among other, are very compatible and linked to Industry 4.0. There is, thus, a need for further research relating the impacts
of the pandemic on the implementation of Industry 4.0, and on global
value chains. Further, as noted above, there is a need for studies aiming
to analyze and evaluate the investments projected and effectively undertaken related to public and private policies aimed at the implementation of Industry 4.0. Research is also needed on the outcomes of
the policies analysed, this requiring a wider chronological horizon as
most policies are quite recent.
Last but not least, and even if in many countries the implementation
of Industry 4.0 is still in an incipient stage, the new orientation encapsulated in the European Commission initiative “Industry 5.0′′ (European
Commission, 2021b) needs to be taken on board as soon as possible. This
means focusing on a more sustainable and resilient and human-centric
perspective of the industry. This means stimulating a better interaction and improved collaborative solutions between humans and technology, the provision of greener solutions, and more synergetic
factories, taking advantage of the human capital and augmenting it with
the latest collaborative technologies. Authors such as Maddikunta et al.
(2021) and Romero and Stahre (2021) are already addressing these
cutting-edge topics.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Joselia ´ Elvira Teixeira: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing – review &
editing. Ana Teresa C.P. Tavares-Lehmann: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft,
Writing – review & editing.
Conflicts of interest
The Authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgments
This research has been financed by Portuguese public funds through
FCT - Fundaç˜
ao para a Ciˆencia e a Tecnologia, I.P., in the framework of
the project with reference UIDB/04105/2020.
References
Agostini, L., Nosella, A., 2019. The adoption of Industry 4.0 technologies in SMEs: results
of an international study. Manag. Decis. 58 (4), 625–643. https://doi.org/10.1108/
md-09-2018-0973.
Atik, H., Unlu, F., 2020. Industry 4.0-related digital divide in enterprises: an analysis for
the European union-28. Sosyoekonomi 28 (45), 225–244. Doi:10.17233/
sosyoekonomi.2020.03.13.
Bigerna, S., Micheli, S., Polinori, P., 2021. New generation acceptability towards
durability and repairability of products: circular economy in the era of the 4th
industrial revolution. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 165, 120558. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120558.
Brous, P., Janssen, M., Herder, P., 2020. The dual effects of the Internet of Things (IoT): a
systematic review of the benefits and risks of IoT adoption by organizations. Int. J.
Inf. Manage. 51, 101952 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.05.008.
Buchi, G., Cugno, M., Castagnoli, R., 2020. Smart factory performance and Industry 4.0.
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 150, 10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
techfore.2019.119790.
Cai, Y., 2020. Innovation in innovation’: a review of Henry Etzkowitz and Chunyan
Zhou, The Triple Helix: university–industry–government innovation and
entrepreneurship (Second Edition). Minerva 58 (4), 651–656. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11024-020-09418-1.
Castelo-Branco, I., Cruz-Jesus, F., Oliveira, T., 2019. Assessing Industry 4.0 readiness in
manufacturing: evidence for the European Union. Comput. Ind. 107, 2232. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2019.01.007.
Ciffolilli, A., Muscio, A., 2018. Industry 4.0: national and regional comparative
advantages in key enabling technologies. Eur. Plan. Stud. 26 (12), 2323–2343.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09654313.2018.1529145.
DIN e V & DKE - Deutsche Kommission Elektrotechnik (2020). DIN and DKE ROADMAP
German standardization roadmap industrie 4.0. standardization council industry
4.0. version 4, Germany, pp.138. [Retrieved 25 nov. 2021] from: < https://www.
plattform-i40.de/PI40/Navigation/EN/Home/home.html >.
Dwivedi, A., Moktadir, M.A., Chiappetta Jabbour, C.J., De Carvalho, D.E., 2021.
Integrating the circular economy and industry 4.0 for sustainable development:
implications for responsible footwear production in a big data-driven world.
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change, 121335. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
techfore.2021.121335.
Etzkowitz, H., Leydesdorff, L., 2000. The dynamics of innovation: from national systems
and “Mode 2” to a Triple Helix of university–industry–government relations. Res.
Policy 29 (2), 109–123. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0048-7333(99)00055-4.
European Commission (2017). Shaping Europe’s digital future: implementation of an
industry 4.0 Strategy - The German Plattform Industrie 4.0. [Acesso 25 nov. 2020].
Disponível em: < https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/blog/implementati
on-industry-40-strategy-german-plattform-industrie-40 >.
European Commission (2018). Shaping Europe’s digital future: the fourth industrial
revolution. [Retrieved 25 nov. 2020]. from: < https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single
-market/en/fourth-industrial-revolution >.
European Commission (2018a). Shaping Europe’s digital future: POLICY - coordination
of European, national & regional initiatives. [Retrieved 25 nov. 2020]. from: <
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/coordination-european-nationalregional-initiative >.
European Commission (2018b). Shaping Europe’s digital future. POLICY- Pillars of the
Digitising European industry initiative. [Retrieved 10 jan. 2021]. from: < https://ec.
europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/pillars-digitising-european-industry-initiative
>.
European Commission (2018c). Proposal for a regulayion of the European Parliament
and of the council establishing the digital Europe programme for the period 2021-
2027. Brussels. [Retrieved 13 jan. 2021]. from: < https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal
-content/EN/TXT/?uri=COM:2018:434:FIN>.
European Commission (2019). Workshop on monitoring progress of national initiatives
on digitizing industry. [Retrieved 30 jan. 2021 from: < https://ec.europa.eu/digitalJ.E. Teixeira and A.T.C.P. Tavares-Lehmann 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 180 (2022) 121664
11
single-market/en/news/workshop-monitoring-progress-national-initiatives-digiti
sing-industry ≥.
European Commission (2020). Digital Innovation Hubs. [Retrieved 10 jan. 2021]. from:
<https://s3platform.jrc.ec.europa.eu/digital-innovation-hubs>.
European Commission (2020a). Digital economy and society index (DESI) 2020.
Thematic chapters. [Retrieved 25 jan. 2021] from: < https://ec.europa.eu/digi
tal-single-market/en/digital-economy-and-society-index-desi >.
European Commission (2020b). S3 tools and data sources. [Retrieved 16 jan. 2021].
from: < https://s3platform.jrc.ec.europa.eu/s3-tools >.
European Commission (2020c). Smart specialization platform. [Retrieved 16 jan. 2021].
from: < https://s3platform.jrc.ec.europa.eu/ >.
European Commission (2020d). EU’s next long-term budget & NextGenerationEU: facts
and figures. [Retrieved 25 nov. 2020] from: < https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/
files/about_the_european_commission/eu_budget/mff_factsheet_agreement_en_12.
11_v3.pdf ≥.
European Commission (2020e). Shaping the digital transformation in Europe. Final
report. DOI: 10.2759/294260 [Retrieved 25 jan. 2021] from < file:///C:/Users/
Usuario/Downloads/
FinalreportofthestudyShapingthedigitaltransformationinEuropepdf%20(1).pdf>.
European Commission (2021). Data dashboard. [Retrieved 25 jan. 2021] from: < htt
ps://ati.ec.europa.eu/data-dashboard/country >.
European Commission (2021a). Digital transformation Monitor. [Retrieved 25 jan.
2021]. from: https://ec.europa.eu/growth/tools-databases/dem/monitor/cate
gory/national-initiatives.
European Commission (2021b). Industry 5.0: towards more sustainable, resilient and
human-centric industry. [Retrieved 13 jan. 2022] from: < https://ec.europa.eu/in
fo/news/industry-50-towards-more-sustainable-resilient-and-human-centric-indust
ry-2021-jan-07_en >.
Executive Office of the President National Science, Technology Council USA (2012). A
national strategic plan for advanced manufacturing. United States of America.
[Retrieved 25 nov. 2020] from: < https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2013/
11/f4/nstc_feb2012.pdf >.
Federal Ministry Economics For Affairs And Energy (2019). Industrie 4.0. Germany.
[Retrieved 16 nov. 2020] from: < https://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/EN/Dossier/in
dustrie-40.html >.
Ferreira, F., Putnik, G.D., Lopes, N., Garcia, W., Cruz-Cunha, M.M., Castro, H., Varela, M.
L.R., Moura, J.M., Shaha, V., Alves, C., et al., 2018. Disruptive data visualization
towards zero-defects diagnostics. Procedia CIRP 67, 374–379, 2018.
Flor´en, H., Barth, H., Gullbrand, J., Holm´en, M., 2021. Additive manufacturing
technologies and business models – a systematic literature review. J. Manuf.
Technol. Manag. 32 (1), 136–155. https://doi.org/10.1108/JMTM-01-2020-0009.
Fonseca, L., Amaral, A., Oliveira, J., 2021. Quality 4.0: the EFQM 2020 model and
industry 4.0 relationships and implications. Sustainability 13 (6), 3107. https://doi.
org/10.3390/su13063107.
Foray, D., Goddard, J., Beldarrain, X.G., Landabaso, M., McCann, P., Morgan, K.,
Nauwelaers, C., Ortega-Argil´es, R., 2012. Guide to research and innovation strategies
for smart specialisations (RIS 3). European Commission [Retrieved 25 nov. 2020]
from: <. https://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/docgener/presenta/smart_sp
ecialisation/smart_ris3_2012.pdf. >.
Ford, S., Despeisse, M., 2016. Additive manufacturing and sustainability: an exploratory
study of the advantages and challenges. J. Clean. Prod. 137, 1573–1587. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.04.150.
Fuchs, C., 2018. Industry 4.0: the digital German ideology. triple C: communication.
Capitalism & Critique. Open Access Journal for a Global Sustainable Information
Society 16 (1), 280–289. https://doi.org/10.31269/triplec.v16i1.1010.
GTAI-Germany Trade & Investments (2014). Industrie 4.0: smart manufacturing for the
future. [Retrieved 16 nov. 2020]. from:<
http://file:///C:/Users/Usuario/Downloads/GTAI%20-%
20industrie4.0-smart-manufacturing-for-the-future-en%20(1).pdf >.
Hervas-Oliver, J.-.L., Gonzalez-Alcaide, G., Rojas-Alvarado, R., & Monto-Mompo, S.
(2020). Emerging regional innovation policies for industry 4.0: analyzing the digital
innovation hub program in European regions. Competitiveness Review: an
International Business Journal, ahead-of-print(ahead-of-print). doi:10.1108/cr-12-
2019-0159.
Horst, J., Santiago, F., 2018. What Can Policymakers Learn from Germany’s Industrie 4.0
Development strategy? United Nations Industrial Development Organization.
Working paper 22.
Horv´
ath, D., Szabo, ´ R.Z., 2019. Driving forces and barriers of Industry 4.0: do
multinational and small and medium-sized companies have equal opportunities?
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 146, 119‑132. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
techfore.2019.05.021.
Hoyer, C., Gunawan, I., Reaiche, C.H., 2020. The implementation of industry 4.0-a
systematic literature review of the key factors. Syst. Res. Behav. Sci. 37 (4), 557–578.
https://doi.org/10.1002/sres.2701.
Jabbour, A.B.L.D.S., Jabbour, C.J.C., Foropon, C., Filho, M.G., 2018a. When titans meet –
can industry 4.0 revolutionise the environmentally-sustainable manufacturing
wave? The role of critical success factors. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 132,
18–25. doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.01.017.
Jabbour, A.B.L.D.S., Jabbour, C.J.C., Filho, M.G., Roubaud, D., 2018b. Industry 4.0 and
the circular economy: a proposed research agenda and original roadmap for
sustainable operations. Ann. Oper. Res. 270 (1–2), 273–286. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10479-018-2772-8.
Kagermann, H., Wahlster, W., Helbig, J. (2013). Recommendations for implementing the
strategic initiative Industrie 4.0, Securing the future of German manufacturing
industry, Final report of the Industrie 4.0 Working Group, Acatech - National
Academy of Science and Engineering. [Retrieved 29 nov. 2020] from: < https://
www.din.de/blob/76902/e8cac883f42bf28536e7e8165993f1fd/recommendationsfor-implementing-industry-4-0-data.pdf >.
Kagermann, H., 2015. Change through digitization—value creation in the age of industry
4.0. In: Albach, H., Meffert, H., Pinkwart, A., Reichwald, R. (Eds.), Management of
Permanent Change. Springer Gabler, Wiesbaden. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
658-05014-6_2.
Kiel, D., Müller, J.M., Arnold, C., Voigt, K.I., 2017. Sustainable industrial value creation:
benefits and challenges of industry 4.0. Int. J. Innov. Manag. 21 (8), 1740015
https://doi.org/10.1142/s1363919617400151.
Kosacka-Olejnik, M., Pitakaso, R., 2019. Industry 4.0: state of the art and research
implications. Logforum 15 (4), 475–485. https://doi.org/10.17270/j.Log.2019.363.
Lee, J., 2015. Smart factory systems. Informatik-Spektrum 38 (3), 230–235. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00287-015-0891-z.
Lepore, D., Spigarelli, F., 2020. Integrating Industry 4.0 plans into regional innovation
strategies. Local Econ. 15. https://doi.org/10.1177/0269094220937452.
Liao, Y., Deschamps, F., Loures, E.D.F.R., Ramos, L.F.P., 2017. Past, present and future of
Industry 4.0 - a systematic literature review and research agenda proposal. Int. J.
Prod. Res. 55 (12), 3609–3629. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1308576.
Linde, L., Sjodin, ¨ D., Parida, V., Gebauer, H., 2020. Evaluation of digital business model
opportunities: a framework for avoiding digitalization traps. Res. Technol. Manag.
64 (1), 43–53. https://doi.org/10.1080/08956308.2021.1842664.
Lu, Y., 2017. Industry 4.0: a survey on technologies, applications and open research
issues. J. Ind. Inf. Integr. 6, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2017.04.005.
Lundvall, B.-.A., 1992. National Systems of Innovation: Towards a Theory of Innovation
and Interactive Learning. Pinter, London.
Luthra, S., Mangla, S.K., 2018. Evaluating challenges to Industry 4.0 initiatives for supply
chain sustainability in emerging economies. Process Saf. Environ. Prot. 117, 168179
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2018.04.018.
Maddikunta, P.K.R., Pham, Q.-.V., B, P., Deepa, N., Dev, K., Gadekallu, T.R., Liyanage, M,
2021. Industry 5.0: a survey on enabling technologies and potential applications.
J. Ind. Inf. Integr., 100257 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2021.100257.
Madsen, D.O., 2019. The Emergence and Rise of Industry 4.0 Viewed through the Lens of
Management Fashion Theory. Adm. Sci. 9 (3), 25. https://doi.org/10.3390/
admsci9030071.
Majstorovic, V.D., Mitrovic, R., 2019. Industry 4.0 Programs Worldwide. Springer
International Publishing, pp. 78–79. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-18180-2_7.
Marcucci, G., Antomarioni, S., Ciarapica, F.-.E., Bevilacqua, M., 2021. The impact of
Operations and IT-related Industry 4.0 key technologies on organizational resilience.
Prod. Plan. Control. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2021.1874702.
Mariani, M., Borghi, M., 2019. Industry 4.0: a bibliometric review of its managerial
intellectual structure and potential evolution in the service industries. Technol.
Forecast. Soc. Change 149, 119752. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
techfore.2019.119752.
Ministry of Transport, Information, Technology and Communications (2021). Digital
transformation of Bulgaria for the period 2020-2030. [Retrieved 28 jan. 2021] from:
< https://www.mtitc.government.bg/sites/default/files/digital_transformation_of_
bulgaria_for_the_period_2020-2030_f.pdf >.
Morrar, R., Arman, H., Mousa, S., 2017. The 4th industrial revolution (Industry 4.0): a
social innovation perspective. Technol. Innov. Manag. Rev. 7 (11), 12–20. https://
doi.org/10.22215/timreview/1117.
Müller, J.M., Buliga, O., Voigt, K.I., 2018. Fortune favors the prepared: how SMEs
approach business model innovations in Industry 4.0. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change
132, 2–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.12.019.
Nazarov, D., Klarin, A., 2020. Taxonomy of Industry 4.0 research: mapping scholarship
and industry insights. Syst. Res. Behav. Sci. 37 (4), 535–556. https://doi.org/
10.1002/sres.2700.
Oesterreich, T.D., Teuteberg, F., 2016. Understanding the implications of digitisation and
automation in the context of Industry 4.0: a triangulation approach and elements of
a research agenda for the construction industry. Comput. Ind. 83, 121–139. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2016.09.006.
Ol´
ah, J., Aburumman, N., Popp, J., Khan, M.A., Haddad, H., Kitukutha, N., 2020. Impact
of industry 4.0 on environmental. Sustainability. Sustainability 12 (11), 4674.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su12114674.
Park, Y.-.T., 2000. National systems of Advanced Manufacturing Technology (AMT):
hierarchical classification scheme and policy formulation process. Technovation 20
(3), 151–159. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0166-4972(99)00103-0.
Reischauer, G., 2018. Industry 4.0 as policy-driven discourse to institutionalize
innovation systems in manufacturing. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 132, 26–33.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.02.012.
Rejikumar, G., Raja, S.V., Arunprasad, P., Jinil, P.l., Sreeraj, K.M., 2019. Industry 4.0:
key findings and analysis from the literature arena. Benchmarking: Int. J. 26 (8),
2514–2542. https://doi.org/10.1108/bij-09-2018-0281.
Romero, D., Stahre, J., 2021. Towards the resilient operator 5.0: the future of work in
smart resilient manufacturing systems. Procedia CIRP 104, 1089‑1094. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.procir.2021.11.183.
Sanders, A., Elangeswaran, C., Wulfsberg, J., 2016. Industry 4.0 implies lean
manufacturing: research activities in industry 4.0 function as enablers for lean
manufacturing. J. Ind. Eng. Manag. 9 (3), 811. https://doi.org/10.3926/jiem.1940.
Slusarczyk, B., 2018. Industry 4.0 - Are you ready? Pol. J. Manag. Stud. 17 (1), 232–248.
https://doi.org/10.17512/pjms.2018.17.1.19.
Schwab, Klaus, 2016. The Fourth Industrial Revolution, 1 ed. World Economic Forum,
New York.
Smit, J., Kreutzer, S., Moeller, C., & Carlberg, M., 2016. Industry 4.0 a study for the
European Parliament. [Retrieved 13 Jan. 2021] from: < http://www.europarl.eur
opa.eu/studies >.
J.E. Teixeira and A.T.C.P. Tavares-Lehmann 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 180 (2022) 121664
12
World Economic Forum, 2016. The future of jobs report: the future of jobs employment,
skills and workforce strategy for the fourth industrial revolution. [Retrieved 09 dec.
2021] from: < http://reports.weforum.org/future-of-jobs-2016/ >.
Valdani Vicari e Associati – Economis & Policy (VVA); & WIC Consult, 2019. Monitoring
progress in national initiatives on digitising industry - Country Report. [Retrieved 05
jan. 2021]. from: < https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/workshopmonitoring-progress-national-initiatives-digitising-industry >.
World Economic Forum (2018). Future of Jobs Report 2018. [Retrieved 09 dec. 2021]
from:<http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Future_of_Jobs_2018.pdf >.
Xu, L.D., 2020. The contribution of systems science to Industry 4.0. Syst. Res. Behav. Sci.
37 (34), 618–631. https://doi.org/10.1002/sres.2705.
Vacek, ´ J., 2017. On the road: From industry 4.0 to society 4.0. Trendy V
Podnik´
aníVolume 7 (4), 43–49.
Zhang, C.M., Chen, Y., 2020. A review of relevant to the emerging industry trends:
industry 4.0, IoT, blockchain, and business analytics. Journal of Industrial
Integration and Management-Innovation and Entrepreneurship 51 (1), 165–180.
https://doi.org/10.1142/s2424862219500192.
J.E. Teixeira and A.T.C.P. Tavares-Lehmann 