Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
Available online 20 October 2021
0142-0615/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Resilience of electric utilities during the COVID-19 pandemic in the
framework of the CIGRE definition of Power System Resilience
Spyros Skarvelis-Kazakos a,*
, Malcolm Van Harte b
, Mathaios Panteli c
, Emanuele Ciapessoni d
,
Diego Cirio d
, Andrea Pitto d
, Rodrigo Moreno e,f
, Chandan Kumar g
, Chris Mak h
, Ian Dobson i
,
Christopher Challen a
, Milorad Papic j
, Craig Rieger k
a School of Engineering and Informatics, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9QT, United Kingdom b Eskom Distribution, Cape Town, South Africa c Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Cyprus, 2109 Aglantzia, Nicosia, Cyprus d Ricerca sul Sistema Energetico – RSE S.p.A., 20134 Milano, Italy e Universidad de Chile and Instituto Sistemas Complejos de Ingeniería, Chile f Imperial College London, United Kingdom g Power System Operation Corporation Ltd. (POSOCO), New Delhi, India h Maxlin Inc, Mississauga, Ontario L5H 1S5, Canada i Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA j Boise, ID 83706, USA k Idaho National Laboratory, Idaho Falls, ID 83415, USA
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
COVID-19
Power system resilience
Disaster recovery
Critical infrastructure
Organisational resilience
Graph theory
ABSTRACT
Resilience is a vital concept in engineering, business, and natural sciences, and is a measure of the ability of an
entity to withstand High Impact Low Probability (HILP) events. During the COVID-19 pandemic, which started in
late 2019/early 2020, power system utilities around the globe have responded in effective and efficient ways to
enhance the resilience of their organisations, both in terms of real-time operations and prudent management of
its infrastructure, in order to continue their mandate in providing reliable supply to meet customer demands.
This paper presents the CIGRE definition for power system resilience, established by the C4.47 Working Group in
2018, and demonstrates the application of resilience-oriented thinking within the electrical sector. The response
and recovery efforts are described, with respect to the key actionable measures integral to the power system
resilience definition, taken before, during and after the COVID-19 pandemic. A practical conceptual framework is
also presented for thinking about resilience in terms of three key components of resilience strategies: organisational, infrastructure and operational resilience. The paper also discusses the different strategies adopted in
response to COVID-19, based on the C4.47 members’ experiences during the pandemic. Finally, a case study is
presented, which proves the effectiveness of a set of response measures, using graph theory and the characteristics of the staff-asset interactions.
1. Introduction
In November 2019, the first cases of a new disease, later named
COVID-19 by the World Health Organisation (WHO), were reported by
health care workers from Wuhan, China. In December 2019, researchers
from Wuhan reported a cluster of pneumonia cases caused by a novel
coronavirus, which has since been named SARS-CoV-2, and declared a
pandemic. The infection rate of the virus at the time of writing this paper
is seen in Fig. 1 [1]. The COVID-19 pandemic stretches the capacity of
emergency response agencies, health care providers, utilities and operators, which sometimes results in an inability to contain the impact of
the virus and respond in a coordinated manner. It tested existing disaster
business continuity plans and the ability of utilities, in real time operation, to respond to and contain the impact of otherwise typical disturbances on the interconnected power system by ensuring system
stability, that voltage, frequency, and harmonic limits are respected, as
well as to continue to provide the needed maintenance and repair on
power plants and transmission facilities while seeking to minimise
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: s.skarvelis-kazakos@sussex.ac.uk (S. Skarvelis-Kazakos).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijepes
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijepes.2021.107703
Received 14 July 2021; Received in revised form 11 September 2021; Accepted 14 October 2021 
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
2
employee exposure to COVID-19 infection. The consequences of HighImpact Low-Probability (HILP) events like the COVID-19 pandemic on
the power system could spread rapidly across all sectors and communities due to the complexity and interdependencies between critical
infrastructures that are dependent on electricity supply. To improve
resilience-based planning in the power system, it is important to
recognise the nature of the COVID-19 pandemic’s potential impact on
the power system as well as prepare and execute systematic responses to
minimise disruption.
At the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, there were fears of
potential widespread blackouts, and network operators warned customers to “keep a torch handy” [2]. This was the first indication that
organisational resilience was key in a pandemic situation. Thankfully,
extensive blackouts did not materialise, although it is still unclear if this
was due to reduced reporting of outages or the effectiveness of network
operator response [3].
Since the start of the pandemic, there has been a significant effort in
documenting its impacts on electric utilities and consumers. Most
striking is the variation in energy demand, typically an overall reduction, which has shifted from the industry and commercial buildings towards residential premises [4]. This shift was expected, since many
businesses and manufacturing plants have been prevented from operating or were operating at a much-reduced capacity while many employees continued working from home. Straightforward comparisons of
energy demand in 2020 against previous years show a significant
reduction in overall load, which could have potentially challenging
implications on the operation of the power system, because it requires a
radical shift in generator dispatch patterns [4,5,6,7,8]. Thus, the energy
mix has also been impacted significantly, with the positive consequence
of less utilisation of fossil fuels (e.g. 40% down in the UK) and more
utilisation of renewables (e.g. more than 30% up in the UK) [5]. The
reduction in demand and the changing energy mix have pushed the
market prices to record low levels, sometimes reaching zero. In addition,
the prices of ancillary services have significantly escalated, due to the
increased need for the network operator to ensure the reliability of the
system [9]. More significantly, high renewables and low demand forced
National Grid (Great Britain’s system operator) to create an entirely new
ancillary service, called Optional Downward Flexibility Management
(ODFM).
From the interactions that the authors have had with the industry
over the past year, it has become evident that the response of the
network operators has been systematic in tracking the causal chains that
may lead to the inability to operate the grid effectively [10,11]. The US
Electricity Subsector Coordinating Council (ESCC) has developed a
resource guide for assessing and mitigating the COVID-19 by investorowned electric companies, electric cooperatives, and public power
utilities [12]. The Resource guide is primarily designed to protect the
health of workforce employed by utilities and to ensure energy operations and infrastructure are supported properly throughout the
pandemic emergency. Measures were taken to reduce risk, such as staff
containment, separation of operational teams and minimisation of
planned outages, albeit without hard evidence of intervention effectiveness [10].
Methodologies have been proposed in the literature on how power
systems should respond under HILP events, and how resilience should be
measured under HILP events like earthquakes and typhoons [13–16].
There is limited literature linking COVID-19 to energy infrastructure
resilience, e.g. through labour shortages [17], as most of the studies
focus on impacts on demand patterns, as described above. Even though
COVID-19 can be characterised as a HILP event, it is necessary to ensure
that resilience to other, potentially co-incident HILP events is not
compromised [18]. HILP response methodologies have been tested
throughout the pandemic and have largely been found effective [10,11].
Operational and policy-oriented recommendations have been proposed
in the literature, albeit not within an established resilience framework
[19]. Flexibility plays an important role in the resilience of the energy
infrastructure [20]. Still, an analysis of why operational and policy interventions have been or will be effective is arduous to do, and in many
cases, it may not even be possible due to the non-linearity and
abstractness of the data and organisational structures. People behave in
very complex ways.
Staff illness is difficult to predict, but in the literature it has been
characterised by network theory and models such as SusceptibleInfected-Susceptible (SIS) [21]. There are parallels between epidemics
and power networks [22] in how a failure or infection of one node can
spread through a whole system, and similar patterns have been identified in organisational structures [23].
1.1. Key contributions and outline of the paper
This paper aims to explore the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on
power systems, with a specific focus on resilience. Experts from across
the world, through the CIGRE C4.47 Working Group, worked together to
integrate infrastructure, operational and organizational resilience in one
holistic framework, which is then demonstrated using graph-based
analysis.
Electric utility experience throughout the pandemic has been
captured, and a set of observed measures that have been taken by
electric utilities is presented. In particular, the authors discuss how the
CIGRE C4.47 definition for resilience [24] can be applied to the response
of power system organisations to the pandemic, and the observed
measures are categorised in accordance with the definition.
Finally, a graph-based analysis is presented, which validates the
effectiveness of the two most significant interventions for mitigating the
impact of COVID-19, using an example organisational structure model of
an electric utility. This novel approach, which is common in epidemic
analysis but not in the electric utility context, enables utilities to view
their staff in a more systematic way. This opens up the possibility of
using quantitative techniques for safeguarding the resilience of electric
utility organisations.
Fig. 1. Total confirmed cases of COVID-19 according to the WHO, correct as of 12 July 2021 [1].
S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al. 
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
3
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses the
importance of staff and asset interactions in the context of epidemics,
Section 3 provides the challenges that electrical utilities across the world
faced during the COVID-19 pandemic, Section 4 presents a categorisation of the utility response to the pandemic, Sections 5 and 6 briefly
present the CIGRE C4.47 resilience definition and contextualise it with
regards to COVID-19, Section 7 presents the lessons learned by electric
utilities during the pandemic, while Section 8 discusses the implications
of COVID-19 on interdependent utility infrastructure. Finally, Section 9
presents a graph-based analysis of COVID-19 counter-measures, and
conclusions are drawn in Section 10.
2. The importance of organisational structure
COVID-19 and other transmissible diseases can adversely impact
power system resilience in three areas:
• Organisational resilience, since staff absences inhibit decisionmaking and preparedness, creating practical and logistical
challenges;
• Infrastructure resilience, due to lack of preventative or corrective
maintenance and repair on generation and transmission facilities
resulting in increasing unavailability of these facilities and ultimately inoperability of the power system; and
• Operational resilience, since staff absences cause deficiencies in
essential operation (e.g. network control centre, SCADA, EMS).
The primary source of fears associated with COVID-19 in the power
sector was the dependence of the infrastructure on company staff,
mainly operational and maintenance workers. Real time operation of a
power system is not fully automated and requires continuous human
intervention, due to its constant changing conditions, either during
normal operation or during faults and other emergencies. This is especially important after a contingency has occurred resulting in loss of
facilities and/or under emergency operations. Just as importantly,
routine maintenance and repair must be carried out to ensure availability of generation and transmission facilities (e.g. maintenance and
supply chain staff). During a pandemic, this human intervention may be
disrupted, or may even be the source of disruption, in the case where
inadequate maintenance and repair, due to maintenance staff absence,
could cause a fault or multiple faults to occur more frequently on the
system. Inadequate system operation staff could also result in disruption
if the system was not continuously operated in a secure operating state
in response to changing operating conditions, including faults. Fig. 2
conceptually illustrates this interconnectedness between staff and assets,
and how an infection and/or fault can cascade and propagate across
those physical and conceptual boundaries. The structure of an infrastructure organisation can be adapted to become more resilient to staff
disruption due to pandemics. Fig. 3 illustrates the difference between (a)
a less resilient and (b) a more resilient organisational structure. In the
first case, a fault develops in Asset 1, but the operator is infected and not
able to return the system to a secure operating state after fault clearance.
Hence, the insecure operating state cascades further to Assets 2 and 3. In
the second case, after the fault is cleared the system is re-secured by
Operator 3, who is not infected, because they were segregated. Hence,
by placing Operator 3 in a segregated location, they are able to maintain
secure asset operation after their colleagues are infected. When trying to
analyse the organisational structure of a network company, such as an
electric utility, it is important to categorise the key staff and asset attributes that might influence the company’s resilience (e.g. asset operators), as well as the interactions between entities. A high-level list of
attributes and interactions is presented in Table 1.
3. Utility experience and challenges during the COVID-19
pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has placed tremendous pressure on most
countries’ healthcare systems, economies, general social activities, and
electricity provision. It has created three major challenges for utilities,
namely:
1. Safeguarding employees,
2. Business continuity - Sustaining critical operations to ensure continuity of electricity provision, and
3. Power system operational challenges - Providing guidance or support
to all employees to ensure adherence to preventative measures is
maintained despite the occurrence of operational challenges.
These challenges are discussed below.
3.1. Safeguarding employees
Safeguarding of employees has been imperative for utilities in order
not to compromise the health and safety of both the employees and
public while executing their duties. Several preventative practices have
been utilised to ensure general hygienic measures, adopted as recommended by the WHO to limit the spread of the virus when essential
service employees are executing their duties. This also required new
ways of performing their duties for the critical operations during the
lockdown period.
3.2. Business continuity
Business continuity challenges result from complexities in organisational decision-making and human resources, for instance a shortage
of qualified staff due to illness or isolation measures. Utilities are
therefore unable to operate the system or respond to emergencies in the
same way they would during normal circumstances.
Fig. 2. Interconnectedness of staff at different levels and physical assets in a power system. The impact of a disease can propagate to physical assets if they are not
operated or maintained well.
S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al. 
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
4
During crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic, one important aspect
which was observed is the operation of a backup control centre at short
notice and makeshift arrangement of additional backup centres in case
of need. The need to have a backup control centre is mainly due to
singular risks from outside (e.g. terrorist threat or local security issues)
or risk of major equipment failure rendering the main control centre
inoperable. However, this pandemic has also provided the opportunity
to explore the setup of temporary backup control centres in the same
facility at various other levels and in any other utilities where communication with this control centre is available. In India, the State/
Regional/National control centre has set up a small backup centre in the
same building, but on different floor levels to avoid any crosscontamination, using it only if the main centre is contaminated [25].
In addition, other organisations with similar facilities have been identified and a temporary control centre is also established in the exact
location. This has provided an added level of local backup during the
pandemic.
It was observed that there is a need for identification of Critical Staff
for Core Functions and reserve manpower readiness to handle such
events. The role of critical staff is to perform the assigned tasks, while
reserve manpower can step in, in case of critical staff unavailability. This
also ensures the functionality of a local temporary backup control centre
operation if needed. In some cases, manpower in control centres was
divided among various groups due to movement restrictions. It constitutes critical staff (to attend on regular basis), reserve manpower (to
attend office on few designated days and the rest of the time Work from
Home – WfH) and non-critical staff (WfH). In addition, being a 24/7
operation, to reduce the movement of critical staff, the 3-shift schedule
has been changed to a 2-shift schedule, for reducing the chances of
contamination. However, not all network operators chose to adopt such
measures in their control centre. Some operators chose not to use the
backup control room in regular business, but to keep it “clean” in case
there was a need to move there, or decided not to go for 12 h shifts.
The option of working from home for the control centre staff has also
highlighted the risks of cyber security. Systems like SCADA and Market
Management generally have their own dedicated network, but accessing
such systems from home has increased vulnerability to cybersecurity
risks.
Electricity markets are also affected, in terms of the levels of demand
and prices for energy and ancillary services. Indeed, electricity prices in
Fig. 3. Comparative example of (a) a less resilient and (b) a more resilient organisational structure. Staff properties are shown in the boxes, which includes if they are
associated with assets or not.
Table 1
Attributes and interactions of the different entities in a network company.
Staff attributes Asset attributes Interactions
Level (director, head,
manager, operator,
etc.)
Functionality Organisational structure
List of staff contacts in
close proximity
Interconnections with
other assets
Proximity
Key worker or not Operational
parameters
Infectivity dynamics
Ability to work from
home or not
Physical interactions
(e.g. power flow)
Contingency and staff
continuity planning
Health level or
susceptibility
(probability of
infection)
Epidemic network
parameters (degree,
betweenness centrality, etc.)
Asset dependency (e.g.
fault clearing)
S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al. 
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
5
wholesale markets have significantly decreased due to a combined effect
of various factors, notably lower electricity demand and fossil fuel prices. Both lower energy prices and lower demand levels may have severe
impacts on an energy company. In some countries, for example, some
generators/suppliers have lost more than 60% of their contracted demand (e.g. Enel Green Power, Chile), which is combined with lower
power production and/or selling at significantly depressed prices.
Business continuity has also been challenged by the need to supply even
when some consumers cannot pay (disconnection bans) [26]. Governments such as Canada, Chile, Italy and Spain have already put in place
such schemes, especially for consumers under energy poverty programs.
Some governments have also implemented complementary schemes to
help companies, particularly electricity companies (suppliers and retailers) and others that provide critical services, that may need financial
support to survive during this period [27].
3.3. Power system operational challenges
Operational challenges result from changes in electricity demand
and consumption patterns. Data so far indicates that residential demand
has increased, while industrial demand has decreased in most cases
[4,28]. During times of low demand like the summer, demand even
dropped below baseload level, causing significant challenges for
network operators.
From a power system operational challenges perspective, the COVID19 pandemic contributed significantly to the reduction of load seen by
many countries which has created concern for utilities in managing low
load conditions. Many operating entities such as Transmission System
Operators (TSO), Independent System Operators (ISO) and Distribution
Network Operators (DNO) have worked together to ensure that voltage,
reactive power and system strength can be controlled while the operational demand is reduced, deploying plans based on operational forecasts that recognise the impacts of COVID-19. These plans include
disconnecting transmission lines with high capacitance, working with
large industrial customers to ensure they stay connected during critical
times, working with customers with on-site generation to increase their
imports from the grid and changing the operational mode of some
generators that could operate as synchronous condensers. In most cases
each action has been rehearsed and tuned. In the UK, storage capacity
such as hydroelectric pumped storage and curtailment of wind generation on short notice are considered as further measures. In South Africa,
curtailment of wind generation has been experienced only for a few days
within a week. In addition, demand response programs and underfrequency schemes have been reviewed since the reduction in the load
has been significant, e.g., 7500–9000 MW. This reduction has also
triggered an increase in the maintenance of generators. The significantly
reduced load during the night has resulted in several coal units being
placed as reserves and caused the disconnection of baseload hydro
during the minimum load condition.
Power System Operation Corporation (POSOCO), which operates the
Indian power system, has observed a reduction in energy supplied in the
range of 20–30%, when compared to the period before COVID-19. In
terms of load, it has observed 40–50 GW of load reduction and in percentage terms it represents around 25–30% of their peak demand. Due to
the lower demand, many plants were shut down, resulting in a reduction
in system inertia; thus decreasing the stiffness of the system from 10
GW/Hz to 7.5 GW/Hz (a drop of 25%) for frequency events. With the
demand reduction, the utilisation of the transmission system was also
reduced, resulting in higher voltage occurrences in the system. Thus, the
number of EHV lines kept out on voltage regulation has increased by
three times at the level of 400 kV and above. In addition, as the lockdown has also impacted the movement of manpower for transmission
line monitoring, it was observed that the number of faults related to
vegetation and clearance increased significantly [25]. During this
pandemic, the Indian power system also faced the extremely severe
cyclone Amphan on 19–20 May 2020. Due to manpower shortage, the
restoration and recovery post cyclone was also impacted. However,
quick deployment and effective strategy has reduced overall restoration
hours significantly.
The COVID-19 pandemic also caused a drastic reduction in electricity demand in the Italian system, which significantly increased the
contribution from renewables to cover the load (on a Sunday, 5 April
2020, an average hourly production rate of 70% from renewables in
total, and specifically 59% from solar and wind power generation was
achieved). At the same time, lower gas prices reduced coal generation to
a minimum, simulating a situation similar to a “phase out”. This is a
situation with a similar generation mix to the 2030 electricity system
designed by the National Integrated Energy and Climate Plan (PNIEC).
Hence, important lessons can be learnt during this period in light of the
decarbonisation process. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the operator
has operated the system in a stable and secure way without curtailing
renewable production significantly, efficiently managing the flexibility
from gas, hydro, pumped hydro, and cross-border interconnectors. This,
however, has been achieved by establishing and managing reserve
margins, i.e. relying on ancillary services markets, causing extra costs
associated with security and flexibility.
From a resilience perspective, the exploitation of flexible systems
and the utilisation of suitable reserve margins (supplied especially by
gas and hydro) represent an important preparation measure deployed by
the Italian Transmission System Operator (TSO), Terna, to maintain
system resilience against the drastic demand decrease due to the
pandemic.
Finally, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and the
North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) have provided
guidance to the industry, to ensure grid reliability amid potential
COVID-19 impacts [29]. FERC and NERC have also specified the
necessary steps to ensure that operators of the bulk electric system
balance the concerns for the health and welfare of their workforce while
staying focused on the mission of supplying power to consumers across
North America.
4. General utility response to the COVID-19 pandemic
The utility response efforts to pandemics such as COVID-19 can be
generally categorised into four response and recovery practices adopted
by utilities namely: (i) emergency response structure, (ii) processes and
procedures to enable operational response, (iii) business continuity and
disaster plans, and (iv) stress testing. Table 2 summarises this
categorisation.
An emergency response structure requires the adoption of a crisis
Table 2
Categorising electric utility response to COVID-19 pandemic.
Emergency
Response
Structure
Processes and
Procedures
Business
Continuity and
Disaster Plans
Stress Testing
• Invoking crisis
management
teams
• Division and
operational
utility
emergency
response
structures
• Integration of
country disaster
structures and
government
departments
• Work from
home (WfH)
arrangement
• Issued
COVID-19
guidelines
• Conducted
risk
assessment
• Test Disaster
Recovery
(DR)
capabilities
• Situational
awareness is
key
• Business and
DR plans
deployed (split
and WfH)
• Reduced
operation and
maintenance
• Personal
Protective
Equipment
(PPE)
requirement is
assigned to
employees at
high risk
• Weekly
inspection of
controls
effectiveness
• Continuous
review of
measures and
controls as the
understanding
evolves
S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al. 
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
6
management team with a mandate to coordinate utility response, and
which will be collecting information to ensure situational awareness is
maintained to inform decision making at a strategic, tactical, and
operational level. This includes:
• Communicating with employees relevant information to keep them
safe and guide operational matters.
• Facilitating awareness and guidelines to inform employees of practices to be adopted.
• Developing plans to respond to threats and risks exposure during this
constraint and health concerns when executing their duties.
• Enable informed decision making to support the response and sustainability of critical operations. This would also require integration
between utility, state, provincial and country disaster response
emergency structures due to region-specific impacts.
Continuous review and development of new processes and procedures to respond to COVID-19 threat and new operating norms were
essential to support the continuity of electricity provision while ensuring
the safety of employees. This required coordination of supporting information from a central basis to provide guidelines, processes, and
procedures based on risk-informed decisions. The level of the utility
COVID-19 responses was a function of the mature digitalisation of
business and mission-critical systems that enabled a flexible work
arrangement. It has been observed that the level of flexible working
arrangement tested the capability and scalability of ICT infrastructure
during lockdown.
Business continuity of critical operations is crucial for the sustainability of utilities during and after the COVID-19 pandemic. Continuity
of organisational and operational functions required utilities to review
the adequacy of staffing and segregation of areas to sustain critical operations. In maintaining network integrity and continuity of supply,
utilities have to ensure sufficient spares and that materials are available
in order to prevent deterioration to the point where the normal operational N-1/N-2 criteria need to be relaxed. The disaster response efforts
required continuous communication and coordination with country
disaster response structures or agencies. This is to ensure that COVID-19
regulations or legislation do not impede the operations of utility employees to ensure the provision of electricity for essential services and
critical economic operations. It was essential to maintain situational
awareness of the effectiveness of the controls or practices, and tracking
the infection rate within the operating areas and employees, which then
informed the operational response (e.g. decision on splitting the control
centre). Reducing the normal business activities to restrict movement
and interactions required utilities to reduce operation and maintenance
to only safety and emergency operation activities that sustain the provision of electricity. This required the use of Personal Protective
Equipment (PPE) by medium or high-risk employees who expose
themselves to the public and are unable to maintain social distancing
practices.
Stress testing the effectiveness of the COVID-19 controls and practices is imperative to assure that outcomes deliver the desired results to
sustain critical operations and safeguard employees. This requires regular inspections of sites and observing the activities of employees to
ensure the safe execution of their duties. The lesson learned is to require
the continuous review of COVID-19 processes and procedures, which
enriches the decision-making processes.
5. Definition of power system resilience
Resilience definitions address a multi-faceted concept that depends
on the context of the discipline/field [30,31,32]. Resilience is more than
simply “the ability to bounce back” after a failure – an organisation
seeking to be highly resilient needs to also continuously focus on aspects
related to the potential for failure at all levels of the organisation [33].
Electrical infrastructure is one of the critical infrastructures, which
influences other essential services, such as telecommunications, water
supply, etc. [34]. A major electricity-related incident can, therefore,
have a significant impact on the country [35,36].
Resilience is a property of a system that complements the traditional
risk-analysis paradigm of identifying vulnerabilities of specific systems
and the subsequent risk management of those vulnerabilities. Resilience,
instead, looks at the “ability to prepare and plan for, absorb, recover
from, and more successfully adapt to adverse events” especially with
respect to the fact that (1) interconnections to social, technical, and
economic networks of large systems that make risk management of individual components cost and time prohibitive, and (2) the vulnerabilities of these systems are uncertain [37]. In the face of COVID-19, the
importance of building resilience in systems is highlighted strongly by
the key role the electricity sector plays in healthcare and communications sectors, and the unprecedented vulnerabilities to staffing and operations that COVID-19 has placed on utility systems.
The CIGRE C4.47 Working Group associates the concept of resilience
to the system’s ability to limit the extent, severity and duration of system
degradation following an event. As the criterion of application for this
property mainly relates to extreme events, the CIGRE C4.47 WG defines
Power System Resilience as [24]:
The ability to limit the extent, severity and duration of system
degradation following an extreme event.
Power system resilience is achieved through a set of key actionable
measures to be taken before, during and after extreme events, such as:
• anticipation,
• preparation,
• absorption,
• sustainment of critical system operations,
• rapid recovery,
• adaptation, and
• application of lessons learnt.
6. Applying the resilience definition on the COVID-19 pandemic
The need for power system resilience is highlighted by the COVID-19
pandemic. In particular, the lockdown period caused significant load
reduction. This reduction, combined with significant renewable energy
generation, causes the power system to be operated under large uncertainties. The pandemic, just like any other threat, causes power system operators to deploy all the actionable measures needed to boost
their system’s resilience. In particular, weather monitoring services
allow to anticipate critical situations with large coverage of demand
from renewables (e.g. Sundays during lockdown). Preparation measures
include (a) improving weather forecasts (to reduce the exchanges on
ancillary service market), (b) buying a suitable amount of reserve in the
ancillary services market to cope with critical situations and (c)
increasing the exploitation of flexible systems. Moreover, advanced
controls of flexible systems, such as HVDC links and storage, may
contribute to reducing frequency fluctuation during situations of low
load and high RES share, which represents an example of an absorption
measure.
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, a fundamental measure
consists of assuring the supply of critical loads, with a special reference
to hospitals that are characterised by extra loads due to the large number
of patients accessing the health care services. The experience of the
COVID-19 pandemic also pushes a change in the internal procedures of
system operators, favouring flexible working and improving safety
during on-field works.
The underlying concept of the resilience definition described before
relies upon the resilience trapezoid. An adapted version is presented in
Fig. 4. The resilience trapezoid is not necessarily referring to particular
timescales, but in this case it is adapted to the timescales and relevant
tasks of a pandemic.
The CIGRE definition of power system resilience is achieved through
S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al. 
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
7
a set of key actionable measures, which can only be achieved by well
planned, executed human interventions to preserve and enhance power
system resilience at all phases of extreme events such as the COVID-19
pandemic. To that end, the CIGRE WG C4.47 proposes to further
break down the definition in terms applicable to COVID-19. This includes three important resilience aspects, which provide a holistic
approach to complement the definition, namely: (i) Organisational, (ii)
Infrastructure and (iii) Operational. It provides a practical conceptual
framework for thinking about resilience and identifies three key components of resilience strategies as illustrated in Fig. 5 [38]. Balchanos
et al. [39] demonstrated an assessment technique based on these three
essential capabilities of a system’s resilient response namely: (i)
absorptive capacity, (ii) adaptive capacity, and (iii) restorative capacity.
Therefore, COVID-19 response and recovery efforts would be described
in terms of resilience capacities regarding strategies against the conceptual framework.
6.1. Organisational resilience
Organisational resilience is defined as strategies and mechanisms
that are an outcome of the effective multi-disciplinary management
principles and strategic planning to manage disruptive incidents to its
business operations. It is a product of a wide range of well-established
processes such as risk-informed decision making, business continuity
of critical operations, emergency response to sustain and ensure
appropriate controls are adopted, and crisis management teams to coordinate the response and recovery with well-informed communication
[40].
In terms of COVID-19 response efforts, it requires organisations to
swiftly enact measures to support, protect and empower employees with
reliable and accurate information to sustain response and recovery and
limit exposure or spread. It is imperative to secure the health and safety
of utility employees when executing duties entrusted to them as essential services during operations, maintenance and construction activities
to sustain electricity provision. There is an increased need to understand
the factors that will affect the wider energy business (in addition to
utilities) in both the short and long term, so that energy businesses with
the foresight and agility can make informed decisions and safeguard
their assets, as well as to capitalise on those opportunities under a green
economic recovery.
6.2. Infrastructure resilience
Infrastructure resilience refers to the physical robustness and
redundancy of network assets to external shocks, and the capability to
maintain and repair them. According to the US National Infrastructure
Advisory Council [41], infrastructure resilience is the ability of the
system to reduce the magnitude and/or duration of disruptive events.
In terms of COVID-19 response efforts, it requires organisations to
review the existing ICT infrastructure to support working from home.
This is a function of the maturity of the digitalisation of the Information
Technology (IT) and Operational Technology (OT) system’s ability to
absorb working from home for some business and mission-critical operations. Splitting mission-critical operations provides the redundancy
strategies that enable flexibility to contain an infection (e.g. control, call
or resource centres). The robustness and redundancy investment in any
power system is usually conducted in terms of a normal demand and
supply condition. The lightly loaded conditions associated with COVID19 require a review of the existing reactive management support to
sustain the security and reliability of a power system (such as deployment of static VAR compensators, capacitors, or reactors, and switching
Fig. 4. Resilience trapezoid adapted to the CIGRE resilience definition and the tasks relevant to a pandemic.
Fig. 5. Resilience conceptual framework to inform the utility efforts during the
COVID-19 pandemic [38].
S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al. 
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
8
high voltage lines out of service).
6.3. Operational resilience
Operational resilience refers to the secure operational strength of a
power system to provide uninterrupted supply to customers, as well as
rapid and flexible restoration. The adaptive capacity of the system requires it to be adjusted to an undesirable situation by undergoing some
changes to safely operate and maintain the interconnected power
system.
In terms of COVID-19 response efforts, it requires operations and
maintenance teams to review the hazard in terms of severity and
exposure of operations and maintenance activities. It requires an operational risk assessment to understand the vulnerabilities to safely
operate a power system and executing duties for electricity provision.
Furthermore, adopting adequate preventative measures to protect employees exposed to high-risk activities is imperative. This requires flexible resourcing and the creativity of field teams to respond instantly
from home. Recovery to normal operations must be staged, considering
the projections to normality (reduction in infection rate or no positive
cases).
A special report by the North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) reviewed reliability considerations and operational preparedness during the COVID-19 pandemic [42]. The following section
unpacks the actions taken by electric utilities against the key measurable
actions within the time slot before, during and after COVID-19. A set of
approaches are presented below, which utilities may consider in striving
towards becoming more resilient during and after the COVID-19
pandemic.
7. Lessons learned by COVID-19 response and recovery
strategies adopted by utilities
COVID-19 has highlighted vulnerabilities and operational requirements to the electricity sector. Tables 3–6 summarise key lessons
learned from the different strategies adopted to respond to the COVID19 pandemic. These lessons learned are mapped against two axes: the
timeline of adverse events (anticipation, preparation, absorption,
adaptation, rapid recovery, and sustainment) and the relevant resilience
aspects (Organisational, Infrastructural, Operational). Tables 3–6
Table 3
Summary table of practices adopted by utilities.
Organisational
resilience
Infrastructure
resilience
Operational
resilience
Anticipation Design response
plans
Invest in ICT
infrastructure
Establish response
structures
Preparation Develop more
detailed plans
Investigate system
impacts
Prepare decisionmaking and
operational
structures
Absorption Activate response
plans
Maintain value
chain and resources
Maintain critical
staff activities and
security of assets
Adaptation Adjust management
arrangements and
sustain maintenance
capacity
Split missioncritical operations,
maintain security
Cancel planned
outages, focus on
operation and
maintenance,
undertake risk
assessments
Rapid
Recovery
Disinfect, educate,
return to work
Restore normal
operation, mitigate
temporary network
impacts
Deactivate
emergency response
structures
Sustainment Adopt new working
arrangements,
review and learn
Disconnect
temporary
connections,
review investment
decisions
Staged return to
normal operations,
restart planned
maintenance
Table 4
Organisational resilience practices adopted by utilities.
Organisational resilience practices adopted by utilities
Anticipation • Develop Business and Disaster management plans to sustain
mission-critical operations during the pandemic.
• Develop COVID-19-specific crisis communication protocols.
• Assign priorities and interactions between response partners.
• Develop trigger levels to invoke COVID-19 emergency structures.
Preparation • Promote a resilience culture at all levels of the organisation,
specific to the COVID-19 pandemic.
• Identification of lockdown sites for mission-critical operations
and logistic support required.
• Develop a phased COVID-19 response and recovery plan.
• Develop an integrated COVID-19 emergency response structure.
• Develop plan to protect the control room and critical operations if
the pandemic situation worsens.
Absorption • Procure location for disaster response sites.
• Promote preventative measures to safeguard staff (e.g. wiping of
all equipment pre- and post-use; deep cleaning of kitchens,
bathrooms and common areas; maintaining social distancing;
mask wearing).
• Establish and communicate staff rules (self-isolation, WfH,
restrict access, limit travel, no face to face meetings).
• Distribute regular credible information on COVID-19 status and
guidance.
Adaptation • Backup stock of supply food to sustain isolation of critical staff at
lockdown sites.
• Establish new management arrangements to maintain
productivity, while working patterns are disrupted.
• Ensure procurement and supply chain processes for immediate
procurement of health and hygiene-related products, including
related equipment.
• Develop emotional and psychological support required for staff
during and after COVID-19.
• Work with authorities to issue certificates for staff clear of the
virus after infection period.
• Obtain legal opinion on the innovative measures adopted to track
interaction of staff, for contact tracing.
• Verify spare equipment inventory to sustain repair, maintenance
and critical capital work.
Rapid
Recovery
• Disinfect work areas, especially during shift changes.
• Roll out programme to educate staff about the do’s and don’ts, e.
g. avoiding clustering in one area, maintaining of social
distancing.
• Provide individualised equipment and implement procedures to
keep that equipment sanitised.
• Enforce screening process of reporting and returning to work -
staff rotation on alternative days.
• Plan for introduction of back-office staff returning from home
(cleaning of work areas).
• Review operations against risk-adjusted approach to reduce
mortality and health demand.
• Establish return to work arrangements, and review and monitor
its effectiveness.
• Develop a disposal plan for PPE, sterilisation and review the
continuation onsite health monitoring and testing after COVID19.
Sustainment • Phase in staged removal of travel restrictions while continuing to
prevent non-essential business travel.
• Implement return to work programme to phase-in normal
operations.
• Adopt new working arrangements and rearrangement of seating
space where reasonably practicable.
• Limit (eradicate) where possible sharing of desks.
• Collaborate with national and international utilities to enhance
pandemic disaster planning required based on lessons learnt.
• Expand disaster planning to accommodate a fast-evolving
situation.
• Review the enhancements in emergency response structures.
• Review the amendments required to the Human Resources and
safety operational practices beyond COVID-19.
• Develop relief packages for sectors impacted significantly by
reduced economic activities during the pandemic.
S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al. 
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
9
describe practices that have improved energy sector resilience to
COVID-19, specific to the timeline of the pandemic’s impact and the
relevant resilience domain. While all of these strategies were developed
as a response to COVID-19, by mapping these strategies to the adverse
event timeline and their resilience domains, these could be extensible to
other unforeseeable adverse events. Each cell could also be used to
create metrics to evaluate resilience of the electricity system in the
future. Such recommendations are more focused and systematic than the
ones found in the literature [19], as they will be based on CIGRE’s
clearly defined resilience framework.
It is important to note that different system or network operators
followed different or contrasting strategies, according to their individual
needs and circumstances. For instance, some network operators chose to
maintain the backup control centre “clean”, so that it can be used only if
the need arises. Hence, the below tables should not necessarily be used
as a best practice guide, but as a starting point for developing possible
response strategies. It is also important to note that many of these
actionable measures are not specific to the response to COVID-19, or
Table 5
Infrastructure resilience practices adopted by utilities.
Infrastructure resilience practices adopted by utilities
Anticipation • Design ICT infrastructure to enable remote working
arrangements.
• Invest in infrastructure to enable integration with country
emergency response structures and sectors.
Preparation • Conduct simulations to assess the adequacy and security during
light load conditions and possible generation unit shutdown
scenarios.
• Procure appropriate spares and equipment to support the
response capabilities.
• Investigate how changes in electricity demand are causing the
deployment of generating resources and changes in the price of
energy in the wholesale market.
Absorption • Apply remote working arrangements to management of meetings
to sustain operations from home.
• Partner with key response stakeholders and vendors to maintain
value chain.
• Use contractors to supplement the resources when necessary for
construction and maintenance activities.
Adaptation • Splitting mission-critical operations or activities to limit infection
rate.
• Obtain temporary relief from certain regulatory obligations.
• Develop infrastructure requirements for permanent preventative
measures to improve continuous health monitoring, designing for
social distancing, increased restricted access, quicker alternative
work arrangements and adequacy of backup centres.
• Review cybersecurity attack vectors and defence barriers at
backup sites to ensure protection of critical operational systems
that may be at higher risk by the pandemic.
Rapid
Recovery
• Increase ICT infrastructure to minimise face-to-face meetings and
enhance remote operations capability.
• Review operating measures to support reactive management
during very lightly loaded conditions resulting in higher than
normal voltage across the interconnected power system.
• Reinstate cancelled capital work.
• Develop plans for bringing back assets where non-critical
switching impacted the outage planning.
• Review tools to mitigate low inertia, oscillatory, light load issues
and reverse power flow, hosting capacity.
Sustainment • Assess investment decisions to determine the adequacy of the
backup or lockdown sites.
• Utilise the Disaster Recovery Site as a Distribution Management
System (DMS) hot standby site, i.e. continuously kept in sync with
the main Operations Centre, to prevent loss of data.
• Review contractual arrangements and infrastructure
requirements for the sequestration plans or enhancement of
pandemic response planning.
• Disconnect temporary supply connections for essential or critical
loads.
• Assess ICT considering the increased remote working and
increased load on data centre infrastructure.
• Implement cyber-secure solutions to enable remote grid
operations.
Table 6
Operational resilience practices adopted by utilities.
Operational resilience practices adopted by utilities
Anticipation • Establish emergency COVID-19 pandemic response structures to
coordinate and communicate.
• Activate emergency and contingency plans.
• Assist ICT infrastructure to maintain mission-critical operations
remotely.
• Conduct risk assessment on operations to develop appropriate
response and recovery efforts.
Preparation • Initiate commercial procedure to validate the transformer design
criteria.
• Conduct operational risk assessment on operations, maintenance
and constructive activities during the threat of COVID-19.
• Compile business plan on operational and investment decision
making required to equip the mission of the utility.
• Activate the utility emergency response structures and crisis
management team.
• Identify critical staff and associated tools needed to enable
working from home as a first option.
• Identify and separate critical employees from the general
population.
• Identify critical units under possible reduction of operational
activities.
• Prepare backup control centre and operational centres.
Absorption • Maintain vigilance of employees’ ability to adjust to the
uncertainty and crisis situation (ensure psychosocial support).
• Maintain power system security and reliability threshold during
lightly loaded conditions with reduction of baseload.
• Create situational awareness for the identification of high-risk
staff.
• Ensure availability of PPE for high-risk staff.
• Maintain operational activities for outage and fault management
criteria.
• Make available medical testing of infection status and disease
treatment for staff.
• Review staff availability and skills levels to limit impact on
operations (e.g. >60 years and underlying health conditions).
• Identify and deploy staff who have previously operated in the
control or dispatching centres, as necessary.
Adaptation • Develop procedures on good practices of use of PPE, adding
COVID-19 preventative measures in job planning or work
instruction.
• Revise COVID-19 response and recovery plans to guide operation
and maintenance activities.
• Conduct regular educational awareness on COVID-19 on exposure threat and preventative measures.
• Provide accessibility to credible information.
• Conduct regular testing of preventative measures and new
operating regime.
• Review the operation and maintenance response plans as the
threat to human life is better understood.
• Cancel all planned outages that do not affect safety and critical
operations.
• Conduct risk assessments on all work activities and issue
necessary PPE for high risk jobs.
• Re-authorise “storm role” staff.
• Suspend the disconnection of customers due to lack of payment.
Rapid
Recovery
• Create COVID-19 Dashboard: tracking of key activities per operational region.
• Deactivate emergency response structures.
• Demobilise lockdown sites.
• Restrict access to only designated people.
• Conduct observations of work sites to ensure social distancing is
maintained.
• Develop return to work arrangement for COVID-19 segregation
efforts (sequestered).
• Develop plans to reinstate normal maintenance activities,
electrification connections and construction efforts.
• Demobilise special contractor emergency teams or cross border
arrangements.
• Develop plans to reintegrate vulnerable or infected staff to critical
operations.
• Deactivate the use of backup centre after lockdown restrictions
and determine infection rate trigger.
• Monitor speed and shape of the recovery and the impact of
deferred outages and decision on recovery.
(continued on next page)
S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al. 
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
10
other pandemics. Some of these actions are operating procedures and
processes commonly used by utilities in response to any emergency
scenario. Still, they are highlighted as relevant considerations during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
8. Infrastructure interdependencies in the context of COVID-19
In recent years, unprecedented and singular extreme events (such as
the 9/11 terrorist attack and COVID-19 pandemic) have revealed the
interdependencies of critical infrastructures. These extreme events had
severe negative consequences across multiple sectors. These consequences can be attributed to complex interrelationships and interdependencies across sectors, due to the interconnected nature of
critical infrastructures and essential services [43].
Rinaldi et al. [44] proposed some of the earliest descriptive interdependency types, namely, (i) physical, (ii) cyber, (iii) geographic, and
(iv) logical. The fundamental definition of infrastructure interdependency and its modelling has led to a further distinction among first-,
second-, and third-order dependencies. According to [44], there are
several complex interdependencies between critical infrastructure systems. Power networks, water networks and social networks share similar
characteristics [22]. These networks are interdependent and they
interact at particular nodes. The risk becomes more pronounced when
considering second, third and n-th order effects [44].
The power system depends on critical personnel to operate and
maintain the grid, and during pandemics the power system becomes
critically dependent on keeping those people healthy, non-infectious,
and available to work [45]. There is a clear dependence on the health
industry to be able to test for the virus and infectious status, treat the
virus, and certify recovery. If not isolated at the control centre, the
critical personnel are vulnerable to infection from family members and
other social interactions. They also need to travel to work safely. Access
to medical testing can be a critical factor for good decisions about the
health and availability of groups of critical workers who must work
together in the same space.
In terms of staff sickness that could be caused by COVID-19, the
interdependency is mainly logical and practical. As shown in an illustrative example in Fig. 6, staff issues have the potential to cascade to
almost every infrastructure system where human intervention is
required, such as operation and maintenance.
Combined resilience models of interdependent infrastructure systems have been considered in the literature, starting with a simplistic
definition that “loss of resilience, R, can be measured as the expected
loss in quality (probability of failure) over the time to recovery, t1 - t0”
[46]. More elaborate models have been considered, but are beyond the
scope of this paper, such as Agent-Based Modelling (ABM), network
graph theory and/or Monte Carlo simulations. ABM has been used in
similar studies before, to simulate the interconnectedness of assets
[47,48].
Broader energy systems and socio-economic implications should also
be considered in the context of pandemics-driven resilience propositions. For example, the potentially higher risk of blackouts due to staff
shortages could lead to substantial economic damage for a number of
industries in an already weakened economic context. This may be
particularly severe for energy-intensive industries such as aluminium
smelters, for instance, which could lead to prolonged or even permanent
termination of their activities. Other difficult situations may arise. Many
small retailers and Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) (e.g., aggregators) may have to deal with insolvent customers who are unable to pay
their bills due to the pandemic economic crisis. Small suppliers and
generation companies may be unable to efficiently participate in the
market and recover investment due to reduced demand. The above issues could lead these companies to bankruptcy, with further knock-on
effects on (short- to medium-term) system resilience. All these very
complex aspects incorporate high nonlinearities and nonlinear feedback
loops between technical power system issues and more general socioeconomic matters. Hence, they should be considered carefully by regulators and policymakers. Thus, the COVID-19 pandemic may be seen as
an opportunity to further enhance power system resilience for long term
adaptation besides purely technical or infrastructure considerations.
Table 6 (continued )
Operational resilience practices adopted by utilities
Sustainment • Ensure staged return to normal operations.
• Provide guidance on the steps to be taken to sustain operations
and enhance “storm” guidelines.
• Adopt processes and procedures to contain future pandemics.
• Partner with key stakeholders internally and external
stakeholders to strengthen institutional arrangement before,
during and after an extreme incident.
• Review enhancement to “storm role”, staffing, processes and
mutual assistance between response partners.
• Review shift patterns/cycle management to reduce turnovers and
length of duty.
• Review standard operating procedures considering the key
insights of the system operations and security of supply.
• Determine the minimum demand and energy reduction during
the COVID-19 period and economic recovery time.
• Restore generation units that have been placed in reserve or
major maintenance activities attempted during this period.
• Review the recovery time of the reinstatement of ancillary
services and demand response partnerships.
Fig. 6. Examples of infrastructure interdependencies, with a focus on staff.
S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al. 
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
11
This is especially the case since the electricity infrastructure is playing
an increasingly important role as the backbone of modern societies.
9. Case study of a notional network operator organisation
9.1. Notional network operator
In order to study the impact of the above measures on the organisational, infrastructural and operational resilience of network operators, an example case study was put together. The case study is based on
a basic conceptual understanding of the different staff teams within a
network operator, and also loosely based on concepts from [49,50]. The
company’s organisational structure is considered a graph, and different
teams are designated as sub-graphs. The teams that were considered are
as follows:
1. Control centre (sub-graph C) – staff who work in the control centre and
operate the Distribution Management System (DMS).
2. Technology office (sub-graph T) – staff (e.g. engineers) who work in
office-based tasks (e.g. planning), as well as managers and team
leaders in the “field-based” teams.
3. Maintenance teams (sub-graph M) – staff who maintain the safe and
proper operation of the assets.
4. Operations for substation A (sub-graph OA) – staff who operate
notional substation “A”.
5. Operations for substation B (sub-graph OB) – staff who operate notional
substation “B”.
6. Field manager (node G6) – staff coordinating the “field” teams, i.e.
operators and maintenance staff.
7. CEO (node G7) – High-level leadership of the organisation.
The notional staff organisational structure before any intervention
related to COVID-19 is shown in Fig. 8. The physical interactions are
shown with black arrows, and these include interactions between staff
and assets. Staff interactions are important since they represent a route
for infection, whereas asset interactions are also important because they
can cause a staff infection to have an impact on the operation of an asset.
For instance, if a distribution line is not maintained properly because of
maintenance staff illness, this could create a fault or outage.
9.2. The need for probabilistic analysis, and interventions considered in
the case study
One effective way of limiting contagion is dividing the organisation
into isolated groups. Some of these decisions are obvious, such as
physically isolating the managers, since they normally interact in person
with many parts of the organisation, but can function quite well
remotely. Many office staff can also work remotely. More consideration
can be given to how much to divide the control room and maintenance
crews into smaller groups, since the smaller groups are less effective,
there may be difficulties in handing off tasks between groups, and the
isolation may be costly in both resources and socially, as when workers
do not live at home with their families. Thus, there is a trade-off between
the size of the groups and organizational effectiveness and costs.
The effect of the group size depends on probability [51] and can be
roughly analysed as follows. Suppose the group has n people, and each
person in the group has probability p of becoming infected in a specified
time period. Specifying the time period allows the limited extrapolation
of the present, often uncertain conditions, and also allows rough estimates of the rate of infection to be multiplied by the time period to
obtain an estimate of p. Assuming that the number of people infected
follows the binomial distribution, the average number of people infected
over the time period is n × p. More to the point, the probability P of
someone in the group becoming infected is P = 1 − (1 − p)
n
, which increases with both n and p. In particular, for small p, we can approximate
P = 1 − enp, which is further approximated by P = n × p. To minimise P,
and hence the probability of the entire group becoming infected, one can
minimise either n or p and get a roughly proportional benefit. Thus,
halving the infection probability p is comparably effective to halving the
group size n. Moreover, given an estimate of the infection rate and hence
p, P can be roughly estimated as n × p for the purpose of deciding the
group size n. There are many options to reduce p, including masks,
cleaning, hand washing, and most importantly, as has been known for
millennia with quarantine, physical isolation. A more detailed probabilistic analysis is undertaken in the following section.
The criticality of each group; that is, their impact on operations,
should also be considered. For example, system operators are more
critical than maintenance workers or cleaning staff in the short term. It is
also worth considering an investment in frequent testing to detect and
try to stop the spread of contagion from any infected group member to
the rest of the group. And access to medical care would cure an infected
group more quickly and be able to verify their cure. All staff should be
vaccinated when vaccines are available. Many of these tactics rely on
access to health care advice, testing, services and supplies, as well as
working through the arrangements with all the staff and all these are
best arranged in anticipation of the next pandemic.
In this study, two interventions were considered, (a) a split control
centre and (b) remote working for some staff members. Fig. 9 shows the
same network after these two interventions. In terms of the investigated
parameters, these were based on graph theory [52], looking at the
structure of the network through the closeness centrality, as well as a
probabilistic model of epidemic spread [21]. The implementation of
these concepts was based on MATLAB. A flowchart of the assessment
methodology is presented in Fig. 7.
9.3. Graph structure analysis – closeness centrality
Graph theory has been used extensively to analyse the resilience and
robustness of networks [53]. In this case, the network is a human
epidemic network, rather than an electrical network, but it can still be
analysed with the same graph theory methodologies. A number of indicators have been considered, such as closeness centrality, degree
centrality and betweenness centrality [54]. Closeness centrality was
chosen as the most relevant [52], as it represents the distance from a
specific node i to all other nodes in a graph. If not all nodes are reachable, then the centrality of node i is:
Fig. 7. Flowchart of the COVID-19 resilience assessment methodology.
S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al. 
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
12
c(i) =
( Ai
N − 1
)2 1
Ci
(1)
Where
Ai is the number of reachable nodes from node i (not counting i),
N is the number of nodes in the graph, and
Ci is the sum of distances from node i to all reachable nodes.
This effectively represents the distance that the virus must traverse
Fig. 8. Notional example of the organisational structure of a distribution network operator before any interventions. Nodes are numbered.
Fig. 9. Notional example of the organisational structure of a power network operator after two interventions. Nodes are numbered.
S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al. 
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
13
across the graph, in order to get from one staff member to any other staff
member. With regards to the assets, their adjacency was only considered
against each other, but with regards to staff nodes, the adjacency was
directed. Asset adjacency implies that the disturbance (i.e. COVID-19)
can transfer from one asset to the other. In practice, this is not
possible, but in terms of the closeness centrality, this may represent the
transfer of the disturbance from the human domain to the electrical
domain, by means of the dependencies of the asset to human intervention (e.g. securing assets after a fault). Figs. 10 and 11 show the closeness
centrality of the two networks plotted through MATLAB, whereas
Table 7 shows the values for each node category.
Each of the two interventions was considered separately, which is
shown in Table 7, whereas the values in Figs. 10 and 11 are for both
interventions. It can be seen that splitting the control centre provides
most of the improvement in the closeness centrality of this particular
staff group, but has no bearing on the rest, whereas most of the
improvement in the other groups is gained by the WfH arrangement.
The above results show that closeness centrality is improved by the
interventions. In particular, the closeness centrality of the asset nodes is
reduced by 26%. This implies that their vulnerability to adverse effects
from the spread of COVID-19 could be reduced by more than a quarter, if
the two measures are implemented. This is also obvious in the plots in
Figs. 10 and 11, and the probabilistic analysis in the following section
confirms this relationship.
9.4. Epidemic control analysis (ECA) methodology, based on a
probabilistic SIS model
A probabilistic analysis of the two organizational structures was also
performed, based on the methodology presented in [21]. The methodology is called Epidemic Control Analysis (ECA) and uses a SusceptibleInfected-Susceptible (SIS) epidemic spread model to evaluate the impact
of removing a node on the overall spread of the disease. The SIS probabilistic network model is very useful in analysing epidemic control
strategies [55]. In this case, the ECA model was used to evaluate the
criticality of specific people within the organisation, with regards to the
spread of COVID-19. This provides a very practical assessment of disease
dynamics.
More specifically, the ECA model uses an SIS model and graph theory
to perform a sensitivity analysis of infection dynamics across the nodes
of an epidemics network, and then derive interventions that have the
potential to improve these dynamics. This is a probabilistic approach
and considers the infection probability of nodes, which is calculated
stochastically. The intervention strategies are derived based on certain
epidemic control coefficients [21].
The parameters of COVID-19 spread were considered based on [56],
and are: timestep of 1 day, infectious transmission rate of 0.5 per day
and recovery rate of 1/7 per day. It is important to note that the
“ambient” infections were not considered, i.e. it was assumed that, apart
from the virus propagating across the organisation, the staff were not
infected by their external environment.
Table 8 shows the number of infected individuals once the virus has
reached a steady state in the population. Note that this study doesn’t
take into account self-isolation, but this is reasonable given the 5 day
asymptomatic incubation period. These results show the impact of the
virus depending on the inception point into the network. Due to the
segregation of groups, the virus is always contained within each group in
the post-intervention network. Meanwhile in the pre-intervention
network the virus achieves a widespread steady-state infection regardless of the inception point. It is observed that the control centre split
doesn’t make any difference in the ultimate number of infections, since
there is still a route for the virus to cross to both groups. Hence, unless
the control centre staff are fully isolated from the rest of the staff, they
are still vulnerable. The Working from Home measure is the most
effective in reducing infections, since in this particular case it removed
the contact points between the individual teams.
The ECA methodology produces a score for each of the nodes in
Fig. 9. This score is the value assigned to the benefit of removing a node
from the system; the higher the value, the more of a hotspot the node is
for disease transmission. It indicates not only a nodes’ chance of infection but also how much they will infect others.
The ECA score results are presented in Table 9. The pre-intervention
score is the ECA score for the original organisational structure, whereas
the post-intervention score is the ECA score for the organisational
structure after the split control centre and WfH measures were implemented. Each set of results simulates every point of viral inception into
the network and takes the average ECA score. This ensures the results
are robust against different starting points for the virus. However, this
does limit potential insights such as how to respond if the virus initiates
in a particular group. The interaction matrix is directed; staff can infect
anyone they are connected to, whereas assets cannot infect any other
node. In any case, the asset interconnections do not seem to affect the
ECA results.
It can be seen that nodes C8, M1, OA4 and OB4 were originally in
contact with management (G6 & G7) giving them a high ECA score. Once
management begin working remotely, the scores for these nodes drop
significantly, as they are no longer key transmission vectors.
In the case of splitting control centre, it can be seen that most of the
nodes actually increase their ECA score, sometimes dramatically, which
is counter-intuitive. However, this is correct, since with the new control
centre team arrangement, each node is marginally more important,
since the ECA value is a score of how much impact a node has on its
neighbours. If the transmission routes are significantly reduced then
each remaining route becomes proportionally more significant. This is
especially prominent in node C7, which now becomes the unique entry
point for the virus to spread between the two control centre teams. From
the results in Tables 7–9, it can be concluded that the control centre
isolation must be complete, in order to bring any benefit, since even one
contact can invalidate the effectiveness of the measure.
A key observation is that despite the fact that specific nodes present a
very high ECA score, they are not necessarily the best ones to be
removed for safeguarding the rest of the nodes from COVID-19 spread.
Instead, it is shown that when the control centre teams are split, and
some managers start to work from home, the ECA score of those nodes
drops significantly. This shows that the proposed interventions work,
and that assumptions about the spread of the virus are not
straightforward.
Fig. 10. Closeness centrality graph of the example organisational structure of a
power network operator before any interventions. Node numbering is
sequential, following the order in Table 9.
S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al. 
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
14
10. Conclusions
In recent decades the world has experienced a number of extreme
events that disrupted critical infrastructure systems with major economic losses that threatened essential services. These events have
exposed critical infrastructure systems beyond their design margins,
thus revealing vulnerabilities regarding the readiness and adaptability
to such events.
The COVID-19 pandemic is testing the utility response to an “unknown or non-traditional threat” and an evolving situation to the provision of electricity (in terms of reliability dimensions). Its consequences
could last longer and present greater difficulties than anyone
anticipates. This challenge calls for a conscientious, aware and resilient
leadership to get through the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, the safety
of utility employees, contractors, and the public is paramount during
this time, while addressing the new power system operating challenges.
This will be achieved by adopting the following:
• Safeguard employees in a manner that does not compromise the
health and safety of both employees and the public;
• Provide guidance and support to all employees to ensure adhering to
preventative practices and lockdown regulations;
Fig. 11. Closeness centrality graph of the example organisational structure of a power network operator after two interventions. Node numbering is sequential,
following the order in Table 9.
Table 7
Closeness centrality of the network.
Node type Closeness centrality
Pre-intervention Splitting control centre Working from Home (WfH) Both interventions Improvement with both interventions
Control centre 0.0051 0.0046 0.0023 0.0017 68%
Technology office 0.0051 0.0050 0.0000 0.0000 100%
Maintenance teams 0.0051 0.0050 0.0023 0.0023 56%
Operations (Subst. A) 0.0040 0.0040 0.0014 0.0014 66%
Operations (Subst. B) 0.0040 0.0040 0.0014 0.0014 66%
Field manager 0.0072 0.0069 0.0000 0.0000 100%
CEO 0.0064 0.0062 0.0000 0.0000 100%
Assets 0.0050 0.0049 0.0037 0.0037 26%
Table 8
Infected individuals when the virus has run its course, before and after the two interventions.
Node type Infected individuals
Pre-intervention Splitting control centre Working from Home (WfH) Both interventions Improvement with both interventions
Control centre 48 48 11 11 76%
Technology office 48 48 0 0 100%
Maintenance teams 48 48 11 11 76%
Operations (Subst. A) 48 48 6 6 88%
Operations (Subst. B) 48 48 6 6 88%
Field manager 48 48 0 0 100%
CEO 48 48 0 0 100%
Assets 0 0 0 0 0%
S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al. 
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
15
• Review and enhance staff continuity plans to ensure critical system
operation can be maintained in the event of higher than expected
number of infections on critical staff;
• Ensure that utility operation (maintain, operate and collect) and
duties are executed during a lockdown period caused by a pandemic,
and
• Integration with provincial/state/national disaster response structures, as appropriate, will be imperative if the infection rate increases
dramatically.
This paper presents the experiences of the CIGRE C4.47 Working
Group in Power System Resilience, with regards to the response of
electrical utilities during the COVID-19 pandemic. The paper also
Table 9
ECA score, as a measure of impact of the two considered changes
Node type Node ECA score
Preintervention
Splitting control
centre
Working from Home
(WfH)
Both
interventions
Improvement with both
interventions
Control centre C1 0.0337 0.0412 0.0078 0.0102 70%
C2 0.0337 0.0412 0.0078 0.0102 70%
C3 0.0337 0.0749 0.0078 0.0169 50%
C4 0.0337 0.0749 0.0078 0.0169 50%
C5 0.0337 0.0749 0.0078 0.0169 50%
C6 0.0337 0.0749 0.0078 0.0169 50%
C7 0.0337 5.5551 0.0078 0.8710 ¡2484%
C8 13.1012 13.9315 0.0184 0.9328 93%
C9 0.0337 0.0412 0.0078 0.0102 70%
C10 0.0337 0.0412 0.0078 0.0102 70%
C11 0.0337 0.0412 0.0078 0.0102 70%
C12 0.0804 0.0412 0.0184 0.0102 87%
Technology office T1 0.0337 0.0337 0.0000 0.0000 100%
T2 0.0337 0.0337 0.0000 0.0000 100%
T3 0.0337 0.0337 0.0000 0.0000 100%
T4 0.0337 0.0337 0.0000 0.0000 100%
T5 0.0804 0.0804 0.0000 0.0000 100%
T6 0.0337 0.0337 0.0000 0.0000 100%
T7 0.0337 0.0337 0.0000 0.0000 100%
T8 0.0337 0.0337 0.0000 0.0000 100%
T9 0.0337 0.0337 0.0000 0.0000 100%
T10 0.0337 0.0337 0.0000 0.0000 100%
T11 13.1012 13.0766 0.0000 0.0000 100%
T12 0.0337 0.0337 0.0000 0.0000 100%
Maintenance teams M1 13.1012 13.0766 0.0184 0.0184 100%
M2 0.0337 0.0337 0.0078 0.0078 77%
M3 0.0337 0.0337 0.0078 0.0078 77%
M4 0.0337 0.0337 0.0078 0.0078 77%
M5 0.0337 0.0337 0.0078 0.0078 77%
M6 0.0337 0.0337 0.0078 0.0078 77%
M7 0.0804 0.0804 0.0184 0.0184 77%
M8 0.0337 0.0337 0.0078 0.0078 77%
M9 0.0337 0.0337 0.0078 0.0078 77%
M10 0.0337 0.0337 0.0078 0.0078 77%
M11 0.0337 0.0337 0.0078 0.0078 77%
M12 0.0337 0.0337 0.0078 0.0078 77%
(Asset) OA1 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 N/A
Operations (Subst.
A)
OA2 0.0565 0.0565 0.0063 0.0063 89%
OA3 0.0565 0.0565 0.0063 0.0063 89%
OA4 6.8519 6.8403 0.0063 0.0063 100%
OA5 0.0565 0.0565 0.0063 0.0063 89%
OA6 0.0565 0.0565 0.0063 0.0063 89%
(Asset) OA7 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 N/A
OA8 0.0565 0.0565 0.0063 0.0063 89%
(Asset) OB1 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 N/A
Operations (Subst.
B)
OB2 0.0565 0.0565 0.0063 0.0063 89%
OB3 0.0565 0.0565 0.0063 0.0063 89%
OB4 6.8519 6.8403 0.0063 0.0063 100%
OB5 0.0565 0.0565 0.0063 0.0063 89%
OB6 0.0565 0.0565 0.0063 0.0063 89%
(Asset) OB7 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 N/A
OB8 0.0565 0.0565 0.0063 0.0063 89%
Field manager G6 14.9569 14.9299 0.0000 0.0000 100%
CEO G7 0.0107 0.0117 0.0000 0.0000 100%
(Asset) A1 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 N/A
(Asset) A2 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 N/A
(Asset) A3 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 N/A
(Asset) A4 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 N/A
(Asset) A5 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 N/A
(Asset) A6 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 N/A
(Asset) A7 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 N/A
S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al. 
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
16
explores the different resilience strategies to frame decisions and their
timing. In particular, the power system resilience definition proposed by
the WG in [24] has been discussed, and how it can be applied in this
situation. In addition, different types of resilience thinking adopted
during the electric utility response to COVID-19 are also discussed, as
experienced by the WG members.
Finally, a notional case study is constructed, based on graph theory
and a probabilistic SIS model, which provides preliminary validation of
the effectiveness of remote working for some staff and splitting the
distribution control centre, which were two of the measures adopted by
these utilities. It is shown that, under the assumed electric utility model,
these two measures can reduce the spread of COVID-19 amongst company staff by 76%, as well as reduce the chances of staff sickness causing
disturbances to assets by up to 26%.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Spyros Skarvelis-Kazakos: Conceptualization, Methodology,
Writing – original draft, Validation, Writing – review & editing. Malcolm Van Harte: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – original
draft. Mathaios Panteli: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing –
original draft. Emanuele Ciapessoni: Conceptualization, Methodology,
Writing – original draft. Diego Cirio: Conceptualization, Methodology,
Writing – original draft. Andrea Pitto: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft. Rodrigo Moreno: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Writing – original draft. Chandan Kumar: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Conceptualization,
Methodology, Writing – original draft. Chris Mak: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Writing – original draft. Ian Dobson: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Writing – original draft. Christopher Challen: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Software, Validation.
Milorad Papic: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – original
draft. Craig Rieger: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – original
draft.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The CIGRE ´ C4.47 Power System Resilience working group would like
to thank all members of C4, C2 and C1 WGs for their contributions to the
present discussion. In particular, the contribution of the following individuals was especially important: Raj Dhrochand, Jens Jacobs,
Andrew Jin, Igor Linkov, Pierluigi Mancarella, Matthias Noebels, Yutian
Zhou.
Support in part from USA NSF grant 1735354 is acknowledged.
Support is also acknowledged from Chilean National Agency for
Research and Development (ANID) through FONDECYT grant 1181928
and Instituto Sistemas Complejos de Ingeniería ANID PIA/APOYO
AFB180003.
References
[1] WHO COVID-19 Dashboard. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020. Available
online: https://covid19.who.int/ [last cited: 12 July 2021].
[2] Noebels M, Peesapati V, Panteli M. How organisational resilience helps in dealing
with COVID-19 and large-scale crises. https://www.mub.eps.manchester.ac.
uk/science-engineering/2020/04/28/guest-post-how-organisational-resilience-he
lps-in-dealing-with-covid-19-and-large-scale-crises/ [accessed 12 July 2021].
[3] Noebels M, Panteli M. Evaluating the resilience of our electricity network during
COVID-19. https://www.mub.eps.manchester.ac.uk/science-engineering/2020/1
2/10/guest-post-update-evaluating-the-resilience-of-our-electricity-network-duri
ng-covid-19/ [accessed 12 July 2021].
[4] Krarti M, Aldubyan M. Review analysis of COVID-19 impact on electricity demand
for residential buildings. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2021;143.
[5] Werth A, Gravino P, Prevedello G. Impact analysis of COVID-19 responses on
energy grid dynamics in Europe. Appl Energy 2021;281.
[6] Zhang X, Pellegrino F, Shen J, Copertaro B, Huang P. Puneet Kumar Saini, Marco
Lovati”, A preliminary simulation study about the impact of COVID-19 crisis on
energy demand of a building mix at a district in Sweden”. Appl Energy 2020;280:
115954.
[7] Mofijur M, Rizwanul Fattah IM, Asraful Alam M, Saiful Islam ABM, Chyuan Ong H,
Ashrafur Rahman SM, et al. Impact of COVID-19 on the social, economic,
environmental and energy domains: lessons learnt from a global pandemic. Sustain
Prod Consum 2021;26:343–59.
[8] Rouleau J, Gosselin L. Impacts of the COVID-19 lockdown on energy consumption
in a Canadian social housing building. Appl Energy 2021;287:116565.
[9] Ghiani E, Galici M, Mureddu M, Pilo F. Impact on electricity consumption and
market pricing of energy and ancillary services during pandemic of COVID-19 in
Italy. Energies 2020;13:3357. https://doi.org/10.3390/en13133357.
[10] CIGRE NGN Event “Impact of COVID on electrical power system”, 29 March 2021.
[11] Espinoza S, Panteli M, Mancarella P, Rudnick H. Multi-phase assessment and
adaptation of power systems resilience to natural hazards. Electr Power Syst Res
2016;136:352–61.
[12] US Electricity Subsector Coordinating Council. Assessing and mitigating the novel
coronavirus (COVID-19) – a resource guide, Ver. 2; March 2020. https://www.ele
ctricitysubsector.org/ [accessed 12 July 2021].
[13] Panteli M, Mancarella P, Trakas DN, Kyriakides E, Hatziargyriou ND. Metrics and
quantification of operational and infrastructure resilience in power systems. IEEE
Trans Power Syst Nov. 2017;32(6):4732–42. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TPWRS.2017.2664141.
[14] Bhusal N, Abdelmalak M, Kamruzzaman M, Benidris M. Power system resilience:
current practices, challenges, and future directions. IEEE Access 2020;8:18064–86.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2968586.
[15] Johnson B, Chalishazar V, Cotilla-Sanchez E, Brekken TKA. A Monte Carlo
methodology for earthquake impact analysis on the electrical grid. Electr Power
Syst Res 2020;184:106332.
[16] Ahmadi S, Saboohi Y, Vakili A. Frameworks, quantitative indicators, characters,
and modeling approaches to analysis of energy system resilience: a review. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 2021;144:110988.
[17] Karan E, Asgari S. Resilience of food, energy, and water systems to a sudden labor
shortage. Environ Syst Decis 2021;41:63–81. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10669-
020-09793-w.
[18] Clark-Ginsberg A, Rueda IA, Monken J, et al. Maintaining critical infrastructure
resilience to natural hazards during the COVID-19 pandemic: hurricane
preparations by US energy companies. J Infrastruct Preserv Resil 2020;1:10.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s43065-020-00010-1.
[19] Elavarasan RM, Shafiullah GM, Raju K, Mudgal V, Arif MT, Jamal T. COVID-19:
Impact analysis and recommendations for power sector operation. Appl Energy
2020;279.
[20] Heffron RJ, Korner ¨ M-F, Schopf ¨ M, Wagner J, Weibelzahl M. The role of flexibility
in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic and beyond: Contributing to a sustainable
and resilient energy future in Europe. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2021;140:
110743.
[21] Hadjichrysanthou C, Sharkey KJ. Epidemic control analysis: Designing targeted
intervention strategies against epidemics propagated on contact networks.
J Theoretical Biol 2015;365:84–95.
[22] Liu YY, Slotine JJ, Barab´
asi AL. Controllability of complex networks. Nature 2011;
473(7346):167–73.
[23] Nekovee M, Pinto J. Modeling the impact of organization structure and whistleblowers on intra-organizational corruption contagion. Physica A: Statist Mech Appl
2019;522:339–49.
[24] Ciapessoni E, Cirio D, Pitto A, Panteli M, Van Harte M, Mak C. Defining power
system resilience, Electra; Oct 2019, CIGRE C4.47 reference paper.
[25] Narasimhan SR. COVID-19 impact on Indian electricity grid operations and the pan
India lights out event of 5th April 2020. IEEE Webinar; 29 April 2020.
[26] IEEE Power & Energy Society Industry Technical Support Leadership Committee:
Sharing Knowledge on Electrical Energy Industry’s First Response to COVID-19,
May 2020.
[27] Mastropietro P, Rodilla P, Batlle C. Emergency measures to protect energy
consumers during the Covid-19 pandemic: a global review and critical analysis.
Energy Res Social Sci 2020;68:101678.
[28] Moreno R, Sanchez ´ M, Suazo C, Negrete M, Olivares D, Alvarado D, et al. Impactos
del COVID-19 en el Consumo El´ectrico Chileno. Revista Ingenierıa de Sistemas, vol.
XXXIV; 2020.
[29] FERC. NERC provide industry guidance to ensure grid reliability amid potential
coronavirus impacts; March 18, 2020. https://www.nerc.com/news/Headlines%
20DL/FERC%20NERC%20031820%20final.pdf [accessed 12 July 2021].
[30] Kasthurirangan G, Srinivas P. Sustainable and resilient critical infrastructure
systems. Scientific Publishing Services Pvt. Ltd; 2010.
[31] Alexander DE. Resilience and disaster risk reduction: an etymological journey. Nat
Hazards Earth Syst Sci 2013:2707–16.
[32] Sanchis R, Poler R. Definition of a framework to support strategic decisions to
improve Enterprise Resilience, vol. 46, no. 9. IFAC; 2013.
[33] Van Harte M, Koch R, Rohde G. Building system resilience through multidisciplinary and cross divisional regional resilience teams. CIRED 2011;0594:6–9.
[34] Stapelberg R. Infrastructure systems interdependencies and risk informed decision
making (RIDM): impact scenario analysis of infrastructure risks induced by natural,
technological and intentional hazards. Analysis 2010;6(5):21–7.
S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al. 
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 136 (2022) 107703
17
[35] Van Harte M, Koch R, Heideman U, Mahomed S, Moganedi T, Correia J. Planning
for major electricity-related incidents, DMISA – disaster risk reduction 2016; 2016.
[36] Moreno R, Panteli M, Mancarella P, Rudnick H, Lagos T, Navarro A, et al. From
reliability to resilience: planning the grid against the extremes. IEEE Power Energ
Mag 2020;18(4):41–53.
[37] Linkov I, Bridges T, Creutzig F, Decker J, Fox-Lent C, Kroger ¨ W, et al. Changing the
resilience paradigm. Nat Clim Change 2014.
[38] UK Cabinet Office. Keeping the country running: natural hazards and
infrastructure, UK; 2011.
[39] Balchanos MG. A probabilistic technique for the assessment of complex dynamic
system resilience. PhD thesis; 2012.
[40] Hollnagel E, Woods DD, Leveson N, editors. Resilience engineering: Concepts and
precepts. Ashgate Publishing Ltd.; 2006.
[41] Berkeley AR III, Wallace M, NIAC. A framework for establishing critical
infrastructure resilience goals: final report and recommendations. National
Infrastructure Advisory Council; 2010.
[42] NERC. Special report, pandemic preparedness and operational assessment: Spring
2020. [accessed 12 July 2021]. https://www.nerc.com/pa/rrm/bpsa/Alerts%
20DL/NERC_Pandemic_Preparedness_and_Op_Assessment_Spring_2020.pdf.
[43] Dudenhoeffer DD, Manic M, Permann MR. Interdependency modeling and
emergency response. In: Proceedings of the 2007 summer computer simulation
conference (SCSC ’07); 2007. p. 1230–37.
[44] Rinaldi SM, Peerenboom JP, Kelly TK. Identifying, understanding, and analyzing
critical infrastructure interdependencies. IEEE Control Syst Mag 2001;21(6):11–25.
[45] Rieger CG, Gertman DI, McQueen MA. Resilient control systems: Next generation
design research. In: 2009 2nd conference on human system interactions; 2009. p.
632–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/HSI.2009.5091051.
[46] O’Rourke TD. Critical infrastructure, interdependencies, and resilience. BRIDGEWashington-Natl Acad Eng 2007;37(1):22.
[47] Dudenhoeffer DD, Permann MR, Manic M. CIMS: a framework for infrastructure
interdependency modeling and analysis. In: Proceedings of the 2006 winter
simulation conference, IEEE; 2006. p. 478–85.
[48] Ouyang M. Review on modeling and simulation of interdependent critical
infrastructure systems. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2014;121:43–60.
[49] Ibanez M. Staff size evolution at the Spanish nuclear power plants. (IAEATECDOC–1193). International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA); 2001.
[50] Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA). Feasibility study on the
Sihanoukville combined cycle power development project in The Kingdom of
Cambodia; January 2002.
[51] Zhigljavsky A, Whitaker R, Fesenko I, Kremnizer K, Noonan J, Harper P, et al.
Generic probabilistic modelling and non-homogeneity issues for the UK epidemic
of COVID-19. arXiv:2004.01991v2.
[52] Diestel R. Graph theory. Springer; 2012.
[53] Alenazi MJF, Sterbenz JPG. Comprehensive comparison and accuracy of graph
metrics in predicting network resilience. In: 2015 11th international conference on
the design of reliable communication networks (DRCN); 2015. p. 157–64. https://
doi.org/10.1109/DRCN.2015.7149007.
[54] Doostmohammadian M, Rabiee HR, Khan UA. Centrality-based epidemic control in
complex social networks. Soc Netw Anal Min 2020;10:1–11.
[55] Zhu L, Guan G, Li Y. Nonlinear dynamical analysis and control strategies of a
network-based SIS epidemic model with time delay. Appl Math Model 2019;70:
512–31.
[56] Eikenberry SE, Mancuso M, Iboi E, Phan T, Eikenberry K, Kuang Y, et al. To mask
or not to mask: Modeling the potential for face mask use by the general public to
curtail the COVID-19 pandemic. Infect Dis Model 2020;5:293–308.
S. Skarvelis-Kazakos et al. 