Technological Forecasting & Social Change 188 (2023) 122265
Available online 7 January 2023
0040-1625/© 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Merging two revolutions: A human-artificial intelligence method to study
how sustainability and Industry 4.0 are intertwined
Armando Calabrese a,*
, Roberta Costa a
, Luigi Tiburzi a
, Alexander Brem b,c
a Department of Enterprise Engineering, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy b Institute of Entrepreneurship and Innovation Science, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany c Department of Technology and Innovation, University of Southern Denmark, Sonderborg, Denmark
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Sustainability
Innovation
Industry 4.0
GRI
Text mining
ABSTRACT
Industry 4.0 is an important contributor to industrial innovation and sustainability. Nevertheless, few studies
empirically analyse how it acts as a binding force of both business practices. This study examines 1501 sustainability reports using a mixed human-artificial intelligence method based on Python’s text mining libraries.
This method takes advantage of AI’s capabilities to extract information from large samples of data and of human
critical thinking to find patterns in those data. Specifically, the method is used to evaluate the adoption of Industry 4.0 technologies, analyse how they are deployed worldwide, and investigate their sustainability outcomes.
In terms of overall frequency, robots and cybersecurity are the most often reported technologies. Broken down by
the firm’s region, Asian firms have the highest rate of adoption, while African firms are lagging. Regarding the
themes, Industry 4.0 is mainly adopted to improve production processes and customer experience. A small
percentage of firms, particularly in Europe and North America, utilize Industry 4.0 to reduce the environmental
footprint of their operations. Furthermore, results indicate that Industry 4.0 and sustainability are following two
routes. Some firms have massively adopted Industry 4.0 to increase operational efficiency and reaped environmental gains as an indirect consequence of improved operations. Others have chosen to balance the adoption
of technologies aimed to increase productivity with innovations whose explicit aim is the reduction of their
operations’ environmental footprint, such as additive manufacturing. Eastern firms tend to follow the first route
while western firms the second. African and South American firms are still at a very early stage in their Industry
4.0 and sustainability journey. At the global level, Industry 4.0 is still far from being utilized as a catalyst to
develop sustainability-driven business models.
1. Introduction
Industry 4.0 is an ongoing process of industrial automation, digitalization, vertical and horizontal integration of the value chain (Dalenogare et al., 2018; Ibarra et al., 2018). It improves factory productivity
(Kumar et al., 2018; Moeuf et al., 2018) and working conditions
(Schneider, 2018; Strange and Zucchella, 2017), and ignites the creation
of new business models (Calabrese et al., 2020b; Strozzi et al., 2017).
Technologies shape the foundations of Industry 4.0 and are its enabling
factors (Liao et al., 2017; Kang et al., 2016). Some of these technologies
are related to the production line, as for example 3D printing (Lu and
Weng, 2018) and collaborative and autonomous robots (Moeuf et al.,
2018). Others, such as big data analytics, are used to develop new services for customers (Kiel et al., 2017; Shou et al., 2019). Finally, some
technologies, such as smart glasses and smart gloves, also known as
wearables (Ghobakhloo et al., 2021a), are utilized to improve workers’
performance (Zavadsk ´ a ´ and Z´
avadský, 2018; Rauschnabel et al., 2015).
Industry 4.0 has a positive impact on unit cost and time reduction
(Ching et al., 2022; Piccarozzi et al., 2022; Jung et al., 2017; Brad et al.,
2018); it also facilitates fulfilling the needs of individual customers
(Bordeleau et al., 2020; Müller et al., 2018) and empowers product
customization (Culot et al., 2019; de Sousa Jabbour et al., 2018). Other
claimed benefits are the improvement of the employees’ safety through
the use of robots and drones for risky tasks (Schneider, 2018; Strange
and Zucchella, 2017). Finally, Industry 4.0 facilitates the creation of new
revenue streams, such as those based on product-as-a-service business
models (Brax et al., 2021; Weking et al., 2020; Bordeleau et al., 2020).
Industry 4.0 technologies have an important role regarding
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: calabrese@dii.uniroma2.it (A. Calabrese).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Technological Forecasting & Social Change
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/techfore
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2022.122265
Received 14 March 2022; Received in revised form 29 October 2022; Accepted 11 December 2022 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 188 (2023) 122265
2
sustainability throughout the value chain (Gastaldi et al., 2022; Kumar
et al., 2022; Tripathi and Gupta, 2021). For instance, Industry 4.0 can be
used to reduce greenhouse gas emissions (Peukert et al., 2015), decrease
waste, and diminish the consumption of resources (Stock and Seliger,
2016; Herrmann et al., 2014). Considering specific technologies, Big
Data can contribute to the growth of the circular economy by facilitating
data management throughout the product life cycle (Jabbour et al.,
2019; Li et al., 2015). Additive manufacturing can help in the reuse of
products and materials (Bloomfield and Borstrock, 2018; Oettmeier and
Hofmann, 2017; Berman, 2012). The Internet of Things can contribute
to waste management in smart cities (Esmaeilian et al., 2018; Kiel et al.,
2017). Also in the social sphere, Industry 4.0 can play an important role
through the improvement of learning by utilizing intelligent assistance
systems (Herrmann et al., 2014; Peukert et al., 2015).
Despite its potential to contribute to firms’ innovation and sustainability, research so far has been mostly devoted to investigating its effects on the former, focusing on the contribution of its technologies to
firms’ economic output (Niehoff, 2022). Little evidence is available
regarding the implementation of Industry 4.0 in sustainability initiatives
(Dixit et al., 2021; Dwivedi et al., 2021; Chiarini et al., 2020; Ejsmont
et al., 2020). Literature is still vague and fragmented as regards the
benefits that Industry 4.0 can deliver to firms endeavouring to make
their business more sustainable (Beltrami et al., 2021; Sharma et al.,
2020).
This study explores the level of adoption of Industry 4.0 and how it is
used within firms. To attain this, 1501 sustainability reports from organizations all over the world have been analysed using a mixed humanartificial intelligence method based on text mining and content analysis
techniques. A frequency analysis has been carried out to assess the
technologies’ adoption rate. Then, a thematic analysis has been
employed to find the themes that the organizations are pursuing when
they adopt Industry 4.0 technologies (Braun and Clarke, 2012; Hearst,
2003). Finally, a framework to display the results has been developed
and discussed (Khan et al., 2021; Ghobakhloo et al., 2021b). The
research method is described in the next section. Then, the results are
presented. Discussions, implications, and limitations follow.
1.1. Background
Despite having been introduced more than a decade ago, the concept
of Industry 4.0 is still elusive and vaguely defined (Ghobakhloo et al.,
2021a; Beltrami et al., 2021; Culot et al., 2020). Scholars have adopted
basically two approaches to deal with it. On the one hand, Industry 4.0 is
broadly defined as the interplay between people, organizations, and
technologies operating in an integrated way along the whole supply
chain to empower decision making, minimize human intervention,
maximize productivity, and enable new business models (Beltrami et al.,
2021; Culot et al., 2020; Raut et al., 2020). On the other hand, scholars
have referred to Industry 4.0 as a set of technologies, i.e., building
blocks, acting as a foundation for a pool of business innovations (Verma
et al., 2022; Ghobakhloo et al., 2021a; Calabrese et al., 2020b; Xu et al.,
2018). In the second approach, Industry 4.0 is seen as a journey where
the incremental adoption of technologies leads to improvements of
business-as-usual processes and activities as well as, potentially, to
disruptive changes (Niehoff, 2022; Calabrese et al., 2020b). From this
perspective, the two approaches to define Industry 4.0 converge as the
latter is just a narrower perspective of the former focused on technologies as enabling factors of business changes. This study adopts the second perspective, namely, it defines Industry 4.0 using technologies as its
building blocks. This choice is preferred because it allows to identify its
components, the technologies, and then analyse how they are deployed
worldwide as well as investigate their sustainability outcomes, as will be
explained in the Research method section (Beltrami et al., 2021).
Irrespectively of the way Industry 4.0 is defined, many scholars
would agree on the fact that its adoption improves firms’ competitiveness along two routes. Digital technologies can be used to improve
existing process efficiency and therefore reduce operational costs (Ching
et al., 2022; Nylund and Brem, 2021). Moreover, thanks to their positive
impact on process flexibility, digital technologies have been seen as a
means to meet customer demands more effectively (Niehoff, 2022;
Braccini and Margherita, 2018; Watanabe et al., 2016). In addition,
Industry 4.0 technologies can be used to rethink business-as-usual routines and find new paradigms to create, propose and capture customer
value (Calabrese et al., 2020b).
The above routes have been connected to business innovations
regarding sustainability. Industry 4.0, by affecting operational performance, has been observed to have a positive effect on both economic
and environmental performance, i.e., two of the three sustainability
pillars (Lopes de Sousa Jabbour et al., 2022; Braccini and Margherita,
2018). In particular, Industry 4.0 is thought to offer opportunities in
terms of efficient planning and production management, thus helping
avoiding overproduction and resource depletion (Stock et al., 2018).
Furthermore, such routes are known to change between developed and
developing countries. In developing countries, Industry 4.0 is less
widespread and more focused on efficiency-related outcomes, whereas
in developed countries resources are on average more abundant and
there is more room to improve business-as-usual processes beyond efficiency (Lee et al., 2022; Siltori et al., 2021; Ingaldi and Ulewicz, 2019).
The line of research outlined above, although promising, is still in its
nascent stage, empirical evidence is unclear, and literature is fragmented (Beltrami et al., 2021; Ghobakhloo, 2020; Sharma et al., 2020).
Beier et al. (2020) for example, based on a literature review, consider
sustainability as an essential part of the Industry 4.0 concept. Braccini
and Margherita (2018) and Piccarozzi et al. (2018) argue that firms
should engage jointly in sustainability and Industry 4.0 initiatives as the
former is a powerful driver for the latter. Along this line, Ghobakhloo
(2020) has shown that the two topics can have a synergistic relationship
when, for instance, Industry 4.0 technologies are used to develop green
innovation capabilities.
According to others, the relationship between Industry 4.0 and sustainability is only indirect. In a recent study, Piccarozzi et al. (2022)
have shown that the two merge in the firm’s production area, where the
application of Industry 4.0 leads to resource efficiency. Accordingly, the
economic sustainability pillar is the most impacted, followed by the
environmental one. In other words, Industry’s 4.0 positive effect on
productivity and cost savings is ex post presented as a sustainability
achievement (Martínez-Olvera and Mora-Vargas, 2019; Rantala et al.,
2019; Nagy et al., 2018). This result comes with no surprise if one
considers that Industry’s 4.0 main goal is “to strengthen and expand the
long-term competitiveness of the company by increasing flexibility and
efficiency of the production through communication, information and
intelligence” (Gabriel and Pessl, 2016, p. 133). More generally, this
evidence agrees with the literature on innovation, where it is known that
an improvement in production processes is likely to reduce firms’
environmental impact (Melville, 2010).
The goal of the present study is to explore how Industry 4.0 and
sustainability are intertwined (Piccarozzi et al., 2022; Beltrami et al.,
2021; Khan et al., 2021). To do so, Industry 4.0 is analysed from the
perspective of a sample of worldwide firms’ sustainability reports. This
approach allows clarifying whether Industry 4.0 contributes directly to
sustainability beyond efficiency and reduced consumptions (MartínezOlvera and Mora-Vargas, 2019). Focusing on single technologies as
Industry’s 4.0 building blocks, the analysis finds out how this paradigm
is being applied in a variety of business contexts.
2. Research method
As a preliminary step, Industry 4.0 technologies have been identified
by means of a sample of words referring to them. Then, using these
words, frequency and thematic analyses have been performed on a
sample of sustainability reports. An outline of the steps of the method is
provided in Fig. 1. In the figure, an icon is added to each step to highlight
A. Calabrese et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 188 (2023) 122265
3
whether it was performed by a machine or by a human. The details will
be provided in the following sections. Briefly, the steps are:
1. Identification of the terms used in the literature to refer to Industry
4.0 technologies;
2. Development of Python’s expressions (so-called regular expressions
or regex) to detect the technologies identified in point 1;
3. Composition of the dataset;
4. Standardization of the text in the reports (so-called normalization);
5. Frequency analysis;
6. Transformation of the words in the reports into vectors (so-called
vectorization) for the thematic analysis;
7. Thematic analysis.
The code for the steps is provided in the Supplementary materials.
2.1. Identification of the Industry 4.0 technologies
In the first stage of the research, the enabling technologies of Industry 4.0 have been identified. Following the approach of Machado
et al. (2019), a pool of “accepted” definitions of the technological pillars
has been used. In particular, the ten most cited general-purpose Industry
4.0 literature reviews in the Scopus database have been selected. To
select them, the keyword “Industry 4.0” has been looked for in the
database filtering for those articles belonging to the “business” field and
classified as “reviews”. Cited and citing literature has been used as well
in an inductive way to refine the initial search. The sampled reviews
have been Ghobakhloo et al. (2021a), Beier et al. (2020), Ghobakhloo
(2020), Nosalska et al. (2020), Zheng et al. (2020), Kerin and Pham
(2020), Ortt et al. (2020), Kerin and Pham (2019), Liao et al. (2017),
Strozzi et al. (2017). From this pool of articles, lists and graphical
summaries of the “defining” Industry 4.0 technologies have been analysed. The final list of Industry 4.0 technologies selected for this study is
reported below:
• Additive manufacturing (including 3D printing);
• Collaborative and autonomous robots and drones;
• Augmented reality (including smart glasses/gloves);
• Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) as stand-alone systems of multiple
interconnected devices;
• Virtualization (including digital twin technologies);
• Cloud manufacturing;
• Cloud computing;
• Big Data;
• Internet of Things (IoT);
• Cybersecurity, namely the set of technologies enabling safe data
storage and transfer (e.g., anti-spyware, anti-phishing software and
frameworks);
• Blockchain.
2.2. Development of the regular expressions
To automatically identify the technologies listed above in the analysed sustainability reports, their different wordings had to be accounted
for. Regular expressions, or regexes, have been used for this purpose.
Regexes are bits of codes utilized in computational analysis to automatically find patterns within strings. As an example, the regex that has
been used to identify the technology “Internet of Things” in the reports is
shown below.
Identification of
«Industry 4.0»
technologies
Development of the
regex to detect each
technology
Collection of eligible
sustainability
reports and inclusion
in the dataset.
Normalization of
the reports
Vectorization of the
reports
Frequency Analysis
For each technology:
1) Analysis of how often
the technology is
mentioned in the reports
broken down by
geographical area.
Thematic Analysis
For each technology:
1) Extraction of the most
similar words for each
technology;
2) Extraction of the text
fragments for each
technology;
3) Content analysis of the
most relevant text
fragments and similar
words and development
of the themes.
Fig. 1. Research method.
A. Calabrese et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 188 (2023) 122265
4
The regex in (1), deployed using Python’s re library, identifies all the
variants of the term “Internet of Things” such as “internet of things
(IoT)”, “IoT”, “Internet of things”, and so on. This step is necessary
because the same technology can be written in many ways in different
reports, all having the same meaning (e.g., for 3D printing, an additive
manufacturing technology, the following spellings might be possible: 3D
printing, 3d-printing, 3d-Printing, etc.). This nuisance, if not addressed,
is detrimental to both the frequency and the thematic analyses. The
other technologies have been dealt with using the same procedure. The
complete list of regexes is available in the Supplementary materials.
2.3. Dataset collection
After having developed the tools to identify each technology, the
reports have been collected. The “GRI’s Sustainability Disclosure Database” (SSD), available as of February 2021 at https://database.globalr
eporting.org/, has been used (Alonso-Almeida et al., 2015; Zutshi
et al., 2009). Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) is an international standards organization dealing with topics related to sustainability. SSD is a
database of sustainability reports, both GRI and non-GRI based. This
database includes, at the time of collecting the data, 63,852 reports from
15,425 organizations. Only verified GRI standards sustainability reports
in English have been selected, namely 1501 sustainability reports
covering the years from 2016 to 2020. These selection criteria have been
chosen to ensure uniformity and accuracy of the analysis performed,
which requires standardization in input to obtain “clean” information in
output.
2.4. Text normalization
Raw textual data are not well formatted for text mining; this represents a potential source of noise. The reports in the dataset have therefore been normalized, namely reduced to standard form. The most
important operations performed at this stage have been: HTML removal;
identification and standardization of the technologies’ names; word
tokenization, namely splitting of the text into words; and word lemmatization, i.e., replacement of the inflected forms of words with their
canonical form (Sarkar, 2019). Table 1 shows an excerpt from a sustainability report before and after the normalization process.
For each report, the result is a list of lemmatized words that can be
used for the frequency and the thematic analysis.
2.5. Frequency analysis
The frequency analysis has been performed after the text normalization step. The overall frequencies of the technologies as well as their
frequencies in each region have been derived.
2.6. Vector representation
Prior to performing the thematic analysis, the words in the reports
have been vectorized. The FastText word vector representation model,
introduced by Facebook in 2016, has been used in this step (Bojanowski
et al., 2016). This algorithm takes a text and, for each unique word in it,
generates a vector based on the word’s context, namely the words surrounding it. Words that are used in the same contexts, i.e., with the same
surrounding words, have similar vectors. For example, in the two sentences “Our firm adopts Industry 4.0 technology to decarbonize the
production line.” and “Our company adopts Industry 4.0 technology to
decarbonize the production line.”, the words “firm” and “company” will
have similar vectors because they have the same surrounding words
(context). The vectorization procedure correctly assigns similar vectors
to them. The procedure is similar to the co-occurrence analysis illustrated in Bornmann et al. (2018) and van Eck and Waltman (2010). In
this case, though, similarity is measured through the scalar product
between word-vectors, as each word is projected on a vector space.
2.7. Thematic analysis
Once the vectors for each word are available, the thematic analysis
can be performed. The analysis has been carried out in three steps
(Niehoff, 2022; Khan et al., 2021; Beier et al., 2020): extraction of the
words most similar to each Industry 4.0 technology; extraction of text
fragments for each technology; coding and identification of the themes.
The procedure is illustrated for the analysis of the 1501 reports, namely
the development of Table 6 (see Results section). By selecting the
appropriate cluster of reports, the same argument has been applied to
develop each of the six sub-tables in Table 7.
As mentioned earlier, each word in the reports, after the text vectorization in 2.6, has an associated numerical vector. These vectors
represent the words in the contexts in which they are used in the sample.
This implies that words in similar contexts have similar numerical vectors. Hence, based on vector similarity, the list of words most similar to
each technology-word can be extracted from the reports. These lists
have been extracted for each Industry 4.0 coded technology. The result
is reported in the Supplementary materials (“Most_similar_words.
docx”).
Then, the text fragments linked to the different technologies have
been extracted from the 1501 reports. To be eligible for extraction, a text
fragment should mention at least one of the technologies. Each text
fragment is composed of 20 words to the left and 20 words to the right of
each technology occurrence. An example of a text fragment regarding
“bigdata” is the following:
“introduced energy-efficiency optimization for ‘air compressors’ that
consumed a great amount of power. The collection and analysis of bigdata
together with AI learning and prediction were used to realize real-time
energy-efficiency management by adjusting the air compressor”.
(AUO, 2018, p. 93)
This data reduction procedure, which follows Niehoff (2022) and
Beier et al. (2020), extracted 6878 text fragments out of 126,582 pages
in the reports. All the fragments have been uploaded in the Supplementary materials (“text_fragments.txt”) to ensure traceability and
avoid data loss. At this point, one coder evaluated each fragment,
selected the most relevant ones, and expanded them (for example, by
selecting 40 words to the left and 40 words to the right of each technology occurrence). Table 2 summarizes the steps so far, namely it gives
an example of the extraction of the most similar words and most relevant
Table 1
An example of normalized text.
Text before it was normalized:
‘\nIn times of crisis and times of calm, we believe we have a corporate responsibility
to lead with our \nvalues of integrity, accountability, service, innovation,
partnership, and respect. Never has this been \nmore evident than during the
COVID-19 pandemic.\n\nDuring this challenging time, we put the safety of our
employees first, and in doing so gave them \nthe peace of mind that allowed’
Text after it was normalized:
[‘time’, ‘crisis’, ‘time’, ‘calm’, ‘believe’, ‘corporate’, ‘responsibility’, ‘lead’, ‘value’,
‘integrity’, ‘accountability’, ‘service’, ‘innovation’, ‘partnership’, ‘respect’, ‘never’,
‘more’, ‘evident’, ‘covid’, ‘pandemic’, ‘during’, ‘challenging’, ‘time’, ‘put’, ‘safety’,
‘employee’, ‘first’, ‘give’, ‘peace’, ‘mind’, ‘allow’]
(
r
˝
internet[\s\W]?of[\s\W]?things?\s?\Wiot\W? |internet[\s\W]?of[\s\W]?things?\b |\biot\b˝
,re.IGNORECASE) (1)
A. Calabrese et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 188 (2023) 122265
5
text fragments for two technologies.
Subsequently, qualitative content analysis of the most relevant
fragments together with the most similar words has been performed.
Two coders performed multiple rounds of reading and collaborative reexamination of the material to minimize the overall bias and refine the
results (Niehoff, 2022; Ghobakhloo et al., 2021a,b). Following Gioia
et al.’s (2013) inductive methodology, broad generalizations have been
based on specific observations. In this case, fragments (first-order concepts) have been used to identify keywords among the most similar
words (second-order concepts), which finally have been grouped into
“aggregate dimensions”, or themes, based on the coders’ previous
knowledge of the subject (Khan et al., 2021). Observations obtained
from this analysis have been summarized in Table 3, where an example
of this inductive process is presented. The full association between most
similar words and themes has been uploaded in the Supplementary
materials (“Keywords_Themes.docx”).
In the last step, using the association between most similar words and
themes, the latter have been assigned to each technology. Table 4 shows
an example.
This passage lays on the fact that the FastText algorithm automatically ranks the most similar words in descending order of similarity
(based on the similarity between the vectors associated to each word in
the corpus). Thus, for example, in Table 4, the word “threat”, which has
been assigned to the theme “Stronger digital security”, is the third most
similar to “Cybersecurity” after “cyber” and “security”. This means that
“threat” is used very often in the same context of “Cybersecurity”. As
“threat” belongs to the theme “Stronger digital security”, this theme is
assigned to “Cybersecurity”. This procedure has been applied to assign
the themes to each technology. It results in an ordinal assignment of the
themes to each technology. Referring again to Table 4, the themes
associated with Big Data are 1) “More efficient production processes”
and 2) “Stronger digital security”. This is because “digitization” (a word
of the “More efficient production processes” theme – see the file “Keywords_Themes.docx” in the Supplementary materials) is more similar to
Big Data technology, namely comes first, than the word “hacking” (a
word of the “Stronger digital security” theme).
Table 2
Extraction of most similar words and most relevant text fragments.
Technology Most similar words Most relevant text fragments
Big Data Iot, intelligence, algorithm,
digitization, intelligent, digital,
predictive, digitize, cloud,
augmented, digitalization,
digitalisation, robot, analytic,
visualization, augmentedreality,
digitalized, sophistication,
digitized, analytics,
convergence, software,
cloudcompute, automation,
visualize, technology, digitally,
technological, sophisticated,
seamless, capability, smart, …,
artificial, accelerator,
personalization, smartphone,
simplify, wearables, spectrum,
virtual, solution, customized,
startup
With industry 4.0, machinelearning, blockchain,
industrial iot and big data
gaining momentum faster than
ever before, industrial
automation is carving its mark
in industry processes,
including tmg automotive’s (
TMG Automotive, 2019).
…
Swisscom joined the un global
compact initiative in 2019 and
is actively committed to
establishing the innovators
network to enable human
rights (inhr) initiated by the
global e-sustainability
initiative (gesi). This network
seeks initially to develop an
“intelligence platform” which,
based on big data and artificial
intelligence, will uncover and
report on current weaknesses
in global supply chains (
Swisscom, 2019).
… … …
Cybersecurity Cyber, security, attack,
vulnerability, threat, privacy,
phishing, defense, cyberattack,
intelligence, malicious,
enforcement, continuity,
tactical, sophisticated, detection,
hacking, software, secure,
analytic, attacker, defence,
sophistication, possibilities,
safeguard, escalating, cloud,
data, digital, hack, tactic, crime,
response, detect, theft, analytics,
nist, abreast, swift, enhanced,
personal, robust, regulatory,
securely, network, threats,
internet, …, terrorism,
accessibility, safeguarding,
information, redundant, soc.,
applicability, digitalisation,
comprehensive
Krungsri took relevant actions
and adopted the concept of
best practices applicable to
various projects such as
advanced anti-malware,
cybersecurity monitoring
process, phishing simulation
tests, compliance with the
swift customer security
framework (Krungsri, 2018).
…
Our global information
security policies, which are
based on cybersecurity
frameworks such as the
international organization for
standardization and the
national institute of standards
and technology, set the
compliance guidelines for our
people, processes and systems.
Walgreens boots alliance has
programs in place to help
ensure adherence to security
policies, control frameworks
and regulatory requirements.
We also periodically engage
independent third parties to
conduct cybersecurity risk
assessments (Walgreens,
2018).
Table 3
Example of thematic analysis.
Most relevant fragments
(first-order concepts)
Most similar words
(second-order
concepts)
Theme Description
Krungsri took relevant
actions and adopted
the concept of best
practices applicable to
various projects such
as advanced antimalware,
cybersecurity
monitoring process,
phishing simulation
tests, compliance with
the swift customer
security framework
Cyberattack (attack,
attacker, etc.),
defence, hacking,
malicious, phishing,
privacy, protection,
safeguard, security,
threat(s),
vulnerability
Stronger
digital
security
Data protection
against threats
such as phishing
attacks
Table 4
Example of thematic analysis.
Technologies Most similar words Themes
Big Data Iot, intelligence, algorithm, digitization,
intelligent, digital, predictive, digitize, …,
workflow, … hacking, …
More efficient
production processes
Stronger digital
security
Cybersecurity Cyber, security, threat, vulnearibility,
phishing, attack, privacy, hacking,
defense, cyberattack, …
Stronger digital
security
Table 5
Sample details.
Region Africa Asia Europe N.
America Oceania S.
Americaa
80 462 502 366 64 27
Year 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
84 346 542 477 52
Sector
Agri.-
Extr.b Manuf. Services
122 637 742
Size SMEc Large
181 1320
a S. America includes Central and South America; b Agri-Extr. stands for Agriculture and Extraction; c Less than 250 employees and €50 million turnover.
A. Calabrese et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 188 (2023) 122265
6
3. Results
Table 5 provides an outline of the collected reports. Other than the
variable of interest, i.e., the firms’ region, also the firms’ sector and size,
and reports’ year of publication have been indicated.
3.1. Frequency analysis
3.1.1. Frequency analysis at the global level
Fig. 2 shows how often the various technologies are mentioned at
least once in each report. “Cyberphysical systems”, and “cloud
manufacturing” have not been mentioned at all in the analysed sustainability reports. “Cybersecurity” is the most often cited technology,
mentioned at least once in roughly 35 % of the reports. “Robots”, which
includes both robots and robotics, “Internet of Things”, and “Big Data”
are also frequently reported. This adoption pattern is in line with similar
findings on a smaller scale by Ghobakhloo (2020) and Kristoffersen et al.
(2020).
3.1.2. Frequency analysis at the regional level
This subsection shows the average frequency of the technologies in
the reports by region (Figs. 3 and 4). To obtain this result, reports have
been clustered according to the geographical area (region) of the firms
issuing them. Then, the total number of technologies mentioned in each
cluster has been averaged by the number of reports in that cluster. For
example, for Asia, the number means that sustainability reports from
Asian firms mention on average 1.5 technology each (Fig. 3). A similar
reasoning has been applied to calculate the percentage of reports
mentioning at least once a technology. The results are reported in Fig. 4.
For example, among all the Asian mentions, roughly 30 % regards
“Robots”.
Commenting on the frequencies in Figs. 3 and 4, firms in Asia are the
most eager adopters of Industry 4.0 followed by those in Europe and
North America. Not only at a global level, but also in each region, the
most adopted technology is “Cybersecurity”. The only exception is South
America, where the most adopted technology is “Blockchain”. A big
divide separates firms in Africa and South America (which includes
South America and Central America) from the rest. This is unfortunate
not only because it represents a missed sustainability opportunity, but
also because it prevents firms operating in disadvantaged economic
contexts from realizing the Industry 4.0 productivity gains (Awan et al.,
2021; Dahmani et al., 2021).
3.2. Thematic analysis
This subsection reports the results of the thematic analysis regarding
the use of Industry 4.0 technologies as described in the sustainability
reports. First, the five main themes emerging from the analysis
explained in Section 2.7 are described. Then, their distribution is evaluated. The themes are the following:
1) More efficient production processes (MEPP): this theme concerns the
application of Industry 4.0 technologies in production processes to
improve productivity and operational efficiency (Sanders et al.,
2016; Schmidt et al., 2015; de Sousa Jabbour et al., 2018). Some
examples from the reports in the sample are listed below:
a. “The Internet of Things, cloud computing and mobile solutions
are enabling the connected mine of the future. Connectivity is the
technological backbone of the 21st century mine; it improves
communication, response, and productivity.” (GOLDCORP, 2017,
p. 58).
b. “Keppel Logistics successfully launched the use of Smart Glasses
to streamline inbound and outbound tasks for all customers at the
Automated Storage and Retrieval System warehouse. The use of
Smart Glasses leads to higher operational efficiency and stocktake accuracy, as compared to conventional radio frequency
scanners.” (Keppel Corporation, 2017, p. 55).
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35%
CPS
Cloud manufacturing
Virtualization
Self-driving
Cloud computing
Augmented Reality
Additive manufacturing
Blockchain
Big Data
Internet of Things
Robots
Cybersecurity
Percentage of reports
Fig. 2. Percentage of reports mentioning at least once a technology.
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
Africa South
America
Oceania North
America
Europe Asia
Avg. number of technologies
Fig. 3. Average number of technologies per report by region.
A. Calabrese et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 188 (2023) 122265
7
2) Increased customer value (ICV): this theme concerns the development of new channels to deliver customer value, for example by
improving customer relationship management routines and by
devising innovative business models such as digital servitization
(Kohtamaki ¨ et al., 2020; Sjodin ¨ et al., 2020). Some examples follow:
a. “As we continue to develop self-driving technology, research like
this is crucial in ensuring that technology is used in ways that
enhance the customer experience. With a target of beginning
production of self-driving vehicles in 2021, we are designing a
business to meet the needs both of partner companies and of their
customers.” (Ford, 2018, p. 51).
b. “Grameen Guru is a tool that uses augmented reality, image
recognition and a multilingual chatbot to help smartphone users
with limited literacy understand available financial products and
services. By holding their phone camera over a product brochure
or icon, users get instant access to the Guru chatbot, which can
explain their options in clear, simple language.” (Accenture,
2018, p. 28).
3) Cleaner production processes (CPP): this theme covers all activities
regarding the reduction of environmental impacts in production
processes. The main focus is the adoption of additive manufacturing,
3D printing in particular, to improve at the same time productivity
and sustainability (Gupta et al., 2021). An example follows:
a. “[At HP] we are disrupting the global manufacturing sector with
3D printing technology that’s making companies more competitive, productive and sustainable.” (Introduction of the CEO to the
company’s Sustainable Impact Report for 2018 [link visited on
November 24th, 2021]).
4) Stronger digital security (SDS): this theme concerns data protection
against threats such as cyberattacks (Jazdi, 2014; Gary et al., 2019;
Culot et al., 2019). As shown in Fig. 2, firms consider digital security
of vital importance. The following example illustrates how prominent is cybersecurity in firms’ agendas:
a. “We are relentless in our efforts to improve our approach to
effectively managing these issues [cyber resilience and the protection of data] including through the upgrade of the information
and operational technologies that keep our systems and customers
safe. We are also focused on providing the training our workforce
needs to manage our cyber security and data privacy obligations,
and to ensure the organization maintains a culture of vigilance.”
(CLP, 2018, p. 3).
5) Remote and digital learning (RDL): this theme focuses on the
development of solutions focused on individual skill enhancement
using innovative approaches such as gamification through
augmented reality technologies (Almeida and Simoes, 2019; Santos
et al., 2016). The following example describes this theme:
a. “In FY20, we’re exploring new ways to use virtual equipment and
environments through augmented reality for increased student
learning. In addition, we’re exploring digital badging to further
recognize the skills and accomplishments of our learners for potential employer.” (Cisco, 2019, p. 83).
3.2.1. Thematic analysis at the global level
Table 6 is a graphic summary of the ordinal association between
Industry 4.0 technologies and themes across the reports worldwide
(Niehoff, 2022). For the sake of the representation, a darker shade of
blue indicates themes that have been assigned a higher priority; white
indicates that the theme is not associated with the corresponding technology. As explained in the method, the assignment of the themes to the
technologies arises from an ordinal ranking based on the similarity between the vector-words representing each theme’s keyword and each
technology.
The table provides strong evidence that environmental sustainability
is hardly a theme for the various Industry 4.0 technologies (Niehoff,
2022; Piccarozzi et al., 2022). The tendency observed by Chiarini et al.
(2020) for Italian firms, namely that “[the environmental issue] does not
seem to be an objective achieved by sampled companies through these
technological solutions [i.e., Industry 4.0]” (p. 9), is sadly a global trend,
as have demonstrated other authors in different contexts (e.g., Gupta
et al., 2021; Siltori et al., 2021; Ejsmont et al., 2020). Industry 4.0 delivers economic productivity as it improves production routines and
facilitates the implementation of more resource-efficient operations
(Ching et al., 2022). As can be seen in Table 6, Industry 4.0 technologies
are not only employed to improve productivity, but also to empower
customer relationships and increase data security (Awan et al., 2021;
Kristoffersen et al., 2020). Overall, a scarce direct mingling between
Industry 4.0 and environmental sustainability can be inferred. Rather,
an indirect link with environmental sustainability exists, as this pillar
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Africa Asia Europe North America Oceania South America
Percentage of reports
Big Data Internet of Things Robots Self-driving Augmented Reality
Cloud computing Cybersecurity Blockchain Virtualization
Fig. 4. Percentage of reports mentioning at least once a technology by region.
A. Calabrese et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 188 (2023) 122265
8
takes advantage of a more efficient resource usage enabled by some
Industry 4.0 technologies (Piccarozzi et al., 2022; Beier et al., 2020). The
only exception is additive manufacturing by means of 3D printing
which, although scarcely used (see Fig. 2), is strongly associated with an
environmental sustainability theme (Dahmani et al., 2021).
3.2.2. Thematic analysis at the regional level
Next, the distribution of the themes across the regions is ascertained.
The purpose is to analyse how Industry 4.0 technologies are used by
firms in different geographic areas. The results are reported in Table 7,
in which the meaning of the colours is analogous to Table 6.
As shown in the table, African and South American firms heavily
prioritize Industry 4.0 technologies to improve production efficiency
(Ingaldi and Ulewicz, 2019; Redondo and Fierro, 2007). In these regions, sustainability-related themes are absent. The few technological
innovations are directed toward reaping the benefits of Industry 4.0-
driven productivity gains (see also Figs. 3 and 4) (Bai et al., 2020). As
pointed out by Siltori et al. (2021), firms in developing countries deploy
Industry 4.0 to address their specific pressing issues (e.g., productivity).
Firms in middle-income countries follow the same trajectory. Asian
firms, despite being the heaviest users of Industry 4.0 technologies in
terms of absolute frequencies (see Figs. 3 and 4), do not pursue any
sustainability theme (apart from the very weak prioritization of Big Data
for social purposes). On the other hand, firms in highly industrialized
regions (Europe and North America) are keener than their counterparts
in less industrialized areas on pursuing sustainability themes along with
productivity’s.
4. Discussion and implications
The results of this study on a worldwide sample of 1501 sustainability reports corroborate and extend the findings in previous literature. The frequency analysis in Fig. 2 shows that cybersecurity and
blockchain are the most adopted technologies on a global scale and are
utilized by firms in each region, irrespectively of the region’s overall
adoption rate of Industry 4.0. These technologies are regarded by
companies around the world as fundamental (Calabrese et al., 2020b).
Their employment, as pointed out by Kumar et al. (2022), minimizes the
risk of business-critical security breaches or data thefts that would
transform the adoption of Industry 4.0 into a counterproductive initiative. Therefore, they represent a starting point for any successful Industry 4.0 journey (Sony and Naik, 2019).
The technologies in the second most utilized cluster in Fig. 2, i.e.,
Internet of Things and robots are adopted by firms in all regions; however, their distribution is not uniform. Firms in low-income regions
utilize far fewer of them than firms in higher income regions do (Table 7)
(Dwivedi et al., 2021). Scarce financial resources makes these technologies unavailable where they would be needed the most (Gastaldi et al.,
2022). Regarding their usage, these technologies have operational efficiency as main theme (Table 6). This evidence confirms the results of
Ching et al. (2022), Niehoff (2022), Piccarozzi et al. (2022), and
Beltrami et al. (2021), among others, but adds to them in two significant
ways. First, these results come directly from corporate sources, namely
the huge sample of available reports, rather than from literature surveys.
Second, the relationship is not only between Industry 4.0 and its benefits, but also among specific technologies and their applications.
Regarding the technologies that allegedly have a direct impact on
sustainability, such as additive manufacturing and virtualization (Ghobakhloo et al., 2021b), they are adopted only by firms in Europe, North
America, and Oceania (Table 7). On average, as displayed in Fig. 2, these
technologies are adopted far less often. For example, additive
manufacturing, which is considered by Dahmani et al. (2021) a significant improvement at the crossroads between Industry 4.0 and sustainability, is mentioned in only 6 % of the 1501 reports. Moreover, their
supposed benefits are often only vaguely described (Beier et al., 2020).
For example, regarding the association between virtualization technologies and cleaner production, one of the selected text fragments reported: “The Air Products Process Intelligence (APPI) Process Advisor
system […] creates a digital twin of the melting process. […] Air
Products Process Intelligence system has helped us improve our
aluminium recycling operation by reducing production losses and energy consumption” (Air Products 2020, p. 11).
This provides evidence that, globally, Industry 4.0 is anchored on
factory routines’ improvement (Shet and Pereira, 2021). Its adoption is
primarily focused on operational efficiency and productivity (Lopes de
Sousa Jabbour et al., 2022; Niehoff, 2022; Rantala et al., 2019). Sustainability challenges are not being addressed by new, Industry 4.0-
enabled business models (Niehoff, 2022; Machado et al., 2019; Beier
et al., 2018). In other words, at the global level, Industry 4.0 efficiencyrelated applications have taken precedence over the sustainabilityrelated ones (Ghobakhloo et al., 2021b; Ghobakhloo, 2020). Basically,
Industry 4.0 is being adopted to perform the same tasks with less resources (Piccarozzi et al., 2022; Calabrese et al., 2020b). Using the
conceptualization of Landrum and Ohsowski (2018), firms appear to
have a “weak” sustainability worldview, in which incremental improvements in factory routines will not lead to significant environmental
and social benefits. This result is even more significant if one considers
that this study has analysed corporate sustainability reports.
Elaborating on the utilization patterns at the regional level, a more
detailed picture can be developed. In particular, two Industry 4.0
adoption’s routes emerge, each with a different effect on sustainability
(Braccini and Margherita, 2018). Firms following the first route (mainly
Asian companies) have chosen to prioritize the development of
advanced manufacturing and inter-functional collaboration to maximize
the efficiency benefits linked to this new wave of technological innovation (Lopes de Sousa Jabbour et al., 2022; Piccarozzi et al., 2022;
Martínez-Olvera and Mora-Vargas, 2019; Rantala et al., 2019). In the
language of Ghobakhloo et al. (2021b) and Ghobakhloo (2020), these
firms have prioritized the efficiency step of digital transformation.
Conversely, firms on the second route (North American, European, and
Oceanian companies) have tried to incorporate sustainability into their
routines. In particular, they have demonstrated a commitment toward
Table 6
Industry 4.0 technologies: thematic analysis worldwide.
More efficient
production processes
Increased customer
value
Cleaner production
processes
Stronger digital
security
Remote and digital
learning
IoT
Big Data
Add. manuf.
Robots
Self-driving
Aug. reality
Cloud comp.
Cybersecurity
Blockchain
Virtualization
A. Calabrese et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 188 (2023) 122265
9
Table 7
Industry 4.0 technologies: thematic analysis by region.
Africa More efficient
production processes
Increased customer
value
Cleaner production
processes
Stronger digital
security
Remote and digital
learning
IoT
Big Data
Add. manuf.
Robots
Self-driving
Aug. reality
Cloud comp.
Cybersecurity
Blockchain
Virtualization
South
America
More efficient
production processes
Increased customer
value
Cleaner production
processes
Stronger digital
security
Remote and digital
learning
IoT
Big Data
Add. manuf.
Robots
Self-driving
Aug. reality
Cloud comp.
Cybersecurity
Blockchain
Virtualization
Oceania More efficient
production processes
Increased customer
value
Cleaner production
processes
Stronger digital
security
Remote and digital
learning
IoT
Big Data
Add. manuf.
Robots
Self-driving
Aug. reality
Cloud comp.
Cybersecurity
Blockchain
Virtualization
Europe More efficient
production processes
Increased customer
value
Cleaner production
processes
Stronger digital
security
Remote and digital
learning
IoT
Big Data
Add. manuf.
Robots
Self-driving
Aug. reality
Cloud comp.
Cybersecurity
Blockchain
Virtualization
North
America
More efficient
production processes
Increased customer
value
Cleaner production
processes
Stronger digital
security
Remote and digital
learning
IoT
Big Data
Add. manuf.
Robots
Self-driving
Aug. reality
Cloud comp.
Cybersecurity
Blockchain
Virtualization
Asia More efficient
production processes
Increased customer
value
Cleaner production
processes
Stronger digital
security
Remote and digital
learning
IoT
Big Data
Add. manuf.
Robots
Self-driving
Aug. reality
Cloud comp.
Cybersecurity
Blockchain
Virtualization
A. Calabrese et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 188 (2023) 122265
10
sustainable innovation by adopting technologies, such as additive
manufacturing, explicitly designed to address their operations’ environmental impacts (Dixit et al., 2021).
Firms along these routes have, as regards Industry 4.0 and sustainability, different degrees of ambidexterity, namely the ability of an organization to exploit its current resources while keeping an eye on new
opportunities (O’Reilly and Tushman, 2013). Asian companies have
embarked on their digital transformation to pursue the exploitation of
their resources (Gastaldi et al., 2018, 2022). Consequently, they have
become more efficient in terms of time savings and cost reductions. They
have therefore utilized Industry 4.0 to contribute indirectly to sustainability (Rubio et al., 2021; Siltori et al., 2021; Martínez-Olvera and
Mora-Vargas, 2019). Western companies, on the other hand, have
departed from this trajectory and started to explore how to employ
smart technologies to directly reduce their environmental impacts.
Fig. 5 illustrates the discussion about the routes and the firms
following them. The labels on the x-y axes refer to the objectives that are
being pursued moving along each route: efficiency and sustainability.
There are three boxes; each briefly describes its route and lists the
route’s main technologies. The box at the bottom left, as already discussed, indicates that cybersecurity technologies are a prerequisite for
any further movement along the axes, namely for the adoption of Industry 4.0. Thus, they are considered the starting point for both routes.
Firms aggregated by region are displayed on the plot. Their display on
the figure is not based on quantitative calculations; it is rather a
graphical way to summarize the results of the frequency and thematic
analyses in Figs. 2–4 and Tables 6–7. The two routes described above are
also indicated. Asian firms have prioritized efficiency-linked Industry
4.0 technologies and have only indurectly reaped its sustainability
benefits (e.g., resource sparing); thus, they are plotted in the top-left
part. Western firms are displayed in the middle because, although
they too have prioritized efficiency-related technologies, they have also
shown a slight tendency to include in their range some so-called green
technologies (i.e., additive manufacturing). African and South American
companies are at the bottom left as they have only shown a low rate of
adoption of efficiency-related technologies.
Which route has the highest potential to contribute to the triple
bottom line is yet to be determined. Whether eastern companies will in
the long run outpace the efforts of western ones in incorporating sustainability is a matter that will have to be settled by further investigations. In any case, with the material at hand, it is clear that,
irrespectively of the route, one of the three sustainability pillars is still
heavily neglected – social change. Not only has the private sector barely
explored environmental sustainability. It has also failed to employ digital technologies to benefit its stakeholders (Lopes de Sousa Jabbour
et al., 2022; Khan et al., 2021; Soni et al., 2021). Overall, the stage in
which Industry 4.0 and sustainability are effectively merged to create
new profitable and sustainable business models, is still far away.
In summary, Industry 4.0, despite its great opportunities related to
sustainability (Stock and Seliger, 2016; Moldavska and Welo, 2017), is
still little adopted in environmental and social sustainability applications. Case studies might be employed to uncover the reasons as to why
its adoption is still low (Shet and Pereira, 2021). Furthermore, this
research points out that Asia is the most advanced region regarding
Industry 4.0 adoption, whereas Europe and North America are further
ahead in sustainability-related Industry 4.0 activities. Future research
may further investigate this aspect to explore the reasons behind these
differences (e.g., a difference in how the various state-led industrial
Revolutionary
route
Evolutionary
route
Sustainability
SA
EU
NA
OC
Efficiency
Evolutionary route: advanced
manufacturing competences, interfunctional collaboration, and value chain
integration is prioritized.
Main technologies: IoT, big data, robots.
Revolutionary route: green product and
process innovation is explored.
Main technologies: additive
manufacturing, augmented reality,
virtualization.
Starting point: safe data storage and exchange
are necessary for any further Industry 4.0
development.
Main technologies: blockchain, cybersecurity.
AS
AF
Fig. 5. A framework displaying the routes to merge Industry 4.0 and sustainability.
A. Calabrese et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 188 (2023) 122265
11
plans are led) (Siltori et al., 2021). Collecting more data and zooming in
on each region would help in further refining the picture and understanding the main reasons behind the observed patterns. The present
research also shows that the most often adopted technologies for cleaner
production are those known as additive manufacturing, among which
3D printing is prominent. However, additive manufacturing technologies are still used sparingly (6 % of sustainability reports mention them)
compared to other technologies such as cybersecurity (32 %), robots (23
%), and IoT (17 %). Future studies may devise solutions for its diffusion
along other core technologies.
Regarding the study’s methodology, the code is available in the
Supplementary materials and can be used as a basis to further investigate Industry 4.0 sustainability reports. In addition, it lends itself to
different purposes other than thematic analysis of Industry 4.0 technologies’ adoption. For example, with minor changes, it could be used to
determine the presence/absence of specific SDGs in sustainability reports: 1) to investigate the factors affecting their adoption, and 2) to
analyse the most recent trends. With this approach, sustainability
reporting can be further connected to the measurement of SDGs, as
argued by Nylund et al. (2022).
Finally, the framework in Fig. 5, other than providing a global
outline of Industry 4.0 diffusion, is a diagnostic tool that can be applied
by managers and policy makers. Managers who have not yet implemented Industry 4.0 can use this research to increase their awareness of
the available opportunities (Calabrese et al., 2020a). Policy makers, on
the other hand, are challenged to design global solutions to address the
two concerning obstacles that emerged in this research: 1) the need for
sustainability-driven applications of Industry 4.0 (Chen et al., 2021;
Song et al., 2017; de Sousa Jabbour et al., 2018); 2) the huge gap between developed and developing economies regarding the usage of Industry 4.0 (Siltori et al., 2021). Each actor’s reaction to their challenges
will determine whether, in the years ahead, Industry 4.0 will leave a
mark on the green revolution. This will create further challenges, but
also opportunities for managers to deal with the digital transformation
in the context of Industry 4.0 (Sony and Naik, 2019).
5. Limitations
The study is based on 1501 sustainability reports published in the
GRI database. To increase the effectiveness of the computational analysis, only verified GRI-standards reports in English have been collected.
This represents a sub-sample of the reports in the GRI database and, in
general, a sub-sample of the population of firms worldwide. Future
research may use the same approach to investigate different populations. In addition, this study adopts a list of technologies that are
widely considered as Industry 4.0 enablers. As pointed out by Ghobakhloo et al. (2021a) and Kerin and Pham (2019), existing classification schemes tend to be fuzzy and heterogeneous. Thus, alternative
classifications might have been used. Finally, future researchers might
want to take a longitudinal perspective on this phenomenon, or investigate in more depth how cultural differences might have an influence on
the results.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
The authors contributed equally and are listed in alphabetical order.
Armando Calabrese: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft and
revisions. Roberta Costa, Luigi Tiburzi: Conceptualization, Writing –
original draft and revisions. Alexander Brem: Conceptualization,
Writing – original draft and revisions.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
The Python code and the Excel file with reports’ descriptions and
partial results have been uploaded in the supplementary materials. The
corpus containing the text of all the reports as well as its normalized
version are available from the corresponding author upon request.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at doi.:10.1016/j.
techfore.2022.122265.
References
Accenture, 2018. Accenture Corporate Citizenship Report 2018: Improving the Way the
World Works and Lives.
Almeida, Fernando, Simoes, Jorge, 2019. The role of serious games, gamification and
industry 4.0 tools in the education 4.0 paradigm. Contemp. Educ. Technol. 10 (2),
120–136. https://doi.org/10.30935/cet.554469.
Alonso-Almeida, María Del Mar, Marimon, Frederic, Casani, Fernando, RodriguezPomeda, Jesús, 2015. Diffusion of sustainability reporting in universities: current
situation and future perspectives. J. Clean. Prod. 106 (November), 144–154. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.02.008.
AUO, 2018. Corporate Social Responsibility Report.
Awan, Usama, Sroufe, Robert, Shahbaz, Muhammad, 2021. Industry 4.0 and the circular
economy: a literature review and recommendations for future research. Bus. Strateg.
Environ. 30 (4), 2038–2060. https://doi.org/10.1002/BSE.2731.
Bai, Chunguang, Dallasega, Patrick, Orzes, Guido, Sarkis, Joseph, 2020. Industry 4.0
technologies assessment: a sustainability perspective. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 229
(November), 107776 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107776.
Beier, Grischa, Niehoff, Silke, Xue, Bing, 2018. More sustainability in industry through
industrial internet of things? Appl. Sci. 8 (2), 219. https://doi.org/10.3390/
app8020219.
Beier, Grischa, Ullrich, Andr´e, Niehoff, Silke, Reißig, Malte, Habich, Matthias, 2020.
Industry 4.0: how it is defined from a sociotechnical perspective and how much
sustainability it includes – a literature review. J. Clean. Prod. 259 (June), 120856
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2020.120856.
Beltrami, Mirjam, Orzes, Guido, Sarkis, Joseph, Sartor, Marco, 2021. Industry 4.0 and
sustainability: towards conceptualization and theory. J. Clean. Prod. 312 (August),
127733 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2021.127733.
Berman, Barry, 2012. 3-D printing: the new industrial revolution. Bus. Horiz. 55 (2),
155–162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2011.11.003.
Bloomfield, Mark, Borstrock, Shaun, 2018. Modeclix. The additively manufactured
adaptable textile. Mater. Today Commun. 16 (September), 212–216. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.mtcomm.2018.04.002.
Bojanowski, Piotr, Grave, Edouard, Joulin, Armand, Mikolov, Tomas, 2016. Enriching
word vectors with subword information. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguist. 5 (July),
135–146.
Bordeleau, Fanny Eve, Mosconi, Elaine, Antonio, Luis, de Santa-Eulalia., 2020. Business
intelligence and analytics value creation in Industry 4.0: a multiple case study in
manufacturing medium enterprises. Prod. Plan. Control 31 (2–3), 173–185. https://
doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2019.1631458.
Bornmann, Lutz, Haunschild, Robin, Hug, Sven E., 2018. Visualizing the context of
citations referencing papers published by Eugene Garfield: a new type of keyword
co-occurrence analysis. Scientometrics 114 (2), 427–437. https://doi.org/10.1007/
S11192-017-2591-8/TABLES/1.
Braccini, Alessio Maria, Margherita, Emanuele Gabriel, 2018. Exploring organizational
sustainability of Industry 4.0 under the triple bottom line: the case of a
manufacturing company. In: Sustainability 2019, Vol. 11, Page 36, vol. 11 (1), p. 36.
https://doi.org/10.3390/SU11010036.
Brad, Stelian, Murar, Mircea, Brad, Emilia, 2018. Design of smart connected
manufacturing resources to enable changeability, reconfigurability and total-cost-ofownership models in the factory-of-the-future. Int. J. Prod. Res. 56 (6), 2269–2291.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1400705.
Braun, Virginia, Clarke, Victoria, 2012. Thematic analysis. In: APA Handbook of
Research Methods in Psychology, Vol 2: Research Designs: Quantitative, Qualitative,
Neuropsychological, and Biological. American Psychological Association, pp. 57–71.
https://doi.org/10.1037/13620-004.
Brax, Saara A., Calabrese, Armando, Ghiron, Nathan Levialdi, Tiburzi, Luigi,
Gronroos, ¨ Christian, 2021. Explaining the servitization paradox: a configurational
theory and a performance measurement framework. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 41
(5), 517–546. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-08-2020-0535.
Calabrese, Armando, Dora, Manoj, Ghiron, Nathan Levialdi, Tiburzi, Luigi, 2020a.
Industry’s 4.0 transformation process: how to start, where to aim, what to be aware
of. Prod. Plan. Control. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2020.1830315.
Calabrese, Armando, Ghiron, Nathan Levialdi, Tiburzi, Luigi, 2020b. ‘Evolutions’ and
‘revolutions’ in manufacturers’ implementation of Industry 4.0: a literature review, a
multiple case study, and a conceptual framework. Prod. Plan. Control. https://doi.
org/10.1080/09537287.2020.1719715.
Chen, Maozhi, Sinha, Avik, Kexiang, Hu, Shah, Muhammad Ibrahim, 2021. Impact of
technological innovation on energy efficiency in Industry 4.0 era: moderation of
shadow economy in sustainable development. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 164
(March), 120521 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120521.
Chiarini, Andrea, Belvedere, Valeria, Grando, Alberto, 2020. Industry 4.0 strategies and
technological developments. An exploratory research from Italian manufacturing
A. Calabrese et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 188 (2023) 122265
12
companies. Prod. Plan. Control January, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09537287.2019.1710304.
Ching, Ng Tan, Ghobakhloo, Morteza, Iranmanesh, Mohammad, Maroufkhani, Parisa,
Asadi, Shahla, 2022. Industry 4.0 applications for sustainable manufacturing: a
systematic literature review and a roadmap to sustainable development. J. Clean.
Prod. 334 (February), 130133 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2021.130133.
Cisco, 2019. 2019 Corporate Social Responsibility Report.
CLP, 2018. Sustainability Report.
Culot, Giovanna, Fattori, Fabio, Podrecca, Matteo, Sartor, Marco, 2019. Addressing
Industry 4.0 cybersecurity challenges. IEEE Eng. Manag. Rev. 47 (3), 79–86. https://
doi.org/10.1109/EMR.2019.2927559.
Culot, Giovanna, Nassimbeni, Guido, Orzes, Guido, Sartor, Marco, 2020. Behind the
definition of Industry 4.0: analysis and open questions. Int. J. Prod. Econ. January,
107617 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107617.
Dahmani, Noureddine, Benhida, Khalid, Belhadi, Amine, Kamble, Sachin, Elfezazi, Said,
Jauhar, Sunil Kumar, 2021. Smart circular product design strategies towards ecoeffective production systems: a lean eco-design Industry 4.0 framework. J. Clean.
Prod. 320 (October), 128847 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2021.128847.
Dalenogare, Lucas Santos, Benitez, Guilherme Brittes, Ayala, N´estor Fabi´
an,
Frank, Alejandro German, ´ 2018. The expected contribution of Industry 4.0
technologies for industrial performance. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 204 (October), 383–394.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2018.08.019.
de Sousa Jabbour, Ana Beatriz Lopes, Jabbour, Charbel Jose Chiappetta, Foropon, Cyril,
Filho, Moacir Godinho, 2018. When titans meet – can Industry 4.0 revolutionise the
environmentally-sustainable manufacturing wave? The role of critical success
factors. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
techfore.2018.01.017.
Dixit, Aasheesh, Jakhar, Suresh Kumar, Kumar, Patanjal, 2021. Does lean and sustainable
manufacturing lead to Industry 4.0 adoption: the mediating role of ambidextrous
innovation capabilities. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. November, 121328. https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.TECHFORE.2021.121328.
Dwivedi, Ashish, Moktadir, Md. Abdul, Jabbour, Charbel Jos´e Chiappetta, de
Carvalho, Daniel Estima, 2021. Integrating the circular economy and Industry 4.0 for
sustainable development: implications for responsible footwear production in a big
data-driven world. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. November, 121335 https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.TECHFORE.2021.121335.
Ejsmont, Krzysztof, Gladysz, Bartlomiej, Kluczek, Aldona, 2020. Impact of Industry 4.0
on sustainability—bibliometric literature review. Sustainability 12 (14), 5650.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su12145650.
Esmaeilian, Behzad, Wang, Ben, Lewis, Kemper, Duarte, Fabio, Ratti, Carlo,
Behdad, Sara, 2018. The future of waste management in smart and sustainable cities:
a review and concept paper. In: Waste Management. Elsevier Ltd. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.wasman.2018.09.047
Ford, 2018. Sustainability Report 2017/18.
Gabriel, M., Pessl, E., 2016. Industry 4.0 and sustainability impacts: critical discussion of
sustainability aspects with a special focus on future of work and ecological
consequences. Ann. Fac. Eng. Hunedoara 14 (2).
Gary, Robert F., Marinakis, Yorgos, Majadillas, Mary Anne, White, Reilly, Walsh, Steven
T., 2019. Legitimate firms or hackers - who is winning the global cyber war? Int. J.
Technol. Intell. Plan. 12 (3), 297–314. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJTIP.2019.099243.
Gastaldi, Luca, Appio, Francesco Paolo, Corso, Mariano, Pistorio, Andrea, 2018.
Managing the exploration-exploitation paradox in healthcare: three complementary
paths to leverage on the digital transformation. Bus. Process. Manag. J. 24 (5),
1200–1234. https://doi.org/10.1108/BPMJ-04-2017-0092.
Gastaldi, Luca, Lessanibahri, Sina, Tedaldi, Gianluca, Miragliotta, Giovanni, 2022.
Companies’ adoption of smart technologies to achieve structural ambidexterity: an
analysis with SEM. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 174 (January), 121187 https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.TECHFORE.2021.121187.
Ghobakhloo, Morteza, 2020. Industry 4.0, digitization, and opportunities for
sustainability. J. Clean. Prod. 252 (April), 119869 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
JCLEPRO.2019.119869.
Ghobakhloo, Morteza, Fathi, Masood, Iranmanesh, Mohammad, Maroufkhani, Parisa,
Morales, Manuel E., 2021a. Industry 4.0 ten years on: a bibliometric and systematic
review of concepts, sustainability value drivers, and success determinants. J. Clean.
Prod. 302 (June), 127052 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2021.127052.
Ghobakhloo, Morteza, Iranmanesh, Mohammad, Grybauskas, Andrius, Vilkas, Mantas,
Petraite, ˙ Monika, 2021b. Industry 4.0, innovation, and sustainable development: a
systematic review and a roadmap to sustainable innovation. Bus. Strateg. Environ.
30 (8), 4237–4257. https://doi.org/10.1002/BSE.2867.
Gioia, Dennis A., Corley, Kevin G., Hamilton, Aimee L., 2013. Seeking qualitative rigor in
inductive research. Organ. Res. Methods 16 (1), 15–31. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1094428112452151.
GOLDCORP, 2017. Operational Excellence Sustainable Value. https://doi.org/10.1201/
b21925.
Gupta, Himanshu, Kumar, Ashwani, Wasan, Pratibha, 2021. Industry 4.0, cleaner
production and circular economy: an integrative framework for evaluating ethical
and sustainable business performance of manufacturing organizations. J. Clean.
Prod. 295 (May), 126253 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2021.126253.
Hearst, Marti, 2003. What Is Text Mining?.
Herrmann, Christoph, Schmidt, Christopher, Kurle, Denis, Blume, Stefan,
Thiede, Sebastian, 2014. Sustainability in manufacturing and factories of the future.
Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf. Green Technol. 1 (4), 283–292. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s40684-014-0034-z.
Ibarra, Dorleta, Ganzarain, Jaione, Igartua, Juan Ignacio, 2018. Business model
innovation through Industry 4.0: a review. In: Procedia Manufacturing, 22. Elsevier
B.V., pp. 4–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2018.03.002
Ingaldi, Manuela, Ulewicz, Robert, 2019. Problems with the implementation of Industry
4.0 in enterprises from the SME sector. Sustainability 12 (1), 217. https://doi.org/
10.3390/su12010217.
Jabbour, Charbel Jose, Chiappetta, Ana Beatriz, de Sousa, Lopes, Jabbour, Joseph Sarkis,
Filho, Moacir Godinho, 2019. Unlocking the circular economy through new business
models based on large-scale data: an integrative framework and research agenda.
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 144 (July), 546–552. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
techfore.2017.09.010.
Jazdi, N., 2014. Cyber physical systems in the context of Industry 4.0. In: Proceedings of
2014 IEEE International Conference on Automation, Quality and Testing, Robotics,
AQTR 2014. IEEE Computer Society. https://doi.org/10.1109/
AQTR.2014.6857843.
Jung, Kiwook, Choi, SangSu, Kulvatunyou, Boonserm, Cho, Hyunbo, Morris, K.C., 2017.
A reference activity model for smart factory design and improvement. Prod. Plan.
Control 28 (2), 108–122. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2016.1237686.
Kang, Hyoung Seok, Lee, Ju Yeon, Choi, SangSu, Kim, Hyun, Park, Jun Hee, Son, Ji Yeon,
Kim, Bo Hyun, Do Noh, Sang, 2016. Smart manufacturing: past research, present
findings, and future directions. Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf. Green Technol. 3 (1),
111–128. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40684-016-0015-5.
Keppel Corporation, 2017. Solutions for Sustainable Urbanisation.
Kerin, Mairi, Pham, Duc Truong, 2019. A review of emerging Industry 4.0 technologies
in remanufacturing. J. Clean. Prod. 237.
Kerin, Mairi, Pham, Duc Truong, 2020. Smart remanufacturing: a review and research
framework. In: Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management. Emerald Group
Publishing Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1108/JMTM-06-2019-0205
Khan, Iqra Sadaf, Ahmad, Muhammad Ovais, Majava, Jukka, 2021. Industry 4.0 and
sustainable development: a systematic mapping of triple bottom line, circular
economy and sustainable business models perspectives. J. Clean. Prod. 297 (May),
126655 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2021.126655.
Kiel, Daniel, Arnold, Christian, Voigt, Kai-Ingo, 2017. The influence of the industrial
internet of things on business models of established manufacturing companies - a
business level perspective. Technovation 68 (December 2017), 4–19. https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0166497216303169.
Kohtam¨
aki, Marko, Parida, Vinit, Patel, Pankaj C., Gebauer, Heiko, 2020. The
relationship between digitalization and servitization: the role of servitization in
capturing the financial potential of digitalization. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 151
(February), 119804 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2019.119804.
Kristoffersen, Eivind, Blomsma, Fenna, Mikalef, Patrick, Li, Jingyue, 2020. The smart
circular economy: a digital-enabled circular strategies framework for manufacturing
companies. J. Bus. Res. 120 (November), 241–261. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbusres.2020.07.044.
Krungsri, 2018. Sustainability Report.
Kumar, Sandeep, Purohit, Bhushan S., Manjrekar, Vikas, Singh, Vivek, Lad, Bhupesh
Kumar, 2018. Investigating the value of integrated operations planning: a case-based
approach from automotive industry. Int. J. Prod. Res. January https://doi.org/
10.1080/00207543.2018.1424367.
Kumar, Anil, Agrawal, Rohit, Wankhede, Vishal A., Sharma, Manu, Mulatweldemeskel, Eyob, 2022. A framework for assessing social acceptability of Industry
4.0 technologies for the development of digital manufacturing. Technol. Forecast.
Soc. Chang. 174 (January), 121217 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
TECHFORE.2021.121217.
Landrum, Nancy E., Ohsowski, Brian, 2018. Identifying worldviews on corporate
sustainability: a content analysis of corporate sustainability reports. Bus. Strateg.
Environ. 27 (1), 128–151. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.1989.
Lee, Chien Chiang, Qin, Shuai, Li, Yaya, 2022. Does industrial robot application promote
green technology innovation in the manufacturing industry? Technol. Forecast. Soc.
Chang. 183 (October), 121893 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TECHFORE.2022.121893.
Li, Jingran, Tao, Fei, Cheng, Ying, Zhao, Liangjin, 2015. Big data in product lifecycle
management. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 81 (1–4), 667–684. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00170-015-7151-x.
Liao, Yongxin, Deschamps, Fernando, de Freitas, Eduardo, Loures, Rocha, Ramos, Luiz
Felipe Pierin, 2017. Past, present and future of Industry 4.0 - a systematic literature
review and research agenda proposal. Int. J. Prod. Res. 55 (12), 3609–3629. https://
doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1308576.
Lopes de Sousa Jabbour, Ana Beatriz, Jabbour, Charbel Jose Chiappetta, Choi, Tsan
Ming, Latan, Hengky, 2022. ‘Better together’: evidence on the joint adoption of
circular economy and Industry 4.0 technologies. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 252 (October),
108581 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPE.2022.108581.
Lu, Hsi Peng, Weng, Chien I., 2018. Smart manufacturing technology, market maturity
analysis and technology roadmap in the computer and electronic product
manufacturing industry. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 133 (August), 85–94.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.03.005.
Machado, Carla Gonçalves, Winroth, Mats Peter, da Silva, Elias Hans Dener Ribeiro,
2019. Sustainable Manufacturing in Industry 4.0: An Emerging Research Agenda,
vol. 58 (5), pp. 1462–1484. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2019.1652777.
A. Calabrese et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 188 (2023) 122265
13
Martínez-Olvera, C´esar, Mora-Vargas, Jaime, 2019. A comprehensive framework for the
analysis of Industry 4.0 value domains. Sustainability 11 (10). https://doi.org/
10.3390/SU11102960.
Melville, Nigel P., 2010. Information systems innovation for environmental
sustainability. MIS Q. 34 (1), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.2307/20721412.
Moeuf, Alexandre, Pellerin, Robert, Lamouri, Samir, Tamayo-Giraldo, Simon,
Barbaray, Rodolphe, 2018. The industrial management of SMEs in the era of Industry
4.0. Int. J. Prod. Res. 56 (3), 1118–1136. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207543.2017.1372647.
Moldavska, Anastasiia, Welo, Torgeir, 2017. The concept of sustainable manufacturing
and its definitions: a content-analysis based literature review. In: Journal of Cleaner
Production. Elsevier Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.08.006
Müller, Julian Marius, Buliga, Oana, Voigt, Kai-Ingo, 2018. Fortune favors the prepared:
how SMEs approach business model innovations in Industry 4.0. Technol. Forecast.
Soc. Chang. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.12.019.
Nagy, Judit, Olah, ´ Judit, Erdei, Edina, Mat ´ ´e, Domici´
an, Popp, Jozsef, ´ 2018. The role and
impact of Industry 4.0 and the internet of things on the business strategy of the value
chain—the case of Hungary. In: Sustainability 2018, Vol. 10, Page 3491, vol. 10
(10), p. 3491. https://doi.org/10.3390/SU10103491.
Niehoff, Silke, 2022. Aligning digitalisation and sustainable development? Evidence
from the analysis of worldviews in sustainability reports. Bus. Strateg. Environ. 31
(5), 2546–2567. https://doi.org/10.1002/BSE.3043.
Nosalska, Katarzyna, Piątek, Zbigniew Michał, Mazurek, Grzegorz, Rządca, Robert, 2020.
Industry 4.0: coherent definition framework with technological and organizational
interdependencies. J. Manuf. Technol. Manag. 31 (5), 837–862. https://doi.org/
10.1108/JMTM-08-2018-0238/FULL/XML.
Nylund, P.A., Brem, A., 2021. Do open innovation and dominant design foster digital
innovation? Int. J. Innov. Manag. 25 (09), 2150098.
Nylund, P.A., Agarwal, N., Probst, C., Brem, A., 2022. Firm engagement in UN
Sustainable Development Goals: introduction of a constraints map from a corporate
reports content analysis. J. Clean. Prod. 371, 133446.
Oettmeier, Katrin, Hofmann, Erik, 2017. Additive manufacturing technology adoption:
an empirical analysis of general and supply chain-related determinants. J. Bus. Econ.
87 (1), 97–124. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11573-016-0806-8.
O’Reilly, Charles A., Tushman, Michael L., 2013. Organizational ambidexterity: past,
present, and future. Acad. Manag. Perspect. 27 (4), 324–338. https://doi.org/
10.5465/AMP.2013.0025.
Ortt, Roland, Stolwijk, Claire, Punter, Matthijs, 2020. Implementing Industry 4.0:
assessing the current state. J. Manuf. Technol. Manag. 31 (5), 825–836. https://doi.
org/10.1108/JMTM-07-2020-0284/FULL/PDF.
Peukert, Bernd, Benecke, Stephan, Clavell, Janire, Neugebauer, Sabrina, Nissen, Nils F.,
Uhlmann, Eckart, Lang, Klaus Dieter, Finkbeiner, Matthias, 2015. Addressing
sustainability and flexibility in manufacturing via smart modular machine tool
frames to support sustainable value creation. In: Procedia CIRP, vol. 29. Elsevier B.
V., pp. 514–519. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2015.02.181
Piccarozzi, Michela, Aquilani, Barbara, Gatti, Corrado, 2018. Industry 4.0 in
management studies: a systematic literature review. In: Sustainability 2018, Vol. 10,
Page 3821, vol. 10 (10), p. 3821. https://doi.org/10.3390/SU10103821.
Piccarozzi, Michela, Silvestri, Cecilia, Aquilani, Barbara, Silvestri, Luca, 2022. Is this a
new story of the ‘two giants’? A systematic literature review of the relationship
between Industry 4.0, sustainability and its pillars. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang.
177 (April), 121511 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TECHFORE.2022.121511.
Rantala, Tero, Ukko, Juhani, Saunila, Minna, Puolakoski, Hanna, Rantanen, Hannu,
2019. Creating sustainable customer value through digitality. World J. Entrep.
Manag. Sustain. Dev. 15 (4), 325–340. https://doi.org/10.1108/WJEMSD-08-2018-
0077.
Rauschnabel, Philipp A., Brem, Alexander, Ivens, Bjoern S., 2015. Who will buy smart
glasses? Empirical results of two pre-market-entry studies on the role of personality
in individual awareness and intended adoption of Google glass wearables. Comput.
Hum. Behav. 49 (August), 635–647. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CHB.2015.03.003.
Raut, R.D., Gotmare, A., Narkhede, B.E., Govindarajan, U.H., Bokade, S.U., 2020.
Enabling technologies for Industry 4.0 manufacturing and supply chain: concepts,
current status, and adoption challenges. IEEE Eng. Manag. Rev. 48 (2), 83–102.
Redondo, Yolanda Polo, Fierro, Jesús J. Cambra, 2007. Importance of company size in
long-term orientation of supply function: an empirical research. J. Bus. Ind. Mark. 22
(4), 236–248. https://doi.org/10.1108/08858620710754504.
Rubio, Francisco, Llopis-Albert, Carlos, Valero, Francisco, 2021. Multi-objective
optimization of costs and energy efficiency associated with autonomous industrial
processes for sustainable growth. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 173 (December),
121115 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TECHFORE.2021.121115.
Sanders, Adam, Elangeswaran, Chola, Wulfsberg, Jens, 2016. Industry 4.0 implies lean
manufacturing: research activities in Industry 4.0 function as enablers for lean
manufacturing. J. Ind. Eng. Manag. 9 (3), 811–833. https://doi.org/10.3926/
jiem.1940.
Santos, Marc Ericson C., in Wolde Lübke, Arno, Taketomi, Takafumi,
Yamamoto, Goshiro, Rodrigo, Ma Mercedes T., Sandor, Christian, Kato, Hirokazu,
2016. Augmented reality as multimedia: the case for situated vocabulary learning.
Res. Pract. Technol. Enhanc. Learn. 11 (1) https://doi.org/10.1186/s41039-016-
0028-2.
Sarkar, Dipanjan, 2019. Text Analytics with Python. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-
4842-4354-1.
Schmidt, Rainer, Mohring, ¨ Michael, Harting, ¨ Ralf Christian, Reichstein, Christopher,
Neumaier, Pascal, Jozinovi´c, Philip, 2015. Industry 4.0 - potentials for creating
smart products: empirical research results. In: Lecture Notes in Business Information
Processing, vol. 208. Springer Verlag, pp. 16–27. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-19027-3_2.
Schneider, Paul, 2018. Managerial challenges of Industry 4.0: an empirically backed
research agenda for a nascent field. Rev. Manag. Sci. 12 (3), 803–848. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11846-018-0283-2.
Sharma, Rohit, Jabbour, Charbel Jos´e Chiappetta, Lopes, Ana Beatriz, de Sousa Jabbour.,
2020. Sustainable manufacturing and Industry 4.0: what we know and what we
don’t. J. Enterp. Inf. Manag. 34 (1), 230–266. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-01-
2020-0024/FULL/XML.
Shet, Sateesh V., Pereira, Vijay, 2021. Proposed managerial competencies for Industry
4.0 – implications for social sustainability. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 173
(December), 121080 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TECHFORE.2021.121080.
Shou, Yongyi, Zhao, Xinyu, Chen, Lujie, 2019. Operations strategy of cloud-based firms:
achieving firm growth in the big data era. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. https://doi.org/
10.1108/IJOPM-01-2019-0089.
Siltori, Patricia F.S., Anholon, Rosley, Rampasso, Izabela Simon, Quelhas, Osvaldo L.G.,
Santa-Eulalia, Luis A., Filho, Walter Leal, 2021. Industry 4.0 and corporate
sustainability: an exploratory analysis of possible impacts in the Brazilian context.
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 167 (June), 120741 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
TECHFORE.2021.120741.
Sjodin, ¨ David, Parida, Vinit, Kohtamaki, ¨ Marko, Wincent, Joakim, 2020. An agile cocreation process for digital servitization: a micro-service innovation approach.
J. Bus. Res. 112 (May), 478–491. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.01.009.
Song, Malin, Qianqian, Du, Zhu, Qingyuan, 2017. A theoretical method of environmental
performance evaluation in the context of big data. Prod. Plan. Control 28 (11− 12),
976–984. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2017.1336801.
Soni, Gunjan, Mangla, Sachin Kumar, Singh, Pallavi, Dey, Bidit L., Dora, Manoj, 2021.
Technological interventions in social business: mapping current research and
establishing future research agenda. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 169 (August),
120818 https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TECHFORE.2021.120818.
Sony, Michael, Naik, Subhash, 2019. Critical factors for the successful implementation of
Industry 4.0: a review and future research direction. Prod. Plan. Control. https://doi.
org/10.1080/09537287.2019.1691278.
STMicroelectronics, and Air Products, 2020. 2020 Sustainability Report.
Stock, T., Seliger, G., 2016. Opportunities of sustainable manufacturing in Industry 4.0.
In: Procedia CIRP, vol. 40. Elsevier B.V., pp. 536–541. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
procir.2016.01.129
Stock, Tim, Obenaus, Michael, Kunz, Sascha, Kohl, Holger, 2018. Industry 4.0 as enabler
for a sustainable development: a qualitative assessment of its ecological and social
potential. Process. Saf. Environ. Prot. 118 (August), 254–267. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.PSEP.2018.06.026.
Strange, Roger, Zucchella, Antonella, 2017. Industry 4.0, global value chains and
international business. Multinatl. Bus. Rev. 25 (3), 174–184. https://doi.org/
10.1108/MBR-05-2017-0028.
Strozzi, Fernanda, Colicchia, Claudia, Creazza, Alessandro, No`e, Carlo, 2017. Literature
review on the ‘smart factory’ concept using bibliometric tools. Int. J. Prod. Res. 55
(22), 6572–6591. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1326643.
Swisscom, 2019. Sustainability Report.
TMG Automotive, 2019. Sustainability Report.
Tripathi, Shubham, Gupta, Manish, 2021. A holistic model for global Industry 4.0
readiness assessment. Benchmarking 28 (10), 3006–3039. https://doi.org/10.1108/
BIJ-07-2020-0354/FULL/XML.
van Eck, Nees Jan, Waltman, Ludo, 2010. Software survey: VOSviewer, a computer
program for bibliometric mapping. Scientometrics 84 (2), 523–538. https://doi.org/
10.1007/S11192-009-0146-3/FIGURES/7.
Verma, Pratima, Kumar, Vimal, Daim, Tugrul, Sharma, Nagendra Kumar, Mittal, Ankesh,
2022. Identifying and prioritizing impediments of industry 4.0 to sustainable digital
manufacturing: a mixed method approach. J. Clean. Prod. 356 (July), 131639
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2022.131639.
Walgreens, 2018. Corporate Social Sustainability Report.
Watanabe, Edson H., da Silva, Robson M., Junqueira, Fabricio, dos Santos, Diolino J.,
Filho, and Paulo E. Miyagi., 2016. An emerging industrial business model
considering sustainability evaluation and using cyber physical system technology
and modelling techniques. IFAC-PapersOnLine 49 (32), 135–140. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.IFACOL.2016.12.203.
Weking, Jorg, ¨ Stocker, ¨ Maria, Kowalkiewicz, Marek, Bohm, ¨ Markus, Krcmar, Helmut,
2020. Leveraging Industry 4.0 – a business model pattern framework. Int. J. Prod.
Econ. 225 (July), 107588 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.107588.
Xu, Li Da, Xu, Eric L., Li, Ling, 2018. Industry 4.0: state of the art and future trends. Int. J.
Prod. Res. 56 (8), 2941–2962. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1444806.
A. Calabrese et al. 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 188 (2023) 122265
14
Zavadsk ´ a, ´ Zuzana, Z´
avadský, J´
an, 2018. Quality managers and their future technological
expectations related to Industry 4.0. Total Qual. Manag. Bus. Excell. https://doi.org/
10.1080/14783363.2018.1444474.
Zheng, Ting, Ardolino, Marco, Bacchetti, Andrea, Perona, Marco, 2020. The Applications
of Industry 4.0 Technologies in Manufacturing Context: A Systematic Literature
Review, vol. 59 (6), pp. 1922–1954. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207543.2020.1824085.
Zutshi, Ambika, Creed, dio Andrew, Sohal, Amrik, 2009. Child labour and supply chain:
profitability or (mis)management. Eur. Bus. Rev. https://doi.org/10.1108/
09555340910925175.
Armando Calabrese is an Associate Professor of Management Engineering at the University of Rome ‘Tor Vergata’, where he received his PhD. He had international research
experience as visiting research fellow at the Advanced Services Group at Aston Business
School, Aston University (UK) and at the Department of Management, Society and
Communication at Copenhagen Business School (Denmark). His main research interests
are service management and economics, sustainability, health and public management.
Roberta Costa, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor in the Department of Enterprise Engineering of the University of Rome ‘Tor Vergata’, Italy. Her current research interests
include: Corporate Sustainability, Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), Sustainability
Reporting, Stakeholder Engagement, CSR communication, green marketing, Knowledge
Management.
Luigi Tiburzi is a Researcher in Management Engineering at the University of Rome, ‘Tor
Vergata’, where he received his PhD. He is interested in the role of services in shaping the
business models of manufacturers, from revenue making and sustainability perspectives.
In addition, he is interested in understanding the role new technologies play in firms’
strategies.
Alexander Brem is an Endowed Chaired Professor and Institute Head with the University
of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany. In addition, he is an Honorary Professor with the University of Southern Denmark, Sønderborg, Denmark. Alexander Brem studied business
administration with a major in entrepreneurship at Friedrich-Alexander-University
Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), where he also received his PhD in 2007, respectively.
A. Calabrese et al. 