THE SOUTH AFRICAN SOFTWARE INDUSTRY AS A KEY
COMPONENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: PIPEDREAM OR
POSSIBILITY?
Patrick Mukala
Software Engineering
Tshwane University of Technology
October, 2009
Abstract:
The Information and Communication sector has
undoubtedly played a pivotal role in changing
the way people live nowadays. Almost every
area of our lives is affected by the presence and
the use of the new information and
communication technologies. In this regard,
many researchers’ attention has been attracted by
the influence or the significant impact of these
technologies on economic growth and
development. Although the history of South
Africa has had some drawbacks that could
constitute a big obstacle to the emergence of a
successful economic environment, the actual
status of the country regarding its economy and
the role that it plays in Africa towards the rest of
the African countries is a vital example of an
emerging economic force in Africa. This paper
examines the crucial role that ICT has played
and is still playing in the South African economy
growth and more specifically the significance of
the economic effects of the software industry. It
makes use of the framework used by Heavin et
al. (2003) to investigate the Irish software
industry in order to analyze the impact of
endogenous factors-national, enterprise and
individual - on the software industry and its
implication on the economic growth in South
Africa.
Keywords: South African Software Industry,
economic growth, ICT sector, government
intervention, exogenous (external) factors,
endogenous (internal) factors.
I. Introduction
The survival of any country in times in crisis and
its potential aim to its global development are
critical factors that constitute key roles of any
government in any nation world wide. The
economic area of the country constitutes its
enormous potential for its development and well
being of its population. On the other hand,
supporting the economy requires a deep and
careful management of resources at the country’s
disposal as well as the contribution of other vital
areas of the country’s asset such us industry. The
case of South Africa’s economy constitutes the
main focal point of its paper; the importance and
diverse industrial means that are in place to
sustain this country’s economic force for the well
being of its 44 millions population forms a
complete interest of many researchers.
The information and Technology sector and
telecommunications are nowadays regarded as a
potential cornerstone to economic boost. The
software industry in particular has had an
increasing impact on the development and
spectacular growth of economic sectors in many
countries world wide. Considered as one of
major industries in the world, the software
industry has successfully contributed to the
development and significant growth of the
economic sectors in an impressive growing
number of countries such as Singapore, China,
India and most definitely Ireland. The latter’s
changes in its economic development is an
inspiring example from which this paper draws a
perspective view on how concentrating on
Information Technology and especially the
software industry in the economic policies of the
government has a significant impact on the
growth of the economic area towards the
country’s industrial development.
In their analysis of the successful influence of
the software industry on the Irish economic
growth, Heavin et al. (2003) support that any
other countries that would like to strategically
adopt software industry as a key component
towards accomplishing economic development
should understand the interaction between both
policy and socio-cultural factors. This just
implies that these countries that aim to achieve
the same results or grow their economic force
need to have a better comprehension of the vital
factors that have critically influenced the 
emergence of Ireland’s software industry and
thus, these findings can provide significant
lessons in order to achieve the same goal.
The software industry, as a global industry, is
inextricably link with hardware technologies;
that is towards its implication on the economic
development, this impact is also felt on the
contribution of the manufacturing industry,
especially hardware manufacturing companies.
Hardware applications are developed to suit the
needs of emerging software packages. There is
an interchangeable influence of both software
applications and hardware designs. The
implications of software industry are very
significant on almost every area of the
Information and Communication technology
(ICT) sector. Thus, the contributions of the entire
ICT on the development and growth of the
economy clearly demonstrates indirectly the
impact of the software industry as the latter plays
a significant role when we refer to the new
information and communication technologies in
general. One cannot talk about the Information
and Communication Technologies without
referencing the software industry.
How policies regarding economic development
are implemented, is undeniably a key facilitator
for an effective economic takeoff and successful
growth. As mentioned previously, the
Information and Communication Technology
area should be critically considered and highly
prioritized in implementing these policies. Let
have a look at how these are perceived in South
Africa.
The Information Technology field, as sustained
by a great number of published research reports
has constantly attracted the attention of the South
Africa’s government regarding its approach its
potential contribution to economic growth and
development (Breitenbach et al. , 2005).
In promoting and sustaining the implementation
of the Information and Communication
Technology in South Africa, a range of
initiatives has been considered to excite its
growth and thus contribute to the economic
development. One of these initiatives is the
SAITIS project (South African Information
Technology Industry Strategy) project.
According to a report published by the
department of Trade and Industry in 2000 on
“South African ICT sector development
framework Summary”, the South African
Information Technology Industry Strategy
(SAITIS) project was developed in 1994. In this
report, it is sustained that new processes needed
to be put in place during that transition period to
replace the Apartheid structures in order to
empower South Africa. The main objective of
the project was “to bridge the global and local
development gaps and develop a robust, growing
and sustainable South African Information and
Communications Technology Sector that would
directly support and contribute to the challenges
of sustainable economic growth, social
upliftment and empowerment”(Department of
Trade and Industry,2000).
According to SAITIS, the ICT area of South
Africa includes major industries such as
Hardware and Telecommunications equipment
manufacturing companies, and a wide range of
services that include services that deal with
software applications development, software
packages products and services that directly
concern the telecommunication area. All these
areas have increasingly contributed to the
country’s economic revenue. An example in this
regard would be the case of telecommunication
infrastructures in 2002; their contribution was
estimated to R74 billion compared to only R7
billion in 1992.
Former President Thabo Mbeki while addressing
the people in the official State of Nation Address
in 2007, pointed out a number of precise goals
and objectives that need to be reached in order to
boost South Africa to a better standard level, and
to fulfill the vision of an improved and excellent
life for all South Africans as a result of a strong
economic country’s status. These specific set
goals include among other factors how to raise
the rate of investment especially in the first
economy, enhance the possibility of doing
business by reducing cost and promote the
development of the small and medium business
sector. All these goals can only be possible if
technology is considered as a pivotal factor and
key component of the economic growth.
In the following lines, our main focus will be to
demonstrate the direct and indirect implications
that the ICT sector, more specifically the
software industry has had on the South African
economic force development and future possible
trends that this industry has on the entire
economic sector of the country. We look at 
different possible internal or external factors that
contribute to the emergence of this economic
force; what approaches have been considered by
the economic policy planners or the South
African government to sustain the development
of a strong software industry with a long-term
vision of the implications of the latter on
strengthening the country’s economic force.
II. Literature Review
Information technology (IT) has been and
continues to draw attention from researchers and
economical analysts on how it affects economic
growth in developing countries, especially
Africa. As previously mentioned, in the midst of
the collection of technologies that make up the
industry software is very important since the rest
of technologies do critically require software so
as to function, and most of them are even derived
from software. The software industry forms
without any doubt an essential if not the most
essential component of the overall value brought
by the information and communication
technologies as a whole.
There is a view that prevails in economics and
this view supports that economic growth is
without a doubt driven by advances and
innovation that take place in technology because
this enables a more efficient production. The
direct effect of technology revolutions can be
perceived through Information and
Communication Technology; hence, for this
ultimate reason they are considered as an
essential and critical factor to driving economic
development nowadays (Pohjola, 2002).
Dr. Nagy Hanna of the World Bank and his
partners in their research on national software
industry development strongly believe that
Information and communication technologies
and related services have and still are
contributing to innovative changes in business
and citizens’ everyday life. If this does not
happen in developing countries, meaning if these
technologies are not significant in developing
countries, a big gap will be created between
these people and the global information society.
These technologies enormously impact on social
and economic development (Hanna et al., 2003).
From a traditional point of view, researchers
have explained the economic success of any
national industry based on a couple of terms
from macro-economy. These related terms
include among others interest and exchange
rates, the value of natural resources,
government’s policy and practical implications
in the market force…The last factor namely the
government intervention is the cornerstone to
promoting a strong economic politics through
sustaining software industry.
For almost a decade, software production has
been considered as an exclusive industry and its
implication perceived nowadays as an important
and essential for the successful development of
developing countries’ economies and of
nowadays an industry, essential for the growth of
the economies of the developing countries; and
the initiation of plans to promote software
industries in these countries is a main concern
(Heeks, 1996).
Because of their success in implementing
software industry as a critical element of
economic initiatives empowerment, a World
Bank report has classified a number of countries
based on a set of four factors with regards to
software production: China for its strategy
regarding the cost, Singapore and Ireland with
regards to the language used as they are Englishspeaking nations, India, Ireland, Singapore and
Israel for promoting a favorable atmosphere that
enables doing business (Carmel, 2003).
In this regard, the government’s action on
supporting the growth of software industry has a
great significance on the impact of the latter on
the country’s economic development; its
practical contribution would be through
supporting higher education, providing funds and
promoting research activities in accordance with
technology and economic growth, and most
importantly endowing regulations that are
favorable to investment in corporate (Shirley et
al., 1997).
In recent researches’ reports, it is sustainable that
technology and innovative activities enable an
enhanced economic growth in developing
countries and these reports indicate that there
exists a major rapprochement between both
growth in productivity and progress in
technology (Breitenbach et al., 2005).
From a study on how information technology
impacts economic development in developing
countries, Professor Chrisanthi Avgerou argues
that most of modern theories on economic
change do actually recognize the importance of
information and communication technologies
(Avgerou, 1998). In order to get the meaning of
economic development and technical innovation,
he points out the Noe-Schumpeterian theory.
This cited theory explains how certain
technologies have a real persistent impact in
economic development. Thus, it is implied in
this theory that “a given technology have impact
on economy if it engenders a number of new
products and services; it reduces the actual costs
and contributes to the improvement of used
processes, services and products of many sectors
of the economy; gains widespread social
acceptance; and generates strong industrial
interest as means for profitability and
competitive advantage” (Avgerou, 1998).
From this perspective, when considering the
Information Technology domain with the
software industry as its centre as mentioned
previously in this paper, we get the idea that
numerous studies have been conducted to
understand the link between development with
regards to economic growth and technology
more specifically information and
communication technologies.
Breitenbach et al. in their research on the impact
of Information and Communication
Technologies on South Africa argue that these
technologies have a significance impact on
companies’ productivity and that Information
and Communication Technologies improve the
mechanisms used by firms to retrieve, collect,
transfer and manage huge amounts of data. This
produces a direct positive outcome in the sense
that it reduces costs related to processes in
accordance with information management within
the concerned companies (Breitenbach et al.,
2005).The evolving software industry constitutes
a path to a wide range of countries such as South
Africa to enter the global Information
Technology production market (Heeks,1996).
Heeks argues that figures tend to sustain that the
use of software industry, more specifically
exporting software products has contributed to
the success of establishing strong growing
industries in certain countries and hence this
constitutes an evitable boost for their economic
development. Among these countries, India can
be picked as an example with statistics showing
that in the past decade, precisely between the
periods from 94 to 95, exporting software
products generated 40 millions US dollars and
this result grows by 4 percent or even more every
year (Heeks, 1996).
From all these studies, it is undoubtedly clear
that the software industry has been targeted by
wide range of countries, especially new
emerging industrial and developing countries
mainly for its capacity to engender revenue
either by means of exportation or any other
value-added indicator that it constitutes for other
industries. In the same perspective, it essentially
requires efficient strategies and strong milestones
for the effectiveness of the government in order
to take local companies and firms in all other
industries at a competitive dimension (Shirley et
al., 2003).
Even for the most industrialized countries,
software engineering is a potential factor for
driving significant growth in economy; such
powerful countries include for instance the
United States of America and Microsoft is a
tangible example of powerful resource that
shows the impact of the software industry in this
country’s economic sector (Momodu et al.,
2007).
The value of the information and communication
technologies has been recognized as a significant
component for economic upliftment by different
administrative entities, ranging from government
structures to public sector. In August 2008, while
addressing delegates at the GovTech, South
African Minister for Pubic Service and
Administration, Geraldine Fraser Moleketi
makes this statement: “Any incremental
improvement in public services through ICT
spends should positively impact on millions of
people. Can we really say that is the case? How
many ICT projects that have been delivered in
the past few years have contributed positively to
the millions of people in South Africa?”(ITWeb
Informatica, 2009).
Pointing out the vision of the South African
government on economy, Isaac Mophatlane, the
Head of Public Sector at Business Connexion
enthuses that “The South African Government is
striving to be more citizen-centered and
technology is the cornerstone that will deliver
this vision”; he latter adds “ Factors such as cost
reduction, improved service delivery and citizen
convenience are legitimate expectations
Government intends to realize through
investments in technology” (ITWeb Informatica,
2009).
There are growing numerous studies on the
impact of the latest technologies on the
development of the economic sectors of
countries and thus, these researches tend to raise
concerns about how to practically measure these
technologies in terms of their direct contribution
to sustaining economic development. In South
Africa, the SAITIS project has set a framework
of major indicators throughout the process of
measuring how to achieve economic growth;
among others, these indicators include the
revenues to generated by Information
Technology, the employment opportunities that
will be created by this sector, their contribution
to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP), the
revenues and outcomes of exported products in
the sector, the investment in terms of percentage
in the field and the global Information
Technology and software industry in the
economy of the country.
South Africa, as an emergent democratic nation
and growing economic force in Africa still have
a log way to go and in the focus of this paper, we
examine how the Information and
Communication technologies and more
specifically the software industry contribute to
the economic development of the country by
taking a cue form example of a successful
country’s framework in occurrence Ireland. This
paper takes a closer look at the framework
adopted by the latter country to boot its
economic force through software industry and
measure the possibility of applying it to South
Africa.
III. Research Framework (Methodology)
As previously stated, the main objective of this
paper is to focus and closely look at the South
African Industry and its implication on the
country’s economic development. In order to
clearly accomplish this, a significant analysis of
factors that need to be considered or have
already been considered to contribute to the
emergence of economic development is
essential.
In order to productively tackle this, the
framework used by Heavin et al. in investigating
the impact of software industry on Irish
economic growth will be adopted. That is, it
comprises two main parts: the external or
exogenous factors that impact on the process of
building the software industry and endogenous
or internal factors that contribute to the
emergence success of the industry.
For the purpose of providing this paper with
significant resources for its core objective, a
number of other frameworks were consulted
among others include Heeks (1996) which
provides significant insights on procedures to
follow in order to implement software industries
in Africa, Hanna et al.(2003) who focus on
National software Industry development…but as
abovementioned, our main inspiring framework
is the one used by Heavin et al. for their study of
this industry in Ireland.
III.1 Exogenous or External Factors
We refer to a certain category of factors as
external or exogenous for their indirect influence
on development of the Information and
Communication Technology sector and these
exogenous factors are hard to control. These
exogenous factors comprise among the others
characteristics such as the population of the
country, the availability of natural resources,
location…and characteristics linked to cultural
attributes such as the language, the consideration
of education and literacy…
Following official American government’s
reports available at http://www.statssa.gov.za,
the South African population was estimated in
2007 being of 47.9 million and is composed of
black in majority, white, colored and Asian. This
factor in terms of population gives the country a
predominance in industrial development as it
provides a good workforce. The country presents
a great range of natural resources that are
favorable for its economic development, these
resources include almost all necessary resources
such as diamond, gold…and South Africa is
actually the unique country is the world that
produces fuel from coal. These resources enable
an emergence of industries such as mining,
machinery, motor vehicle manufacturing…
Due to its past experience with related crisis on
the political aspect, the educational system of the
country is still in transition since the government
is still restructuring the all system to eliminate
racial segregations and provide the same
standards of education to all South Africans.
This will offer a better environment for a proper
emergence of a strong software industry.
Factors related to cultures are very important in
participating to create a favorable atmosphere for
an emergent software industry capable enough to
enter into the international market. English, as an
official language used in South Africa constitutes
a major advantage to the development of
software industry, not only that south Africans
can trade internationally and gain access to a
great range of countries world wide through the
language, but also this has attracted big
manufacturing and software development
companies to set up in South Africa, to
exemplify we will name Microsoft Corporation
and other major international software providers
such as Computer associates (CA)…A broader
view of government’s initiatives to improving
the country’s educational system during the post
apartheid period, is a significant asset to the
development and implementation of a marketcompetitive and active software industry.
III.2 Endogenous or Internal Factors
Endogenous factors refer to these attributes that
can be created and adopted as milestones in
developing Information and Communication
Technology industry. The framework used to
investigate the software industry in Ireland
considers these factors at three different levels:
national, enterprise and individual.
At national level, that is the implication of
government in the industry. The regulations and
policies that the latter formulate constitute a
pipeline to supporting the development of the
software industry. At the enterprise level, factors
that facilitate the possibility of developing a
successful software industry include for instance
their vision and inspiration from other emerging
enterprises, the willingness to take risks and
develop strategic operations for their implication
in the software market. At the individual level,
essential factors that vitally impact on the
establishment of a successful software industry
include attributes such as the attitude and
determination of South African to work, their
motivation, desire of technological innovation,
and the atmosphere at the information society.
As stated previously technology and innovation
are considered as vital to the economic growth.
IV. Analysis and Contextualization
IV.1 National-level factors
At the national level, an active implication from
the government is required to support and
implement programs, policies and concrete
governmental actions with the intent to
contribute to the establishment of an active
software industry. It is clear that every country or
nation that wish to focus their programs to
vitalize the software industry as a key component
of their economic development won’t take the
same path, but a clear and an efficient vision on
resources distribution plays a great role on the
best route to adopt. These resources include
among others availability of required
infrastructures and human force. English, as
quoted previously, as the English used in South
Africa is a vital key to international market and
opportunities.
Most of the countries that have evolved in this
industry have been working on the resources at
their disposal and found themselves ways to
enter the global market. But when it comes to
allocating resources or deciding on mobilizing
resources to build and support the industry, the
government’s action is the expected and
prominent. Heeks support that
Dr Hanna points out that in countries that lack
enough infrastructures, and encounter problems
with their resources such as the case of Ireland at
some point, need special initiatives from the
government in order to boost the industry
(Hanna et al., 2003).
In South Africa such initiatives are being
encouraged by the government despite its any
drawbacks that may block the process. In 2007,
the South African minister of trade and industry
talked about the implementation of the National
Industrial Policy. This actual policy takes into
account the role of ICT into helping achieve the
required economic development rate set for
2010. The minister continues by clarifying that
the principal approach of this particular policy is 
arrow government’s actions on industrial
development. He pointed out four critical areas
that constitute the priority of this industrial
policy: these include creating a favorable
regulatory environment for macro-economy,
enhance and mobilize necessary infrastructures,
producing skilled and educated industrialists and
bring effort for innovation in technology (dti
minister, 2007).
As mentioned in the introduction the information
technology field ,as sustained by a great number
of published research reports , has constantly
attracted the attention of the South Africa’s
government regarding its approach its potential
contribution to economic growth and
development(Breitenbach et al., 2005).
Another essential factor that supports and shows
the involvement of the South African
government is the SAITIS project. This project
was developed to face the challenges of
technologies in the economic field and create
empowerment for all South Africans. In details
the project has set a framework of major
indicators throughout the process of measuring
how to achieve economic growth; among others,
these indicators include the revenues to
generated by Information Technology, the
employment opportunities that will be created by
this sector, their contribution to the Gross
Domestic Product (GDP), the revenues and
outcomes of exported products in the sector, the
investment in terms of percentage in the field
and the global Information Technology and
software industry in the economy of the country
(Breitenbach et al., 2005).
In terms of funding and financial contribution or
provisions of the South African government for
the software industry, we will look at the
department of trade and industry in order to get
insights about how this is accomplished. In 2007,
at the same occasion the minister talked about
the industrial policy for enforcing development
of software industry, he also pointed out that the
software industry is recognized by the
department of trade and industry as a vital
component of the Information Technology sector
and will become a valuable driving factor for
enabling economic growth. He provided figures
of the South African Software industry in terms
of finances for the year 2006 that were estimated
at 13 billion rand and this value was expected to
increase over the next years. In terms of what
this industry has brought to the South African
economy just for its exported products, an
amount that is valued being over R500 million is
advanced, even tough it is less than the domestic
market.
He quotes: “The software industry is strongly
pyramidal in structure regarding revenue
concentration, with the five largest software
vendors controlling approximately 40% of the
software revenue and the ten largest controlling
50% of the revenue”. (Trade and Industry
Minister, 2007).
In order to support the industry, education should
be prioritized by the government and be
considered as a key milestone to establishing
competent personnel capable of operating in the
software industry. Each year, when the South
African financial minister Trevor A Manuel
presents the budget at the parliament, education
has always be considered among the vital sectors
where considerable amounts of money are
allocated. In his 2008 budget speech before the
national assembly, the financial minister noted
that an improved considerable amount of R46
billion was allocated to provinces for sectors
such as health and education among others.
Indisputably, education is the critical path if not
the most accurate and appropriate way to equip
the society with required skills for any sector of
economic development. In the same sense,
education of women should be encouraged and
even practical initiatives should be created to
support and give opportunities to women
especially in technical fields such as IT and
Engineering. Such initiatives in South Africa are
visible; an example to consider in this case is the
Women in IT project that provides financial
support to young South African ladies to pursue
their studies in IT.
IV.2 Enterprise-level factors
The second set of endogenous factors is
associated with the enterprise. In the previous
lines, we mentioned that the spirit that drives
enterprises to create and promote innovative
activities is a very important factor that sustains
the emergence of software industry. With all
these estimates of revenues produced in domestic
software market of South Africa, we can
understand how risk-taking software companies
are in South Africa. 
The South African Trade and Industry minister
pints out that the South African Information and
Communication Technology industry has made a
significant impact within international
perspective with its specialties in areas including
“electronic banking and financial services
applications, fraud prevention systems and prepayment”(Trade and Industry Minister, 2007).
In this perspective, the South African
government also engages in actions to support
software companies in order to uplift their
standards and capacitate them to enter global
market competitiveness.
Opportunities offered by south African
companies to young south African students that
pursue their studies in the software development
field particularly and even the Information
Technology sector is vital factor to express the
determination of these companies to have skilled
personnel to support their software production.
IV.3 Individual-level factors
Individual or human resource is the most critical
asset to drive the development of a strong
software development. The industry requires a
team of skilled personnel trained to fulfill the
wide sector of software development. The roles
include for example programmers, software
testers, software analysts, project managers…all
these people constitute a vital milestone for the
establishment of a successful software industry
in South Africa.
Opportunities that are offered by software
development companies in South Africa play a
significant role in recruiting qualified people.
The aim is to recruit a human resource equipped
with strong entrepreneurial spirit, driven by a
spirit of ingenuity and innovation and thus,
forming the fundamental team of software
development companies.
V. Conclusion
Software industry as integral component of the
Information and Communication Technology
sector is vital to economic growth. Considering
this industry to boost the economic sector of the
Republic of South Africa requires a meticulous
control and implementation of a set of factors.
These include the intervention of the government
in allocating enough resources for the
implementation of the industry. Policies and
regulations made in consideration of the
pyramidal role that plays the South African
Software Industry to economic development of
the country. Enterprises and human resources are
vital assets to establishing a successful software
industry capable of entering the international
market. And for all these to be concrete, the
government needs wok in conjunction with
industrial firms to promote initiatives that are
intended to give opportunities for education,
employment and finance these mechanisms to
produce a workforce that is software-literate.
VI. References
[1] Heavin C., Fitzgerald B., Trauth E.M.,
(2003). Factors Influencing Ireland’s software
Industry: Lessons for Economic Development
through IT . Organisational Information Systems
in the Context of Globalization: Kluwer
Academic publishers;
[2] Tessler S., Barr A., Hanna N., (2003).
National Software Industry Development:
Considerations for Government Planners.The
Emergence of Software Exporting Industries in
Developing and Emerging Economies: Erran
Carmel;
[3] Department of Trade and Industry, 2007.
Minister Speech – CoMMIt ’07 Symposium;
[4] Heeks R., (1996). Building Software
Industries in Africa. Information Technology in
Developing Countries;
[5] Trevor A Manual, (2008). Minister of
Finance Budget Speech;
[6] Maumbe BM., Owei V., (2007) . Bringing
M-government to South African Citizens: Policy
Framework, Delivery Challenges and
Opportunities. Cape Town: e-Innovation
Academy, Cape Peninsula University of
Technology;
[7] IT Web Informatica, 2008. Effective eGovernment: South Africa’s guide to public
sector transformation through technology. Cape
Town: ITWeb Limited.;
[8] Carmel E., (2003). Taxonomy of New
Software Exporting Nations. Washington D.C:
Electronic Journal on Information Systems in
Developing Countries;
[9] Carmel E., (2003). The New Software
Exporting Nations: Success Factors. Washington
D.C: Electronic Journal on Information Systems
in Developing Countries;
[10] Breitenbach MC., Aderibigbe OA.,
Muzungu D., (2003). The impact of Information
and Communication Technology (ICT) on
economic growth in South Africa: Analysis of
Evidence. University of Pretoria, Mamelodi
Campus;
[11] Avgerou C., (1998). How can IT enable
economic growth in developing countries?.
London: LSE Research Online.
[Available Online] at:
http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/2581;
[12] Alesina A., Rodrik D.,(1994). Distributive
Politics and Economic Growth. Quaterly Journal
of Economics. President and Fellows of Harvard
College and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology;
[13] Tessler S., Barr A.,(1997). Software R&D
Strategies of Developing Countries. Stanford
Computer Industry Project;
[14] Momodou IB, Ekene SN, Kenneth A.,
Idowu SF., (2007). Software development: an
attainable goal for sustainable economic growth
in developing nations: the Nigeria experience.
International Journal of Physical Sciences Vol. 2
(12), pp. 318-323;
[15] Freeman C., (2002).Continental, national
and sub-national innovation
Systems — complementarity and economic
growth. United kingdom: Elsevier Science B.V;
[16] Ogunsola L.A, Okusaga T.O,(2006). Digital
Divide Between Developed and Less-Developed
Countries: The Way Forward. Nigeria : KamlaRaj;
[17] Molokken K., Jorgensen M.,(Undated). A
Review of Surveys on Software Effort Estimation.
Simula Research Laboratory
[18] Fedderke J., Simkins C., (2002). Economic
growth in South Africa since the late nineteenth
century.
[19] Colecchia, A. and P. Schreyer (2001). ICT
Investment and Economic Growth in the 1990s:
Is the United States a Unique Case? A
Comparative Study of Nine OECD Countries?.
OECD Science, Technology and Industry
Working Papers, 2001/7, OECD Publishing.
doi:10.1787/078325004705
[20] Pohjola M., (2002). New Economy in
Growth and Development. United Nations
University. World Institute for Development
Economics Research.
[21] Indjikian R., Siegel D., (2005). The Impact
of Investment in IT on Economic Performance:
Implications for Developing Countries. Great
Britain: Elsevier Ltd.
[22] Eugene F. Fama( 1980). Agency Problems
and the Theory of the Firm.
The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 88, No.
2. (Apr., 1980), pp. 288-307.University of
Chicago;
[23] Arora A., Athreyer S., (2002). The software
industry and India’s economic development.
Information Economics and Policy 14 (2002)
253–273. Elsevier Ltd;
[24] Pigato M., (2001). Information and
Communication Technology, Poverty,and
Development in sub-Saharan Africa and South
Asia. Africa Region Working Paper Series No.
20;
[25] Robbins G., (2008). Reflecting on South
Africa.s post-apartheid experience with spatially
informed economic development programmes.
Think piece for TIPS Forum
October 2008. School of Development
Studies.University of KwaZulu-Natal;
[26] US Department of State . Available online
at: http://www.statssa.gov.za;
[27] Mundie C., Haynes P., (2006). How
Information and Commuincations Technology is
transforming economic development. Microsoft
corporation.