International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
Available online 14 September 2020
Disaster management digitally transformed: Exploring the impact and key
determinants from the UK national disaster management experience
Yousuf Salim AlHinai
Sultan Qaboos University, Oman
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Disaster risk reduction
Disaster and crisis management
Digital transformation
Technology innovation
Adoption
TOE Framework
Sendai
ABSTRACT
With the increasing social and economic devastation caused by disasters around the world, the international
community and country-level National Disaster Management (NDM) authorities have placed improving their
ways to mitigate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from disasters as a top priority. Technological advancements and the 4th Industrial Revolution are critical tools to help achieve this. However, they also present many
challenges to traditional NDM systems by altering the fundamental operational, organizational, and social dynamics of conventional disaster management. Currently, there is a lack of research that studies these aspects
beyond technology and examines the impact of digital transformation on the full life cycle of disaster management on the national level. Therefore, this research fills this gap by integrating interdisciplinary concepts
from different research fields including Disaster Management, Information Systems, and Business Management to
understand the impact and determinants of digital transformation in NDM systems. To achieve this, the research
uses the Technology-Organization-Environment (TOE) framework and conducts semi-structured interviews with
UK NDM experts. The results show that the impact of digital transformation on NDM is profound, paradoxical,
multi-directional, and driven by a multitude of driving forces. This research makes many significant contributions to research and practice. Theoretically, this research expands the TOE framework beyond its original underpinnings by uncovering a new set of disaster-context determinants. It also presents an innovative Layered
Cake FAST (Foundations-Approach-Strategy-Technology) Model that offers a unique roadmap for NDM on how
to handle its digital transformation journey. Practically, the research presents several sets of useful expertrecommended actions.
1. Introduction
With the increasing frequency and severity of disasters [1] and the
associated social and economic impacts on all countries, the international community has placed improving the ways through which disasters are managed a key priority. The Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015–2030 framework has set four main priorities for
governments to focus on: 1) understanding disaster risk; 2) strengthening disaster risk governance to manage risks; 3) investing in disaster
risk reduction for resilience; and 4) enhancing disaster preparedness for
effective response and ‘building back better’ in recovery, rehabilitation,
and reconstruction [2]. The framework further specified a set of
required actions for each of these priorities, and emphasized the role of
technology as a key strategic and operational enabler. For example, in
understanding disaster risk, actions required include:
“to promote investments in innovation and technology development
in long-term, multi-hazard and solution-driven research in disaster
risk management to address gaps, obstacles, interdependencies; and
social, economic, educational, and environmental challenges and
disaster risks” (Action K - p.15), and
“identify research and technology gaps and set recommendations for
research priority areas in disaster risk reduction; promote and support the availability and application of science and technology to
decision-making” (Action G - p.16)
The Coronavirus (COVIC-19) pandemic is a living case to prove how
technology can make substantial improvements to countries response to
disasters in many forms such as more effective testing and disease
detection [3], efficient and streamlined policy and decision making [4],
flexible and distributed training and education [5,6], and as a creative
remedy for imposed work and social distancing [7]. Therefore, the role
of technology is operationally as well as strategically critical for
E-mail addresses: yalhinai@gmail.com, yalhinai@squ.edu.om.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/ijdrr
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2020.101851
Received 23 March 2020; Received in revised form 30 August 2020; Accepted 2 September 2020 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
2
optimizing National Disaster Management (NDM) in risk reduction,
mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery. Digital Transformation (DT) is a term used to indicate all the unprecedented dynamics in the operational (e.g. digitization of tasks using technologies),
organizational (e.g. change of processes and creation of new business
models and inter-organizational relationships), and social (e.g. effect on
human/customer/beneficiary life, expectations, and experiences) that
new technologies provide or impose on disaster management organizations [8]. As technological innovations advance, NDM systems will
naturally need to adapt and change. However, this might not be a simple
task given the multi-agency multi-layer (e.g. gold-silver-bronze layers)
nature of national disaster management structures.
The literature on the use of technology for disaster management
shows a growing interest in the field. However, it also shows that the
main focus of the contemporary literature is on the technology-specific
opportunities and challenges of enhancing disaster management by
investigating technology-specific, phase-specific and/or task-specific
aspects of the use of technology for disaster management. While this
offers critical theoretical and practical contributions to disaster management, it remains quite shortsighted and non-strategic for two reasons. First, technologies change quickly and those of today will soon be
replaced by new ones, which will make a large part of this literature
quite irrelevant. Second, regardless of what technology is discussed and
how it can help enhance specific tasks/aspects of disaster management,
it is the overall organizational mindset, strategic priority, and institutional readiness for the new digital era that will ultimately determine
whether a specific technology or group of technologies will ever be
successful. There is a clear gap in the literature is this area [9]. More
explicitly, there is a need for the literature to focus on the structural and
strategic transformation that new technology brings to national disaster
management systems and to devise new models and frameworks on how
these systems can adapt and utilize digital transformation to seize
forthcoming opportunities and resolve challenges.
Filling this gap is important for several reasons. First, the 4th Industrial Revolution drives the fusion of technologies and the blurring of
borders between physical and digital environments causing impacts on
both personal and professional lives [10], thus redefining the underlying
fundamentals of society, work, organizations, industries, and relationships [11]. In this new digital era, more than 20.4 billion devices will be
connected to the Internet of Things (IoT) and 90% of automobiles will be
connected to the Internet by 2020, where companies will invest $15
trillion in digital technologies between 2017 and 2025 yielding an expected $14 trillion to the global economy by 2030 [12]. Therefore,
entire industries, organizations, and societies are believed to be
completely transformed - all of which are key to successful NDM. Filling
this gap will help “examine the intersecting trajectories of social, technical, and information perspectives during the full life cycle of a crisis:
preparation, response, and recovery” [13]; p.1).
Second, from a strategic perspective, digital transformation is a
major “shock to what may be a reasonably functioning system” [14];
p.20). Therefore, digital transformation is about strategy, not just
technology [15]. Recent research from the MIT Sloan School of Management emphasizes that “Almost no organization is sheltered from the
competitive disruption brought by one of the widespread adoption of
digital technologies” [16]; p.2) including public authorities and governments [14]. To adapt to this new digital era, organizations of all types
will have to take proactive steps to adjust their knowledge, skillset,
culture, and internal and external structures and relationships [17]. For
NDM as a complex multi-organizational multi-layer structure, proactivity in this area requires a deeper understanding of the determinants
and potential implications of digital transformation. This will help NDM
to develop its strategies to cope with the inevitable changes, seize critical opportunities, and minimize the threats of the new digital era.
Third, NDM is primarily a government-led [18] multi-organizational
structure [19] which makes it a highly collaborative and
stakeholder-dependent system [20–22]. So, while governments can
often assume a national leadership position in NDM structures, their
success is highly bound by explicit and implicit exchanges of interests
with other industries such as transportation (land, air, and sea), infrastructure (roads, water, electricity, sewage, and other municipal services), tourism and hospitality, financial industry, Small and Medium
Enterprises (SME), and logistics. As a result, NDM not only needs to
understand how digital transformation is going to impact them directly
but also how it is going to impact other collaborating stakeholders/industries and therefore influence the dynamics of its organizational relationships with them.
On such grounds, this research attempts to fill the aforementioned
gap by integrating interdisciplinary concepts and understandings from
different research fields to enhance our understanding of the impact of
digital transformation on NDM and to uncover the determinants that can
either enable or hinder the digital transformation process for NDM. This
will help governments to prioritize, strategize, and set the foundations
for the new digital era in their NDM systems to cope with the developments, seize the opportunities, and deal with threats.
This research borrows its theoretical foundations from the innovation adoption research in the Information Systems field. More specifically, it uses the Technology-Organization-Environment (TOE)
framework [23,24]. This is because digital transformation is essentially
an innovation process for which organizations need to adopt the right
mindset (e.g. leadership and culture), assets (e.g. physical and intellectual) and tools (e.g. technology, processes, and strategies) and environment (e.g. inter-organizational relationships, regulatory
frameworks, and policymaking). In short, the TOE specifies that, in
organizational settings, three important contexts influence the
decision-making processes for innovation adoption including the technology, the organization, and the environment. The TOE and its three
contexts are used in this article to better understand the contextual
impact and determinants of digital transformation in NDM systems. To
achieve this, a cross-sectional research design is used to conduct
semi-structured interviews with m NDM experts from the United
Kingdom.
This paper is organized as follows. Firstly it establishes the conceptual context and discusses relevant literature on digital transformation
and disaster management, and highlights the gap that this research
endeavors to fill. It then, introduces and justifies the conceptual context
and theoretical grounds for this research and raises key conceptual ideas
towards fulfilling its aims. After that, it specifies and justifies the
research design, data collection method, sample, and the analytical
approach of the empirical study. Finally, it presents the analysis of the
expert interviews and discusses the results vis-a-vis the research questions, and provides answers to the research questions, offers recommendations, and highlights the contributions, limitations, and avenues
for future research.
2. Literature review
2.1. Digital transformation
For a long time, organizations of all kinds have invested in and
adopted technology mainly to automate tasks and processes. However,
the advent of the 4th Industrial Revolution created an impact that goes
beyond the digitization of tasks or the digitalization of specific processes. A detailed discussion of the specifics of individual 4th Industrial
Revolution technologies is outside the focus of this study. However, to
name a few enabling technological innovations, these include: Artificial
Intelligence (AI) [25,26]; Machine Learning [27]; Nanotechnology [28,
29]; Internet of Things (IoT) [30]; Robotics and Internet of Autonomous
Things (IoAT) [31] such as self-navigating drones, autonomous vehicles,
home robotics, and information-collection and target-attack robotics;
Blockchain [32] with its transformation applications in traditional industries like healthcare [33,34], construction [35], civilian and military
air traffic management [36], manufacturing [37], financial services
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
3
[38], travel and tourism [39] etc.; Fifth Generation Digital Cellular
Networks (5G) [40]; Arandjelovic R. 2018 [41]; Big Data and Data
Analytics [42,43] and its uses in healthcare [44], product design,
manufacturing and services [45], security and privacy protection [46],
and so on; and 3D Printing [47]; and many others.
Despite the specific technologies, the new digital era promises organizations of all types (commercial, public, government, and nonprofit) a digital transformation that will unleash unprecedented routes
to conducting business, offering products and services, managing organizational relationships, and maximizing value for beneficiaries [16].
Several definitions of digital transformation exist in the literature
[8]. One of the distinctions is how these various definitions considered
digital transformation as an internal or as an external dynamic to organizations. For example, on the one hand, the term is defined as the
intra-organization reform caused by new digital technologies to enable
“major business improvements” including new business models [16];
p.2), innovation and creativity stimuli [48], and organizational
competitiveness [49]; p.7), and better internal performance [50]; p.5).
On the other hand, others emphasize a more general and strategic
perspective beyond organizational boundaries highlighting the effects of
digital transformation on politics, business, social issues [15,51,52], and
all “other aspects of human life” [53]; p.689).
To synthesize, most definitions commonly share at least three elements [8]; p.417): (1) Technological – digital transformation is mainly a
technology-driven phenomenon; (2) Organizational – digital transformation requires and mandates a multi-directional change to organizational structures, processes, and business models; and (3) Social –
digital transformation is a phenomenon that has an impact on all aspects
of human and social life. This article builds on this holistic notion of
digital transformation (over and above the technology itself) to fulfill its
aims. It, therefore, takes a holistic, strategic, and organizational view
into digital transformation rather than discussing the impact of any
specific new technology.
Digital transformation and new digital technologies have redefined
and restructured whole industries. A clear illustration of this is the birth
of a new type of entities called ‘born-digital’ [54] which is “a generation
of organizations whose operating models and capabilities are based on
exploiting internet-era information and digital technologies as a core
competency” [55] that redefine value landscapes. Examples of these
include how born-digital organizations like Uber, Grab, and Kareem
[56] transformed the global transportation industry [57]; how Airbnb,
Booking.com, Expedia, and others [58,59] restructured the hotel and
hospitality value chains; how Twitter and Facebook redefined journalism and press industry; how Tesla is revolutionizing the automobile
industry; and how societies, people, and social interactions, in general,
are being transformed by organizations like Instagram, Snapchat, and
TikTok.
An exhaustive list of every example where digital transformation has
altered fundamental aspects of life, work, interactions, and relationships
for individuals, communities, organizations, industries, and nations will
be too long to list in this article. Yet the main point here is that digital
transformation is an inevitable phenomenon that will impact all social
and organizational structures, and NDM is no exception. Indeed, just as
human interaction continues to move toward greater reliance on a variety of digital platforms, so too will there be expectations that NDM
responds with agility.
To capitalize on the opportunities and requirements that digital
transformation brings through its focus, goals, activities, tools, and
challenges, it is not enough to simply introduce technology [60].
Instead, it is imperative to reconsider or redefine some of the underlying
strategic fundamentals, making changes to key processes, and leading a
multi-directional change in the organizational structure [61]. This requires taking calculated steps towards embracing a strategic digital
endeavor by the organization, reexamining the surrounding environments, studying beneficiary targets, instilling cultural change, and
introducing or retraining necessary intellects [62]. Generally, digital
transformation is a technology-driven ongoing adjustment and adaptation process for organizations, industries, and society where new digital
assets such as ubiquitous and embedded connectivity and computing
technologies will redefine value streams and distribution channels [63,
64]. The present research builds on this foundation to help NDM systems
better understand the implications of digital transformation and establish their outlook into the fast-evolving future. As a starting point, the
following reviews the contemporary literature that studied technology
in the context of disaster management.
2.2. Technology and disaster management
There is quite a large body of literature investigating technology in
the context of disaster management. However, a synthesis of the existing
literature clearly shows that the majority of this literature is technologyspecific, phase-specific, or task-specific. Generally, most studies followed one of two main streams: 1) focusing on the uses, advantages, and
opportunities that specific technologies present for an improved (task)
performance during (a phase of) disaster management; or 2) focusing on
the issues, implications, challenges, and concerns that specific technology presents to (a phase of) disaster management. The following sections briefly exhibit these two literature streams.
2.2.1. Stream one: the opportunities
Schempp et al. [65] discussed how leveraging traditional sources of
data (authoritative data) with new sources (social media) helps improve
the distribution of supplies between hospitals, rescue centers, and rescue
demand points during disaster response. Besides, Kirac and Milburn [66]
used the 2010 Haiti earthquake as a case to investigate and develop a
framework for the value of social data and the tradeoff between the
timeliness and accuracy of social data for disaster response logistics
planning. Also, Ragini et al. [67] proposed a methodological model of
how big data created by social and mobile networks, data mining
techniques, machine learning, and sentiment analysis can provide
timely, strategic, and effective disaster response and recovery. Further,
Xu et al. [68] used the Internet of Things (IoT) technology and mobile
cloud computing platforms to create an optimal evacuation planning
system for rapid evacuation of large populations to achieve improved
convergence rates, shortened evacuation route lengths and evacuation
time, and balanced capacity in surrounding shelters. Also, Bennett et al.
[69] investigated how future wireless technologies enhance disaster
mitigation and response efforts for people with disabilities.
Furthermore, in the context of recovery, Nawari and Ravindran [70]
investigated how digital technologies such as of Blockchain, smart
contracts, and Building Information Modeling (BIM) creates integrated,
self-regulating, self-monitoring, and cyber-resilient transactional operations to automate the building permitting process in the recovery and
rebuilding phase of a natural disaster. Also, Babbitt [71] discussed how
new ‘clean’ technological innovations provide creative and efficient
solutions to manage the social, economic, and environmental challenges
that result from post-disaster debris. Moreover, Bierweiler [72] discussed how big data and advanced data analytics using enterprise open
source solutions give disaster management agencies invaluable insights
and actionable intelligence for preparing and responding to natural disasters. Also, Kim et al. [73] demonstrated how the Internet of Things
(IoT) technology, sensor networks, and robotics improve the response to
tunnel fire disasters (especially in tunnels longer than 1 km) by allowing
accurate detection, search, and rescue capabilities for disaster response.
Alsamhi et al. [74] discussed how disaster communication augmented
by Tethered Balloon Technology provides enhanced capabilities for
preparedness, detection, mitigation, and response to various types of
disasters (except storms). Garba and Ahmadu [75] demonstrated the
role that ICT plays in ensuring responsible and responsive collection and
dissemination of information and synergizing the activities among
disaster management stakeholders in Nigeria by proposing an integrated
technology information system. Also, Hapuarachchi [76] examined the
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
4
usage of geographical information and technology in disaster management at the sub-national level in Sri Lanka and found that there is
limited use of this technology despite the advantages it provides to national disaster managers. Further, Diwakar et al. [77] discussed how
using space technology improves disaster mitigation and response in
India.
2.2.2. Stream two: the challenges
Seba et al. [78] investigated the security concerns from the use of
wireless technology in disaster situations and how these networks
resolve the urgent need for sensitive and real-time information exchange
in chaotic situations; they also pose threats to disaster management
systems. In addition, Wang et al. [79] investigated how the disparities in
social media use among various vulnerable areas and community groups
surrounding disasters can result in some groups being left behind in
disaster response due to their lower level of digital activity on social
media. Also, using the case of 2016 Wuhan rainstorm and flood disaster
in China, Fang et al. [80] demonstrated how the discrepancy between
what people emotionally and psychologically express on social media
and their actual physical activity flow during disasters can pose a great
information accuracy challenge for disaster management agencies.
Furthermore, Faruk et al. [81] emphasized how the reliance on telecommunications infrastructure during disasters and the failure of these
networks can lead to great losses which makes the decision by the
government to choose a certain network very critical for communication
continuity during disasters. This study stressed the importance of
aligning national network deployment with existing commercial deployments to ensure sustainability of communications. Moreover,
Chernobrov [82] investigated how digital technologies and big data
paved the way for digital volunteers as a new group of participants in
disaster management and how this has transformed humanitarian crises
response, altered the role and power dynamics for disaster management,
and broke traditional constraints of the aid-media relationships through
citizen journalism, and presented new challenges to disaster
management.
In the context of security environment and social media, Bergeron
[83] discussed how the new interconnected digital world while offering
unprecedented degrees of convenience, capability, and comfort to our
modern quality of life, it also introduces significant threats and vulnerabilities when things fall apart or fail in disaster situations; and
makes a call to address them. Further, Alshammari et al. [84] focused on
the use of modern cloud computing technologies and the concerns of
data reliability and cost of storage as a result of multiple replications of
data; and proposed a Preventive Disaster Recovery Plan with Minimum
Replica (PDRPMR) mechanism which can be a cost-effective solution to
reduce the number of replications in the cloud to be one or two replicas
only without compromising the data reliability. In addition, Youngblood
and Youngblood [85] studied how the use of multi-agency websites
powered with social networking data by Emergency Management
Agencies (EMAs) on local and state levels, no matter how technologically advanced, can prove useless without rigorous functionality, usability, and accessibility capabilities and user trust over and above the
focus on content development. Also, Paul and Sosale [86] discussed how
new digital technologies, including social media and mobile phones,
enabled citizen journalism in the 2015 South Indian flooding disaster;
and how despite the vast amounts of data published by citizen witnesses,
these technologies were incapable to sufficiently challenge caste, class,
and urban-rural inequalities in disaster response. Furthermore, Alexandru et al. [87] highlighted the main features of the new emerging
smart citizens and smart cities enabled by technologies such as the
Internet of Things (IoT) and this has created more empowered yet more
demanding citizens for disaster management.
As mentioned earlier, while these two streams have critical theoretical and practical contributions for disaster management, this article
aims to go beyond this technology-specific, phase-specific, task-specific
opportunity vs. challenge focus and take a more strategic, long-term
organizational perspective to help NDM better plan for the unavoidable digitally transformed future. To do this, it is important to first
discuss and establish the relevance of digital transformation to NDM as
an organizational system, as discussed next.
2.3. Digital transformation and national disaster management
The relevance of digital transformation for NDM can be established
by considering a typical entity-relationship network1 in which NDM
plans and operates (Fig. 1).
As the figure above demonstrates, NDM encompasses a multiplicity
of stakeholders to respond to disasters and protect people, property, and
places. To effectively manage disasters, NDM cooperates and collaborates with public, private, non-profit organizations (NGOs), and other
governments. In light of this, it is critical to understand how digital
transformation will influence NDM for the following reasons.
Firstly, digital transformation is changing the very nature of how we
understand and define disasters. In the new digital era, technology
changes the ways hazards are mitigated, prepared for, responded to, and
recovered from. For example, the risks of flooding could be reduced by
capitalizing on the timely and real-time information that new mobile
data technologies offer to better understanding peoples’ movement and
behavior and enhance awareness and information sharing [88].
Furthermore, new digital technologies can bring new and unprecedented hazards and risks such as technology misuse (e.g. cybercrimes,
cyber terrorism, and cybersecurity issues), distortion of communication
and information (e.g. hacking and spreading of rumors), and rapidly
outdating governments’ legal and regulatory frameworks. In this case,
the greatest risk that new digital technologies bring to NDM is when
responsible entities are unable to cope with the changes and find
adaptive ways of thinking, planning, and working with irrelevant or
outdated approaches.
Secondly, digital transformation is changing people and communities that NDM serves. People are now dynamically connected and
Fig. 1. Entity-Relationship Network for NDM (Source: author).
1 This shows a general, non-exhaustive representation.
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
5
networking in ways that are changing their relationships with organizations and with each other [89]. Because of new digital technologies,
people’s perceptions, evaluations, and expectations are rapidly changing. For example, more and more individuals are heading to social media
to express their needs, opinions, descriptions, and reporting emergencies
and levels of the urgency of their situations [65]. Whole generations of
“born digital” or “digital natives” are evolving [90]. The preferences of
these generations in terms of ways to communicate preferred sources,
types, and formats of trusted information will all be transformed. Systematic monitoring and understanding of these effects and how they
could potentially alter ways of working are critical and strategically
decisive for NDM effectiveness.
Thirdly, properties and places are digitally transforming. For
example, the Internet of Things (IoT) is creating an entire new topography of physical devices and static everyday objects. The IoT allows
devices to wirelessly communicate, send and receive live data, and be
monitored and controlled from remote distances over the internet
[91–93]. Emergent smart technology reconfigures the very notion of
“home” as a nexus from which a multiplicity of devices work collaboratively as intelligent agents [94] and communicate over a new spectrum of networks and standards [95,96]. Similarly, smart city
technologies will create more efficient, sustainable, competitive, productive, open, transparent, and highly interconnected cities with a
nascent set of governance requirements [97]. To succeed, NDM, therefore, needs to understand, prepare for, and capitalize on digital
transformation.
Fourthly, the private sector, NGOs, and many other industries are
also undergoing digital transformation. One of the key responsibilities of
NDM is to coordinate an effective response to disasters through partnerships with these non-governmental organizations [98]. However, the
new digital era determines a large part of the strategic sustainability of
this relationship and cooperation. Many organizations and industries
like transportation, hospitality and hotels, retail shopping, and infrastructure are being redefined internally as business models, and externally as collaborators in their value chains [99]. These and other
industries have direct operational and strategic implications on NDM in
risk reduction, response, and recovery phases [100].
Finally, even the public sector and other governments that an NDM
often partners and closely works with are digitally transforming. Many
of these have already created dedicated strategies and plans in this direction. For example, the UK has developed the Government Transformation Strategy 2017–2020 [101], which endeavors to give
directions to a full scale governmental digital transformation. Similarly,
other governments around the world are working diligently to change
their strategic and operational dynamics and priorities to cope with the
new digital era [102].
Based on the above, it important to understand the conceptual significance of digital transformation to NDM and ensure that these government systems remain relevant, effective, and efficient in the new
digital era. The next section establishes the theoretical foundation for
this research.
3. Theory
3.1. Technology and innovation adoption in organizations
Digital transformation is about the use of new digital technologies to
re-innovate traditional structures, processes, technologies, mindsets,
business and operational models to improve the competitiveness of the
organization and deliver relevant value for internal and external beneficiaries in an ever-evolving digital economy [49]; p.7). Digital transformation is linked to innovation as a driver and an outcome leading to
better organizational performance [103]. Innovation is the creation and
adoption of new ideas [104,105]. Therefore, digital transformation is
about innovation, and innovation is about novelty and inventiveness
[105]. For organizations, innovation can occur in the creation of or the
adoption of new administrative systems, technologies, processes, policies, structures, products, or services [106,107]. For disaster management and related organizational systems, the potential impact of
technological innovation on all phases of disaster management is well
established [108]. However, there is a critical need to understand more
about the nature of this impact and its determinants for enhanced
effectiveness, efficiency, and competitiveness outcomes [109].
There is a rich line of research in the Information Systems field that
investigated the enabling or inhibiting determinants for the adoption of
technological innovations in organizations. Many theories were developed and used for this purpose including the diffusion of innovation
(DOI) theory [110], the Institutional Theory [111], the Iacovou, Benbasat, and Dexter model [112], and the
Technology-Organization-Environment (TOE) framework [23,24]. A
detailed discussion of each of these theories is beyond the scope and
purpose of this research. However, the TOE framework chosen as a
theoretical ground for this research is discussed and justified next.
3.2. The TOE framework
The Technology-Organization-Environment (TOE) framework [23,
24] is one of the most recognized and well-established theories in
innovation and technology adoption research particularly at the organizational level. The key idea of the TOE is three contexts that can influence the innovation adoption and decision-making processes in
organizations: the technological context, the organizational context, and
the environmental context (Fig. 2 below). Influencing factors from some
or all three contexts will determine the extent of technological innovation and the likelihood of decision making to adopt new innovations
within the organization.
3.2.1. Technology context determinants
Among the main determinants in this context are technology availability and characteristics. Availability refers to technologies that are
internal or external to the organization. Internal technologies include
those that are currently in use. External technologies are those that are
not currently in use but have relevance to the organization’s domain. In
addition to availability, the technological context includes the technologies themselves, their characteristics, as well as all related processes
[23].
The consideration of the technology context is important because
organizations need to understand the type of organizational changes
that will result from the decision to adopt or reject a certain technological innovation [113]. Generally, technology-driven change in the
organization can vary from incremental, synthetic, to discontinuous
[114]. Incremental technologies introduce new features or new versions
of existing technologies; and this often has a minimum impact on the
organization. Synthetic technologies are formed by rearranging existing
technologies (e.g. combining several technologies) to create an innovative solution; and has a medium impact on the organization depending on what is being created. Discontinuous technologies represent
radical changes caused by new technological innovations and this has
the largest impact, potentially positive or negative, on organizations
[113,114].
Incremental and synthetic technology-driven changes are easier to
monitor, manage, and evolve with because they are more gradual and
progressive. This is often dealt with by a continuous effort to automate
more tasks and processes. Digital transformation impacts on NDM are
more closely synonymous with discontinuous changes driven by the 4th
Industrial Revolution technologies. Digital transformation is radical and
creates a new operating landscape for organizations of all kinds by
reforming the way traditional elements function. Radical technological
innovations require a high degree of new knowledge compared to incremental innovations [115]. In such technological contexts, organizations might have to make “quick and decisive adoption decisions to
maintain and enhance competitive standing” [113]; p.12). In light of
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
6
this, this research will explore the technology context impact and determinants that can enable or inhibit the digital transformation of NDM.
3.2.2. Organization context determinants
The organizational context includes the entity’s internal characteristics such as its structure, size, scope of operation, decentralization
level, degree of formalization, culture, staffing, employee reporting
linkages, and communication processes [23]. Depending on the situation, different determinants can have different types and degrees of
impact on innovation adoption and decision-making processes. For
example, larger size organizations with extensive knowledge depth (i.e.
larger numbers of technical specialists) are more innovative in the
manufacturing industry [115]. In other research, the internal dynamics
linking the different parts or units of the organization and the degree of
formality impacted organizational innovation adoption [113]. Also,
decentralized organizational structures with fluid and flexible
cross-team communications are more able to adopt innovation
compared to organizations that have rigid, hierarchal, command-based
structures [106,116].
For NDM, the organizational context similarly plays a role in determining its ability to understand and embrace the transformations driven
by new digital technologies. Previous studies indicate that the composition of teams and internal group processes, particularly in top management, were found to determine the organization’s overall
innovativeness [117,118]. After all, it is often the values, attitudes, and
commitment of the leaders that determine the organization’s goals and
purposes as reflected by internal structures, strategy, and internal cultures [119]. Another example involves the organizational structure and
degree of agility in its system, which are key components and drivers of
innovation and successful digital transformation in organizations [120].
Organizational agility is its ability to “sense changes in the internal and
external environment, respond efficiently and effectively in a timely and
cost-effective manner, and learn from the experience to improve the
competencies of the organization” [121]; p.136). For NDM, this is a key
and critical aspect because of the nature of its decentralized
multi-organizational structure and the possible outlets for technological
changes that it needs to sense, monitor, and manage. Given this
understudied component of NDM research, this research will explore
how the organizational context impact and determinants can either
enable or inhibit the digital transformation of NDM.
3.2.3. Environment context determinants
The environmental context includes characteristics of the surroundings, the industry (e.g. size and structure), and the economic,
political, regulatory, and macroeconomic landscapes in which the organization operates [23,24,113]. The environment will contain factors
that might enable or inhibit an organization’s decision to transform
digitally. However, the strength of this impact will vary depending on
the context and the nature of the organization. For example, in a study of
1200 public organizations in the U.S., it was found that organizational
characteristics and top management attitudes towards innovation were
more influential than were environmental factors [105]. In other
research, environmental factors (e.g. hostility and uncertainty) are the
most critical for determining organizational innovativeness through its
strategic posture (aggressive-proactive vs. passive-reactive) towards
change [122].
As was discussed previously, NDM operates within an environment
that involves many other players (private, NGOs, public, international
stakeholders) and many key inputs (hazards, properties, people, places).
Such an environment creates a context for many influencing factors on
the digital transformation of NDM and offers many advantages. For
example, digital transformation can lead to “shorter product cycles,
increased segment fragmentation, blurring industry boundaries,
breaking corporate hierarchies, and increased interdependence of world
markets” [122]; p.400). The most important point here is that NDM will
directly or directly be impacted by what happens in the environmental
context. Therefore, NDM must anticipate technological changes in the
environment and be capable of seizing the opportunities that digital
transformation presents. In light of this, this research will explore the
environmental context impact and determinants that can enable or
inhibit the digital transformation of NDM.
3.3. The present research
This study explores the impact and enabling and inhibiting determinants for the digital transformation of NDM. In doing so, it establishes digital transformation as an innovation process and therefore
extracts its theoretical grounds from the Information Systems and
Fig. 2. The TOE framework [23,24].
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
7
innovation adoption fields using the Technology–Organization–Environment (TOE) framework [23,24]. The TOE
theory is the most suitable theory for this study for several features
presented by Baker [113].
First, while the TOE is a highly adaptable theory which makes it
more of a generic framework compared to other more restrictive or
specific theories, the three contexts give sufficient conceptual boundaries. Within these three contexts, researchers can investigate any type
or number of constraints, opportunities, enablers, or inhibitors relevant
to their research. This contextual freedom is very beneficial for this
exploratory research.
Secondly, the TOE is consistent and share similar underpinnings with
other well-established theories in the innovation adoption field such as
the diffusion of innovation (DOI) theory [110]. However, the TOE offers
greater space for original knowledge development. For example, while
individual leader characteristics and internal characteristics of organizational structure in the DOI are conceptually included in the TOE’s
organizational context, the TOE offers the flexibility to add any other
contextually relevant factors. The outcome of such contextual flexibility
is more conceptual richness, explanatory power, and building of new
knowledge. These characteristics are suitable for the present study,
which aims to explore a new research area. Finally, because of the potential for more factor-specific future research following this exploratory
research, the generic nature of the TOE makes it more possible to allow
further specification, identification, and comparison of the ideas presented in this study. This research builds on TOE foundations and proposes a model of determinants for the digital transformation of NDM.
4. Research design and method
Several characteristics of this research indicate that a cross-sectional
design, as described by De Vaus and De Vaus [123]; is the most suitable
logic of inquiry. First, this research studies the impact and determinants
of digital transformation as episodic rather than temporally evolving
concepts, so there is no time dimension integral to this study. Second,
this research is interested in the impact and determinants based on the
variance or differences among individuals’ perceptions rather than how
these perceptions change after a controlled or time-lapsed intervention
as in experimental and longitudinal designs. Hence, the empirical phase
of this study entails collecting data at one point in time. Third, the
analysis of the data will depend on existing differences among individuals rather than differences that result from manipulations or interventions. Within this broad cross-sectional research design (Fig. 3), a
qualitative study was conducted where primary data was collected from
semi-structured interviews with experts in NDM, as discussed below.
4.1. Study context: the UK experience
This research uses the United Kingdom example to extract some
useful insights and lessons and meet the aims of the study. The UK
example was suitable for this study because, on the one hand, it is one of
the more well-developed and recognized disaster management systems
in the world with exported expertise to the Middle East, Asia, Africa, and
other regions. Furthermore, the UK is a well-ranked digital government
country. The United Nations E-Government Survey 2018 [102] evaluated governments’ digital presence and innovation in the public sector
and its impact on people’s everyday lives. Overall, the UK ranked fourth
globally in 2018 with a ‘very high’ e-government digital index and a
‘very high’ Online Service Index (OSI).2 Also, since 2012, the UK government committed itself to go digital, which resulted in £1.7 - £1.8
billion in total annual savings for the country [124]. As a result, the UN
considered many of the UK’s governmental digital practices exemplary
for other countries. For example, the UK’s success in monitoring,
recognizing, and embracing users’ behavioral changes and preferences
for the development of its unique e-government portal received global
recognition [125]. Also, the UK government’s embracing of
community-based digital initiatives such as the Fix-My-Street application [126] was one of the exemplary digital practices and one which was
later adopted by many other countries around the world [102].
More strategically, the UK government has taken advanced steps in
becoming a world leader in digitizing its services and strengthening its
cyber-security presence and e-government resilience [102] including
the introduction of the Government Transformation Strategy
2017–2020 [101] and the second version of its five-year National Cyber
Security Strategy 2016–2021 [127]. However, despite these achievements, like most governments, the UK still has a long way to go. The
Global Digital Transformation report [128], which surveyed more than
1200 government officials from more than 70 countries (UK N = 243),
showed that most UK governmental agencies still feel that employees
and leaders lack the necessary skills for digital transformation. The
report also showed that less than 1/5th of these agencies are satisfied
with their digital vendor community. The UK agencies claimed cost,
competing priorities, and security concerns are the main influencing
factors towards digital transformation. So, while the UK NDM makes an
exemplary case for many other countries, it too can benefit from the
ideas and exploration presented in this research.
4.2. Method and sample
Primary qualitative data was collected via semi-structured interviews [129] with eight experts in NDM in the United Kingdom. Interviews have the advantage of allowing a dialogue with the participant
where existing questions can be clarified and new ones can be improvised based on the participant’s feedback [130]. Interviews are also
useful to gain first-hand in-depth insights from reliable sources. In
particular, experts were targeted because they are considered as ‘crystallization points’ for practical and informative insights that are often
unavailable to others [131]. Generally, expert interviews were chosen
for this research for several practical and methodical reasons, as
postulated by Bogner et al. [131]. Firstly, speaking to experts is useful
for the exploratory type of research projects, which goes in line with this
research. Secondly, expert interviews are an efficient and concentrated
method for gathering data compared to participatory observation or
systematic quantitative surveys. This research seeks concentrated
knowledge about NDM which is restricted to a specific circle of individuals who are directly involved in the management of national disasters in the country. Thirdly, interviewing experts can enrich the study
referring the researcher to a wider network of potential participants
[131].
The interviews followed a semi-structured style that allowed the
participants to freely express their views while allowing the researcher
to maintain the flow of the dialogue within the intended focus and
scope. Appendix A presents the list of questions used as a general
guideline during the interviews. For logistical reasons, sessions were
conducted online via GoToMeeting software. The interviews were
designed to cover two main themes. The first theme built a contextual
understanding of the impact of digital transformation as perceived by
NDM experts. This included insights about the meaning of digital
transformation impact, the directions of this impact on NDM structures,
the paths this impact takes to influence NDM, the disaster management
areas where the greatest potential of this impact is expected to happen,
and the forces that can drive NDM towards technological innovation and
digital transformation. Then, the second theme focused on understanding the enabling and inhibiting determinants of the digital transformation in NDM.
Before each interview, the researcher explained the aims, method
used, type of analysis, and possible outcomes of the study to the
2 OSI measures the online presence of the government in terms of service
delivery with four progressive Presence categories: Emerging - Enhanced –
Transactional – Connected.
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
8
participant and obtained informed consent via email. Participation was
voluntary and participants were given the choice to withdraw from the
interview at any point during the session. Also, participants were
informed of the confidentiality of the research and their anonymity was
assured by removing identifiers and using proxies such as participant 1,
participant 2, and so on. The interviewees’ permission for recording the
sessions for later analysis and future reference was pre-acquired. The
interview recordings and transcripts were stored in a passwordprotected computer that is only accessible to the researcher.
Table 1 below, shows a general profile of the experts interviewed in
this research. The experts were located using a convenience simple
snowball sampling technique [132] through recommendations from
academics and practitioners in the field. The sample consists of eight
experts with diverse national and international experiences in NDM
strategy, policymaking, operational leadership, consultancy, and
training. The majority of the sample provides the NDM expertise to
different governments and countries around the world.
4.3. Analysis approach
Content and thematic methods were used to analyze the expert interviews. Content Analysis is the use of specific methods to make inferences from data to the bigger context [133]. It does not only analyze
the manifest content but also looks for implicit meanings based on the
context [134]. This approach was applied to uncover relevant explicit
and implicit inferences from the experts’ interviews concerning the
context of the research. Because content analysis also encompasses accounting for key phrases or content and interpreting them based on their
context [135], mentions of some keywords (e.g. ‘digital’, ‘technology’,
‘innovation’) were sought from the transcripts of the interviews. In
addition, Thematic Analysis, which is “a method for identifying,
analyzing, and reporting patterns (themes) within data” [136], was used
to guide the analysis based on the aforementioned main themes and
subthemes: theme one ‘Impact’ (subthemes: meaning, directions, paths,
areas, and forces) and theme two ‘determinants’ (see Section 4.3). These
themes and subthemes were used to track direct and indirect traces of
key concepts in the interviews.
5. Analysis and results
This research aims to answer two main questions: 1) what is the
impact of digital transformation on NDM? And 2) what are the main
determinants for the digital transformation of NDM? The following two
sections will answer these questions.
5.1. The impact
To understand the impact of digital transformation on NDM, and
address the first research question, the expert interviews uncovered
some interesting and insightful ideas.3 As discussed in the following
sections, the understanding of this impact is established based on the
following subthemes:
- The meaning of digital transformation impact for NDM (Section
5.1.1: The Meaning),
- The directions of the perceived impact (Section 5.1.2: The Paradox),
- The paths through which the impact can take place (Section 5.1.3:
The Effects),
- The areas where the greatest impact is perceived to exist (Section
5.1.4: The Digitally Transformed Cycle), and
- The forces that can drive NDM towards more technological innovation and digital transformation (Section 5.1.5: The Driving Forces)
5.1.1. The meaning
The interviews revealed three main perceptions/views of the impact
of digital transformation and its meaning and relevance to NDM: the
acknowledger-enthusiast, the acknowledger-moderate, and the
acknowledger-skeptical. So, while all participants agreed on and
Fig. 3. Overall research design.
Table 1
Participants profile.
Participant Description – area of expertise
Participant
1
National and international expert in disaster management, resilience
and contingencies, trainer and consultant for many foreign
governments. Held responsibilities for digitization in disaster
management with experience extending to more than 40 years.
Participant
2
Expert practitioner, leader and researcher in NDM. Long experience
in civil defense, response and recovery operations.
Participant
3
Leader, expert, and trainer in UK national emergency planning and
disaster management
Participant
4
National and international leading practitioner, expert and
researcher in maritime risk management, operational support and
disaster management.
Participant
5
UK leading practitioner and expert in emergency planning and
resilience and head of response operations in county level.
Participant
6
UK NDM policy manager/advisor and trainer.
Participant
7
National and international expert and consultant in civil
contingencies, resilience training, and NDM policy and standards.
Participant
8
National and international expert and consultant in national disaster
and contingency management
3 Due to research word count limitation, only one or two excerpts from the
interviews is used as an example of evidence.
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
9
acknowledged the potential impact of digital transformation on NDM,
their views varied on what that practically means.
For the acknowledger-enthusiast, digital transformation meant a
profound real-life phenomenon that NDM must pay attention to, understand, react to, and capitalize on, sooner rather than later, as the
following example shows (‘p’ stands for ‘participant’):
“Digital Transformation enhances national disaster management
capability to respond to disasters and disruption because you’ve got
more ways to communicate, you can harness technology to use in
responding to disasters, such as drones flying over disaster sites and
being able to relay back photos and videos […]and you obviously
have enhanced communications with mobile and satellite communications” (p3)
For the acknowledger-moderate, digital transformation is seen as an
important and generally a positive phenomenon, but with a more
reserved perception of how impactful it is going to be on NDM. For
example, they see that digital transformation impact will depend on the
specific technology features and their relevance/irrelevance to the core
(operational) business of NDM. In addition, they also see that the direct/
indirect impact will depend on the temporal proximity of the technology
to the present time (i.e. already existing vs. under-development vs. futuristic concept technology). The following is an exemplary excerpt:
“Social m
edia […] can be a close example to a technology which directly
impacted national disaster management. But some other new technologies like self-driving cars and digital companies like Uber and
others might not have a direct impact on national disaster management because [NDM] is concerned with large scale disasters like
cyclones […]. When we talk about technologies that are futuristic
and not currently in wide-scale use yet, such as self-driving cars,
these are not present yet … that’s why we are not currently concerned about them in our emergency planning” (p2)
The acknowledger-skeptical participants perceive digital transformation as either a threatening phenomenon or one with low (or no)
direct relevance to NDM. For example, one assertion was that despite
what technology can facilitate, the paper-and-pen solution remains the
most resilient state of all NDM work, therefore making digital transformation less meaningful to NDM. The following response demonstrates such an example, wherein increased technology is a potential
threat to security and privacy and the overall maintenance of national
infrastructure. Here, the respondent indicates that some national sectors
are more vulnerable than others and that the very presence of technology creates additional levels of vulnerability and thus more complications for NDM in general:
“We all know that in some of our critical infrastructure, in terms of
power and communications, [they] can be affected by the digital
cyber threats. We know our financial systems can be affected … so
someone can get on our stock exchange or take money from bank
accounts [ …]. I would argue that that kind of threats just increase [
…]. I know a lot of people who work in the health sector who are
worried about activists getting in and changing life support sheets, or
altering the levels of dosage that they are giving patients, because
they can. It’s extraordinary what the internet encourages, and what
we have got to deal with on a national basis … when we’ve got a
national infrastructure or national systems to protect” (p7)
Overall, the three views that emerged from the interviews can teach
us several important points. First, digital transformation is an inevitable
and significant reality for NDM and must be understood and proactively
planned. Second, the perceptions among disaster management professionals will undoubtedly vary and, therefore, NDM leadership must
devise suitable digital transformation strategies to navigate through this
variation. A possible strategy is to start with continuous expert conversations and conferences regarding the future of NDM in the new
digital era. Third, digital transformation is a continuing journey with
temporal (e.g. present vs. future) and spatial (e.g. national-local vs.
national-global or operational vs. strategic) dimensions that must be
understood and controlled to increase the agility of NDM in the midst of
all the direct/indirect implications of technological advancements.
5.1.2. The paradox
The interviews revealed an interesting paradoxical perspective on
the direction of the impact of digital transformation on NDM: positive or
negative. For example, each new digital technology can be equally
rewarding and challenging for NDM at the same time, and each technology can equally bring opportunities and threats. Also, it was
conceded by experts that ironically perhaps, only technology could
remedy the negative effects of technology. The following shows an
example.
“The digital era will increase risks of disasters … but they will also or
should support the management of disasters [ …]. So it works both
ways, for example, social technologies in particular can work in two
ways: good and bad. It can act for good in terms of alerting people
and telling them what to do and it can be harnessed by governments
as a vehicle for informing the public about what they should be doing
and so on. But it can work for the bad also. There can be people, or
broadcasters, who put out information from social media [ …] which
actually does harm to people … so it can work both ways” (p8)
In addition, the paradoxical effect also appears in the availability of
data and information that digital technologies allow that is fundamentally beneficial but also detrimental at the same time. The amount of
data and information that rapid technology advancements make available can either assist or impede judgment and decision making for the
layperson as well as NDM organizations. While the speed and pace of
technological developments should be a great advantage in our time, it
also brings unprecedented pressures on organizations in the race to cope
with rapid and ongoing change. Here are some examples.
“People never had more access to more knowledge [than they do
today]. We have got unequalled access to facts and data, and yet at
the same time, people’s decision making is becoming more and more
driven by soft factors like beliefs and so on” (p1)
“One of the threats here is the pace of technology as it improves.
Unless you are a small or agile operator, it is quite difficult for a
national entity to say, “we will this year concentrate on SnapChat or
another technology” because technologies come up in favor and then
they quickly get taken over by someone else or die. So, there is an
issue that national disaster management needs to deal with” (p4)
Overall, this paradoxical impact carries benefits and challenges. On
the beneficial side, it assures that implementing the right digital transformation strategies may significantly improve NDM systems. On the
challenging side, NDM needs to rapidly develop a proactive mechanism
to understand the direct and indirect implications of new digital technology. However, this might require intensive and expensive resources.
5.1.3. The effects
The interviews revealed three-directional path through which digital
transformation can impact NDM in its ‘disasters’ and ‘management’ core
components (Fig. 4 below). Firstly, digital transformation changes the
core nature and essence of existing and known disasters. Secondly,
digital transformation creates new unprecedented types of disasters.
Thirdly, digital transformation challenges the conventional disaster
management methods and ways of operating.
In the first effect path, digital transformation can change existing and
familiar disasters and yield reformed and often more complicated versions. This effect can take place by adding more variables (both positive
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
10
and negative) to the situation and thus widening the scope of existing
disasters, amplifying their consequences, or changing the dynamics of
dependencies in a disaster. The following passages demonstrate the respondents’ ideas in this regard.
“We now see disasters being mitigated or amplified by things like
technological glitches and computer systems, whereas 10 years ago
that was much less common. We saw that recently in a major airlines
incident when one 100 flights got cancelled … that was luckily an
isolated event … but that happening alongside another wider
disaster could definitely make things a lot worse” (p6)
“Gen4 and associated technologies will change the nature of risk
environment, in terms of the structure of the nation and risk dependences […] and it may also change the nature of disasters […]. If
you go back to the 1970s, if you lost electricity it would have been
difficult but not a disaster. By 1990s lost electricity supply for a week
would have been disastrous. Come forward 20 years to 2010 …
losing IP services for a week would have been a disaster, but in 1990s
nobody would have cared […]. The life and system drivers have
changed” (p1)
In the second effect path, digital transformation can create new and
unprecedented types of disasters, which might require new ways to
respond than traditionally known to NDM. This effect includes novel
disasters that the use of new technologies directly create, those that
result from the increased digital interconnectedness, or those that result
from possible failures of newly introduced technology.
“Where I would say we’ve got a way to go is realizing the extent of
the vulnerabilities that exist in our communities with new technology … and I think not only we are not yet really making the most of
the fact that we could use new technology better for local coordination and emergency response, but also that we need to have much
more testing and exercising using technological failure examples”
(p3)
In the third effect path, digital transformation can challenge the
conventional methods of disaster management. One aspect of this is the
unprecedented challenges that new technologies might impose on the
command and control structures in conventional NDM. For example,
digital transformation can challenge NDM by creating extra unconventional layers to be managed during disasters (e.g. social media platforms). Diverting the attention of people during disasters, influencing
people’s perceptions, and facilitating uncontrollable or random participation by spontaneous volunteers are just a few examples of the complications that new technologies such as social media can bring to NDM.
Increased number of stakeholders and more data may obfuscate rather
than ameliorate NDM protocols and procedures.
“Technologies like social media helped people learn about what’s
happening in disruptive situations, so our corporate communications
team 10 years ago was seen making press releases, whereas now they
put much greater focus on their social media space, so we have one
person doing nothing but maintaining Twitter blogs and responding
to things there. So yeah, that’s changed” (p5)
“In the past you had a very command-led structure, where the
expectation is the command leader says something and it cascades to
everybody, but in this age of social media and mobile phones it’s the
democratization that technology allows people” (p4)
Overall, these three effect paths can offer a structured method for
understanding the impact of digital transformation on NDM. Through
this, these effects can be accounted for, mitigated, and capitalized on to
develop relevant, comprehensive, and well-rounded digital transformation strategies for NDM. Understanding these effects paths will
also allow NDM to reevaluate its current methods and decide what to
keep and what must be tweaked even invalidated.
5.1.4. The Digitally Transformed Cycle
Taking into account the full disaster management cycle, the interviews revealed some areas where the most significant impact of
digital transformation will take place. The existing literature mainly
focused on technology-specific, phase-specific, or task-specific areas of
improvements, as discussed previously in the literature review section.
This research uncovers interesting cross-cutting areas where digital
transformation can be most impactful regardless of the specific technology, phase, or task. The following discusses three examples of such
cross-cutting areas. The benefit of highlighting these areas is that they
apply to any disaster management phase, any task, and using any
technology.
5.1.4.1. Modeling and visualization. The experts perceive that the ability
to model and visualize data and information is one of the most important
benefits that digital transformation can offer to NDM. For example,
digitally-enabled modeling and visualization are critical to allow better
early warning, improved training and scenario exercising, and enhanced
shared situational awareness - especially for the multi-agency nature of
NDM. Harnessing digital transformation to improve modeling and
visualization capabilities will lead to better decision-making, policy
specification, and strategy development throughout the disaster management life cycle.
“We can create much better shared situational awareness and we will
start to be able to model hard consequences much better very soon,
and over time we may be able to get into modeling soft consequences
as well. So, the data revolution and modeling revolution may allow
us to get a better grasp of the unforeseen consequences of decisions”
(p1)
5.1.4.2. Risk control. Risk control includes the identification, assessment, and management of risks. Risk control is a core element of all the
phases of disaster management. Digitally-enabled risk control can help
in identifying potential risks in the prevention and mitigation phases
and in dealing with evolving risks during the preparedness, response,
and recovery phases. Besides, digital transformation may bring its own
sets of risks and therefore require additional risk control mechanisms.
The interviewees expressed that digitally-enabled risk control will
enhance risk prioritization and strategy building, enrich awareness and
knowledge of direct or indirect risks, improve the management of risk
information by integrating various technologies, and advance the
numeration and representation of risks and their consequences for better
decision making.
“Horizon scanning for national disaster management is critical to
strategically understand what new risks exist and then plan on how
to mitigate them [using technology]” (p2)
“New technology allows us to know about more risks worldwide than
we are used to. So that information sharing is there. Whether it’s
Fig. 4. Three-directional effects of digital transformation on NDM
(source: Author).
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
11
done by governments, or the insurance industry, or just interested
people online. So, we have a lot more information that involves risk
identification than we used to, which is good. In slow times, we can
do a lot more analysis on different types of risks, comparing,
graphically representing them in a compelling ways” (p6)
5.1.4.3. Feedback loops and lessons learned. As reflected by the experts,
establishing effective feedback and lesson learning mechanisms in a
multi-agency NDM environment is one of the most critical and challenging areas. The experts stressed that it is often more common for
NDM stakeholders to focus on preparation, response, and recovery than
post-disaster lessons learned and feedback loops. They also asserted that
using digital transformation for feedback loops and lessons learned can
be very useful for enhancing the assessment and evaluation of decisions
and actions, automating the presentation and call-back of lessons
learned in the preparation for the next disaster, and improving
government-agency communication across different organizational
layers.
“Yeah I don’t think people reflect enough … I think we are too keen
to see it’s all over and we want to move on. And what we’ve seen in
some disruptions is that you can actually go right back to the
anticipatory phase and you can actually reduce the likelihood of
something happening again if you spend more time and effort in the
recovery phase analyzing and using technology to figure out what
did go wrong and how you responded, and learning lessons to focus
on continuous improvement” (p3)
“I could imagine that in the future if you had certain types of disasters, then the lessons from similar types of disaster could automatically be flagged for you” (p6)
Overall, this research suggests that focusing on such cross-cutting
areas (Fig. 5 below) can help to capitalize on digital transformation to
improve existing NDM systems. This research contrasts with existing
literature’s tendency to focus on technology-specific, phase-specific, or
task-specific areas because technologies are fast evolving and rapidly
replaceable. To strategically benefit from digital transformation, NDM
has to first focus on identifying such cross-cutting areas and then decide
which technology, phase, or tasks should take priority. Technology is
enacted differently in different contexts. Thus a more macro perspective
will allow for a more comprehensive examination of how technology
will impact at a system level.
5.1.5. The Driving Forces
Finally, to better understand the impact of digital transformation on
NDM, it is important to uncover the potential forces that will drive this
impact. The interviews revealed three-directional forces (Fig. 6): two
internal forces including top-down (Strategic to Operation) and bottomup (Operation to Strategic) and a third external outside-in force.
5.1.5.1. Top-down. From this perspective, digital transformation in
NDM will be mainly driven by top-bottom forces, from strategic levels
towards operational levels. In this case, those sitting in top leadership
seats will make the most important decisions to lead digital transformation by pushing down technological innovations to those in the
operational levels. This direction can be useful for establishing or
installing cross-agency or cross-government systems/technologies for
enhanced multi-organizations dialogue and communication, or for using
digital transformation to bridge the capability gaps among stakeholders
in multi-agency disaster management work environment.
“Yeah … if a new technology is forwarded from the top, then yes we
will embrace it. For example, over the past five years, we have a
government resilience system that they [strategic level] provided to
us, which we use, which is how we share information across our
agencies. It’s got two sides to it, the day to day usage where we use it
as the online reporting for everything, and you also got the response
mode where we share common operating pictures, general information about what’s happened, but that’s only between the
responding agencies and government, it’s not public facing” (p5)
5.1.5.2. Bottom-up. From this perspective, operational levels are the
main driving force for the digital transformation in NDM, where those
who are in the operational levels push up technological advancements
and innovations based on their specific needs to higher strategic levels.
The logic behind this suggestion is that it is a more justifiable investment
if the proposals for digital transformation stem from operational levels
where the outcome of investment can be more tangible.
“As we engage with people in the operational levels [ …] if we see
them using new ‘toys’, we will gradually want to integrate with what
they are doing, equally in terms of communicating with systems they
develop or use. They would pull us with them because we have to
maintain communications with them and it’s more in the interest of
the strategic level than the operational level to make sure they can
communicate” (p6)
5.1.5.3. Outside-in. In this view, external forces such as research and Fig. 5. Cross-cutting areas for the digital transformation in NDM
(source: Author).
Fig. 6. Three-directional driving forces of digital transformation in NDM
(source: Author).
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
12
science, communities, other industries, and the media digital are the
main drivers for the digital transformation of NDM systems. More precisely, external factors will drive strategic decisions within NDM to cope
with technological changes.
“Those people who are doing remote sensing within the scientific
and engineering communities and so on have been looking for ways
for doing that better. Also, media have been looking at how to use
technology to improve what they do within their own organizations.
So, it will be the [external] organizations themselves who will be
coming up with the ideas of how to best use technology to improve
emergency practices. So, there will be things that engineers will do
because they make sense in engineering terms or scientists will do
because they make sense in scientific terms” (p8)
Overall, the comprehension of such driving forces helps NDM to
foster change and innovation to understand more about the dynamics
behind digital transformation in the new digital era. This understanding
will lead to better decision-making practices, strategy design, and
effectively focusing digital transformation efforts within NDM. This
understanding will also allow NDM to mitigate risks and negative impacts of digital transformation by devising counter-force actions or
mechanisms.
5.2. The determinants
Moving to the second research question on the enabling and inhibiting determinants of the digital transformation of NDM, the interviews
revealed an interesting set of determinants. Over and above the
technology-organization-environment contexts of the TOE theory (see
the Theory section), this research uncovered a new set of determinants
that are specific to the disaster context. This newly added disaster
context could explain a large part of the NDM willingness and decisions
to innovate and transform in the digital age. The following sections
highlight these determinants. Then the Discussion section will present a
novel TOE-Disaster (TOE-D) model and extends the original TOE
framework.
Before discussing the determinants, it is important to note that, first,
the determinants reported here are based on the UK expert interviews
and are not exhaustive of every possible factor. Second, the categorization of these determinants under the four contexts (technology, organization, environment, and disaster) is based on the conceptual
proximity of each determinant to the domain of one of the contexts.
Third, each determinant is presented as a critical factor but its actual
impact can either be positive or negative depending on the specific
context or situation.
5.2.1. Technology context determinants
According to the TOE theory, the technological context includes internal and external technologies (equipment and processes) that are
relevant to the organization. The expert interviews revealed the
following determinants (evidence from the interviews is presented in
Appendix B):
- Technology availability: whether or not the technology is (or
made) available for those who need it. In the context of this study,
technology can be offered by upper strategic levels, requested by
lower operational levels, and/or pushed-in by external forces (private sector, people, other governments, etc.).
- Technology criticality: whether or not the new technology is critical for the disaster managers measured by direct enhancements to
operational tasks or avoidance of a clear threat.
- Technology justifiability: whether or not the new technology
acquisition can be justified. Justifiability is measured by direct enhancements to operational tasks or avoidance of a clear threat,
compared to its financial and cost implications.
- Technology testability: whether or not the new technology can be
tested in disaster or disaster-like situations. Testability in such settings is critical for disaster management because the sensitivity and
constraints in disaster situations do not allow experimentation of
new technologies. Therefore, unless it is possible to test the proposed
technology in a controllable environment, the technology will have
very low acceptance, if any, by NDM.
- Technology homogeneity/heterogeneity: the degree to which the
new technology is homogenous or heterogeneous with other (existing) critical systems or technologies in NDM. NDM deals with complex disaster situations, and any new technology or system that could
potentially add to this complexity will not be easily accepted.
5.2.2. Organization context determinants
According to the TOE theory, the organizational context includes the
characteristics and resources of the organization such as size, degree of
centralization, degree of formalization, managerial structure, human
resources, amount of slack resources, linkages among employees, and
communication processes. The expert interviews revealed the following
determinants (evidence from the interviews is presented in Appendix C):
- Organizational structure: the nature of structure and working relationships that link various ministries or agencies in the NDM to the
top/central leading authority. Whether or not there is an integrating
relationship among all components of the NDM structure in technological innovation and investment, will determine the extent to
which digital transformation will/will not (successfully) take place.
- Procurement System: the speed at which NDM can determine, try,
buy, install, and train people for a new technology will determine the
degree to which it can utilize or cope with the rapidly evolving
digital transformation. This is particularity important – and challenging - in multi-agency settings like NDM.
- Financial Constraints: the ability to capitalize on available financial resources for digital transformation given the multiorganizational nature of NDM.
- Data and Information Eccentricity: the degree to which there is an
existing conformity in the data and information possessed by
different organizations within NDM. The more the existing conformity in data and information, the smoother the digital transformation will be. This indicates that countries that have successfully
built solid and integrated inter-organizational e-government systems
might have better chances for success in the digital transformation of
their NDM.
- Technological inclination: the degree to which technological
innovation is a prioritized solution for problems facing NDM whether
in or out of disaster situations. Such inclination toward technology
represents the general mindset and culture in the agencies leading
disaster management in NDM.
- Organizational Adaptability: the degree to which NDM is able to
cope, learn and adapt to new changes and ideas in general and those
brought by digital transformation in specific.
5.2.3. Environment context determinants
According to the TOE theory, the environmental context includes the
characteristics of the settings in which an organization operates such as
the size and structure of the industry, the competing forces, the macroeconomic context, and the regulatory environment. The expert interviews revealed the following determinants (evidence from the
interviews is presented in Appendix D):
- Governmental Collaborative Mindset: the extent to which a
collaborative mindset is instilled in the overall government system in
the country and among various governmental authorities. The digital
transformation of NDM requires a collaborative mindset across the
whole government and among agencies that are directly or indirectly
involved in managing national disasters.
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
13
- Political Accountability: the perceived political accountability by
decision makers in NDM. This determinant is important because
digital transformation will require quite fundamental changes and
decisions to be made and if political accountability, for failure
especially, is too strong, then this deters or discourages the adoption
of new technological innovations and digital transformation in NDM.
- Governmental Bureaucracy: the extent to which bureaucratic
culture is present in the government system will impact the ability of
NDM to cope and utilize the fast-paced digital transformation.
5.2.4. Disaster context determinants
In addition to the above three contexts from the TOE theory, this
research adds a new set of determinants specific to the disaster context.
Similar to the above-discussed determinants, these disaster-specific
factors can influence either positively by expediting or negatively by
hindering the decisions for NDM to digitally innovate and transform.
The expert interviews revealed the following determinants (evidence
from the interviews is presented in Appendix E).
- Situational Criticality: the perceived extent to which the criticality
of disaster or emergency situations encourages/hinders the willingness of decision makers to explore new digital innovations or technologies. This is based on the fact that disasters are often demanding,
chaotic, and uncertain situations, and therefore, disaster managers’
priority is to use all they already know and to apply it to the situation
to stabilize it in the shortest time possible. The interviews showed
that it is perceived that adding technology to a ‘working’ disaster
management system could potentially add more variables, complications, and requirements to an already critical situation, therefore,
reducing the willingness of NDM to innovate.
- Temporality: the perceived extent to which the temporality of
disaster or emergency situations (age of the disaster situation) encourages/hinders the willingness of decision makers to explore and
invest (time, effort, and money) in new digital innovation. The interviews showed that it is perceived that because of the temporality
of national disasters and also the fact that it is a multi-agency
structure rather than a single unitary organization, investing time,
effort, and money in new digital innovations or technologies might
not be justifiable.
- Human Factor: the perception or belief that humans only can
manage disasters and that technology will only add another layer of
responsibility on humans. This perception or mindset might
discourage the willingness of decision makers to explore using new
digital innovations or technologies. Also, there is a fear that humans
may willfully use technology as a way to exacerbate security protocols, and that technology in the wrong hands creates new forms of
unprecedented emergency scenarios.
- Resilience Mindset: the belief that resilient state (e.g., working with
pen and paper) is the principle and target of disaster management
and that adding technology might only drive them away from that
state. The interviews showed that this is seen in two ways. First, new
technologies will add more layers of responsibilities to deal with and
therefore expand the gap between disaster management and resilience state. Second, new technologies will add another layer of
threats or vulnerabilities (e.g. cyber-attacks) and therefore add to the
complexity of reaching the resilience state.
6. Discussion
The present research has identified that the existing literature primarily focused on the digitization of technology-specific, phase-specific,
or task-specific disaster management domains. It also revealed that there
is an urgent need for studies to investigate the impact and determinants
of digital transformation on national disaster management (NDM) as a
strategic endeavor beyond the technology itself. Therefore, this research
addressed this critical gap by integrating multidisciplinary concepts and
understandings from Disaster Management, Information Systems, and
Business and Management. It posited two overarching research questions: 1) what is the impact of digital transformation on NDM? And 2)
what are the determinants for the digital transformation of NDM?
Building on the theoretical foundations of the TechnologyOrganizational-Environment (TOE) framework, this study used the UK
experience as an example and conducted semi-structured interviews
with experts in UK NDM.
The findings of this study established the profound impact of digital
transformation on NDM in several ways. First, it showed that since many
of the advanced digital innovations have not yet reached common use,
the impact is perceived differently by different specialists in NDM
(enthusiast, moderate, or skeptical). However, the findings revealed an
agreement among all experts on the relevance and importance of digital
transformation to NDM systems. Second, this study showed that the
impact of digital transformation on NDM is paradoxical in nature and
will affect NDM depending on how it will be planned for, adopted, and
strategized. Third, it revealed three-directional paths for this impact that
NDM needs to understand and adapt to: it changes existing and familiar
disasters, it creates new unprecedented disasters, and it challenges the
current NDM ways of thinking, planning, and working. Fourth, the
findings also demonstrated that the best strategy to effectively deal with
the impact of digital transformation in NDM is to focus on cross-cutting
areas (e.g. modeling and visualization, risk control, and feedback loops
and lessons learned) that span across all phases of the disaster management cycle than focusing on technology-specific, phase-specific, or
task-specific areas. Finally, it demonstrated that the impact is driven by
three-directional forces including top-down (strategic to operation),
bottom-up (operation to strategic), and outside-in (outside NDM to inside). Such understanding provides NDM with ways for channeling the
impact of digital transformation for their short- and long-term advantage. All of these points answered the first research question stated
above.
To answer the second research question, a unique TOE-Disaster
(TOE-D) model (Fig. 7) for the enabling and inhibiting determinants
for digital transformation in NDM is proposed based on expert interviews and the theoretical foundations of the TOE framework. As
discussed in the results section, the proposed model expands the conventional technology, organization, and environment contexts of the
TOE by adding a fourth ‘disaster’ context with a unique set of determinants specific to national disaster management. This model helps
tailor our previous understanding of innovation adoption contexts to the
disaster management filed, which is a unique contribution to the
Fig. 7. TOE-disaster (TOE-D) model for digital transformation in NDM
(source: Author).
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
14
existing literature.
In addition, based on the findings from the empirical study, this
research presents an innovative Layered Cake FAST (Foundations →
Approach → Strategy → Technology) Model - Fig. 8 below - which offers
a unique perspective to help NDM lead its digital transformation
journey.
The basic principle of the Layered Cake FAST Model is that effective
and successful digital transformation of NDM must start with establishing the foundations, the approach, the strategy and, then only,
technology can sit in and equipped and ready environment. The practices and actions in each of these layers can vary from one NDM to
another depending on the country’s system, structure, culture, the hierarchy of authority, and other critical factors. However, to give examples, the foundations can include the existence of a national will, top
management support, an appropriate organizational structure with
dedicated units, and cross-ministerial communication and collaborative
culture.
Once NDM establishes the foundations, it then needs to decide on its
approach on how to tackle digital transformation by setting a suitable
purpose, scope, focus, and pace and also deciding on how the digital
transformation journey will unfold. After that, NDM needs to decide on
its strategy involving its digital transformation strategy, learning and
awareness strategy, stakeholder engagement strategy, and other supporting strategies that can help ensure successful and smooth digital
transformation for NDM and its partners. Lastly, once the NDM establishes the foundations, the approach, and the strategy, then only technology can be implemented to give the most effective outcomes for
NDM. To put this model in practical terms, Table 2 below offers a set of
suggested recommendations and actions for each section of the Layered
Cake FAST Model. While these recommendations are not exhaustive,
they provide useful ideas and guidance for practitioners in particular.
7. Conclusions
The purpose of national disaster management (NDM) systems is to
protect people, properties, and places within the country. The 4th Industrial Revolution and new technological innovations promise profound and unprecedented transformation to the ways humans live,
work, interact, do business, and manage their lives. Therefore, it is
inevitable for NDM organizations to consider how digital transformation
is going to affect their existing work mechanisms and relationships and,
therefore, devise ways to ensure that the new digital era is going to work
for their advantage. A literature review of existing studies in the technology and disaster management field revealed the need to conduct
studies that go beyond the current focus on technology-specific, phaseFig. 8. The layered cake fast model (source: Author).
Table 2
Examples of Recommended Actions based on the Layered Cake FAST Model.
Cake Layer Recommended Actions for Digital Transformation of NDM
Foundations •Establish and ensure clear national will.
•Ensure NDM top management support including the right awareness
& mindset.
•Review government architecture and ensure NDM plugs in to the
right place in government.
•Create a strategic national secretariat (single focal point - not one of
the ministries).
•Get NDM doctrine sorted - establish a clear business and operating
model for NDM and communicate it to all involved.
• Established a clear system of authority, roles and responsibilities
within and around NDM.
• Establish a system of standards, rule, regulations, and governance
for technology use in NDM.
• Unify cross-government technology-related efforts and investments, and avoid duplication of efforts (e.g. create focal dedicated technology units to serve all NDM).
• Establish strategies for joint cross-government communication
systems and unified disaster information broadcasting (e.g. central
social media teams to push out joint messages).
• Break down departmental/ministerial barriers and develop crossgovernment culture of information sharing, discussion, coordination, and consultation.
• Get the intellectual and practical (physical and financial)
foundations lined up to support NDM digital transformation.
Approach • Identify your general focus, scope and pace.
• Follow a gradual approach: start with operational levels then move
up to strategic.
• Start with the ‘bad’ side. Focus on minimizing harm using
technology and minimizing harm from technology itself.
• Apply a ‘generational approach’ to NDM digital strategy - harness
the passion and intellect of the youth base and the digital
generation to understand and utilize the new digital era to manage
disasters now and in the future.
• Establish a specialized unit for technological horizon scanning for
NDM to help identify your digital transformation scope and
priorities.
• Identify your focus areas within NDM and look for cross-cutting
areas to capitalize on technological capabilities.
• Cross-check your digital transformation approach, scope and focus
with the national risk register of likely scenarios.
• Get an independent scientific technological review to decide what
to do with technology today, what is missing, and what is coming
which you might use or consider.
Strategy • Define your NDM digital transformation strategy.
• Establish ‘think tank’ teams of Subject Matter Experts within NDM
and other scientists to help define your strategy.
• Ensure the existence of needed policies, resources, mechanisms,
evaluation methods to support your strategy.
• Build NDM strategy to develop necessary culture of cooperation,
coordination, and information and data sharing across NDM and
overall government.
• Develop your cross-departmental data management strategy - set
teams to define what information is needed where, define needed
systems, and decide how to best utilize new technologies.
• Utilize international expertise, knowledge and experiences in the
field.
• Develop your learning and awareness strategy to support NDM
digital transformation.
• Work with local authorities to establish programs on technology
advancement, risks and crises for the society and other
stakeholders.
• Hold major conferences with leaders in the field to better
understand digital transformation.
• Gather scientists and scientific research to understand both good
and bad aspects of new technologies.
• Build your stakeholder integration strategy.
• Identify stakeholders for priority disasters.
• Decide how to bring each stakeholder in different layers of
responsibility and develop a structure of where stakeholders sit-in
with NDM and decide how to share information.
• Engage with stakeholders to see how they deal with technology
and what technologies they have in place to deal with these
disasters.
(continued on next page)
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
15
specific, or task-specific issues. Therefore, this research particularly
investigated the overall impact that digital transformation has on NDM
and the specific determinants that can help or hinder the successful
digital transformation of NDM.
Using the TOE (Technology-Organization-Environment) theory, the
study found that the impact of digital transformation on NDM is profound, paradoxical, multi-directional, and involves a multitude of
driving forces. This research offered disaster management a new
perspective by uncovering a new set of determinants unique to the
disaster management context and thus expanded the traditional TOE
framework beyond its original underpinnings. The research also presented an innovative Layered Cake FAST (Foundations-ApproachStrategy-Technology) Model that provided a unique and practical
roadmap for NDM on how to handle its digital transformation journey.
This model also presented a set of expert-recommended actions to guide
NDM leaders and professionals.
This research made significant contributions to both theory and
practice. To theory, it has expanded the existing literature on disaster
management beyond its current status quo by integrating new concepts
and theories from other research fields. Additionally, it presented a
unique model of the determinants of digital transformation in NDM
based on primary first-hand insights from experts in the field and
therefore opened avenues for further investigation and research into this
area. To practice, this research unlocked the doors for an important
strategic dialogue for the future of NDM in the new digital era, offered
unique perspectives to help enrich this dialogue, and provided good
foundations and paths for establishing relevant strategies, policies, and
plans.
This research fulfilled the aims it was set to achieve. However, it
could have benefited more from interviewing a larger number of experts. Also, it would have been ideal to interview practitioners specialized in digital transformation to reflect on and complement the ideas
presented by NDM experts. For future research, it will be a useful idea to
further test and validate the TOE-D model, preferably in a different
country than the UK or a different setting. Such cross-country or crosssetting comparative studies will further enrich our understandings of
this area.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Appendix A. Interview Questions
1 To what extent has digital innovation been considered in NDM?
2 What implications (opportunities and threats) does the new digital era pose on NDM?
3 Apart from simple digitization (using technologies to automate tasks), what can NDM as an organizational system do differently/better to seize the
opportunities of the new digital age?
4 What technological, organizational, and environmental factors (enablers/inhibitors) will determine the NDM ability to digitally transform?
5 Practically, what recommended actions/strategies can NDM use today to maximize its chances to cope with the new digital era and benefit from the
opportunities it brings?
Appendix B. Research Evidence from Expert Interviews – Technology Context Determinants
Category Determinant Sample Interview Excerpt
Technological Availability “If we can use a technology … if that’s available to us … then we will obviously use it where it enhances our ability to respond and
communicate” (p5)
Technological Criticality “The key phrase that decision makers will be looking for is business criticality, how critical is this system to the successful operation of
the business? If it’s a nice to have then we haven’t got a chance. If it’s a system that’s absolutely essential to enable better response to
emergency or better decision making by commanders then you’ve got a chance of gain” (p5)
Technological Justifiability “The national disaster management in the UK follows the lead-agency concept … so it is quite difficult proving your [digital] benefit
under disaster management. Any wider government response comes with it the challenge of actually if you don’t see the immediate
output, if doesn’t benefit your own department, you have a bigger challenge in asking the government telling them you need to spend
money on [the technology]” (p7)
Technological Testability “We need to do more testing of technological failure examples, one of the things that I think personally is that for organizations it costs a
lot of money to do technology disruption failure scenarios because you can imagine for example a 999 system, there is no way you can
turn it off to see what you would do if it didn’t work. So, where you rely very heavily on something working, you can’t realistically test
losing it for a long period of time” (p3)
Technological Heterogeneity/
Homogeneity
“New technology is going to sit on top of an awful lot of heterogeneous networks, in other words, they are going to have stuff in the
networks of different generations of technology, different connectivity and so on and so forth. And heterogeneity creates single points of
(continued on next page)
Table 2 (continued )
Cake Layer Recommended Actions for Digital Transformation of NDM
• Understand the present technological control systems of major
critical infrastructure operators and what their future plans are and
make sure they are not building up single points of failure and if
they didn’t have them, make sure that they have redundancy and
resilience built in their networks.
Technology • Study new technologies well and consider benefits and risks.
• Define a national information assurance regime to make sure what
comes out of technology is true and current to prevent technologies
from becoming the architect of chaos.
• Establish your data and information management policies, data
specifications, data standardization across NDM.
• Create common unified lexicon of key technology-related terms.
• Choose technologies that can cover cross-cutting areas in the
disaster management cycle and NDM network.
• Start using new technologies in controlled small scale then scale up
to major national disasters.
• Link with industry specific scenarios where technology is used and
then scale up to national level disasters.
• Diversify your technology supplier network to minimize risks.
• Embrace new technologies and try out all new technologies and
seek ways to capitalize on their benefits.
• Embed digital innovations elements in training strategies to
professionalize NDM.
• Incorporate a culture of new technology use in all day to day
activities of NDM.
• Test to ensure that for any technology you use/choose, there is a
way to work without it.
• Provide a safe place for exercising and trying new technologies
where people are less afraid of failure.
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
16
(continued )
Category Determinant Sample Interview Excerpt
failure where things can go wrong and where the vulnerabilities exist at the boundaries of systems. So, you have new vulnerabilities that
have to be considered and have to be covered off because we don’t build things at once and because all the historic legacy stuff lying all
over the place” (p1)
Appendix C. Research Evidence from Expert Interviews – Organization Context Determinants
Category Determinant Sample Interview Extract
Organizational Structure “When you talk about national disaster management, you are talking about a massive body of a large number of boxes like
ministries, authorities and so on, and each of these boxes has its own technologies they use based on their specialized needs and
objectives, especially to support their own decision making. The role of national disaster management then comes to coordinate and
align these efforts on government and social and commercial levels for the objective of managing emergency situations” (p2)
Organizational Procurement System “In the commercial sector […] for emergencies, they quite quickly have to deal with social perceptions, so people are either reading
up or direct messaging or putting a post #rubbish_service by this company and so on … and therefore customers demand that
companies use technology. Whereas in government entities, the governments have lagged behind because of how poor generally
computer projects are within the government sector” (p4)
Organizational Financial Constraints “It’s difficult to break down huge financial barriers because budgets are allocated to ministries and disaster management is a theme
that cross-cuts everybody from the ministry of the interior, foreign office, defense, security and intelligence agencies, etc. So how do
you allocate a pot of gold to a crosscutting theme like disaster management? So, strategies are needed in terms of how to build in the
new digital era and prove the benefits it will bring” (p7)
Organizational Data and Information
Eccentricity
“The other problem with government is it already has a vast amount of data, and multitude of systems, and this is all incredibly
dispersed data, incredibly mucky, and the systems are heterogeneous because of the way constitutions are set up … and most of this
evolved over time. And the way in which data and information has evolved as a result of that can vary widely between government
departments” (p1)
Organizational Technological Inclination “There is a fundamental difference between those organizations who tend to quite often rely on technology first and humans second
… they always seek for technical solutions. Whereas others tend to rely on human beings first with technology in support” (p8)
Organizational Adaptability “The ability of the organization to understand technology, the good and bad, and what they might do, and understanding quickly
enough. In my experience, government organizations can be quite slow to move and the technology can move faster than
organizations can manage it” (p8)
Appendix D. Research Evidence from Expert Interviews – Environment Context Determinants
Category Determinant Sample Interview Excerpt
Environmental Governmental Collaborative
Mindset
“Now where you’ve got certain government systems, shall we call them autocracies, where the ruler can direct “we gonna do this”
… well that’s all fine, but the paradox there is that those are the countries whose ministries are generally the worst at sharing
information. So, the ruler can say, “do it”, but actually the obstacles against doing it are much greater” (p1)
Environmental Political Accountability “Government systems are built on political accountability and exercise of power, so in case of automated choice A proves wrong,
who is to blame and take responsibility? The absence of democracy in the decision of top leaders to adopt a technological
innovation does not imply the absence of politics” (p1)
Environmental Governmental Bureaucracy “I worked in other countries where to get two civil servants from two government departments to talk to each other about a
problem required briefing up to two ministers, exchange of letters between two ministers, written agreement to come up with
meeting time with a fixed agenda where these two guys under supervision. Well in that sort of environment, digital transformation
is never going to get off the ground” (p1)
Appendix E. Research Evidence from Expert Interviews – Disaster Context Determinants
Category Determinant Sample Interview Excerpt
Disaster Situational
Criticality
“The reason I’ve seen [that] technologies piloted or tried do not reach beta stage is because the last thing you want during a disaster is a new thing
to come along that could break. That’s the overriding thinking in the back of our mind when we have technology discussions in the national
disaster management context […] is the fact that we know the systems that we currently have are not perfect, but they work. So, to add an
unknown which could fail and no one knows how to fix is a big no-no that strategic leadership and indeed practitioners completely against” (p6)
Disaster Temporality “In essence, national disaster management is mainly a coordinating framework for other independent organizations each with their own policies
and objectives. It is a tool to align available recourses to deal with the effects of an exceptional emergency situation. So, in cases of national
emergency, other organizations will temporarily hand over their resources to the national leading unit for the purpose of mobilizing these
resources towards achieving specific objectives of saving lives and properties. Then, all organizations go back to their own routine work once the
national emergency is over” (p2)
Disaster Human Factor “For example, the huge amount of information on social media, we use that only as a kind of signal or indicator. So, when something is happening
somewhere, we pick up the phone and engage on a human level. So, using the data as a warning and informing or flagging and then carrying out a
human check behind that. The data could be crap and the time it requires to shape and process big data is way too long to actually provide useful
outputs to most responses” (p6)
Disaster Resilience Mindset “Because of the nature of our job, we need to be resilient for every eventuality and ensure that that eventuality will always include there being no
power or having been the subject of cyber-attack, then our role is to have paper-based systems to fall back on” (p5)
Appendix F. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2020.101851.
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
17
References
[1] A. Alexandru, M. Ianculescu, I.A. Marinescu, T.D. Popescu, Shaping the digital
citizen into a smart citizen on the basis of IoT capabilities, in: 22nd International
Conference on Control Systems and Computer Science (CSCS), University
Politehnica of Bucharest, Romania, 2019, pp. 707–714 (IEEE).
[2] S.H. Alsamhi, M. Samar Ansari, N.S. Rajput, Disaster coverage predication for the
emerging tethered Balloon technology: capability for preparedness, detection,
mitigation, and response, Disaster Med. Public Health Prep. 12 (2) (2018)
222–231.
[3] M.M. Alshammari, A.A. Alwan, A. Nordin, A.Z. Abualkishik, Disaster recovery
with minimum replica plan for reliability checking in multi-cloud, Procedia
Computer Science 130 (2018) 247–254.
[4] S.J. Andriole, Five myths about digital transformation, MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 58
(3) (2017).
[5] R. Arandjelovic, 1 million IoT devices per square km- are we ready for the 5G
transformation? [online]. CLX Forum. Available from: https://medium.com/
clx-forum/1-million-iot-devices-per-square-km-are-we-ready-for-the-5g-transfor
mation-5d2ba416a984, 2018. July 23.
[6] H. Arksey, P.T. Knight, Interviewing for Social Scientists: an Introductory
Resource with Examples, Sage, 1999.
[7] K. Ashton, That ‘internet of things’ thing, RFID journal 22 (7) (2009) 97–114.
[8] L. Atzori, A. Iera, G. Morabito, The internet of things: a survey, Comput. Network.
54 (15) (2010) 2787–2805.
[9] C.W. Babbitt, The role of clean technology research in disaster debris
management, Clean Technol. Environ. Policy 21 (5) (2019) 923.
[10] J. Baker, The technology–organization–environment framework, in: Y. Dwivedi,
M. Wade, S. Schneberger (Eds.), Information Systems Theory: Explaining and
Predicting Our Digital Society, Springer, New York, 2011, pp. 231–246.
[11] B. Beaglehole, R.T. Mulder, C.M. Frampton, J.M. Boden, G. Newton-Howes, C.
J. Bell, J. T, o.P. B J, Psychological distress and psychiatric disorder after natural
disasters: systematic review and meta-analysis, Br. J. Psychiatr. 213 (6) (2018)
716–722.
[12] S.W. Becker, T.L. Whisler, The innovative organization: a selective view of
current theory and research, J. Bus. 40 (4) (1967) 462–469.
[13] R.I. Benjamin, E. Levinson, A framework for managing IT-enabled change, Sloan
Manag. Rev. 34 (4) (1993) 23–33.
[14] D. Bennett, B.D. Phillips, E. Davis, The future of accessibility in disaster
conditions: how wireless technologies will transform the life cycle of emergency
management, Futures 87 (2017) 122–132.
[15] W.P. Bergeron, Coporative Security in a Connected Digital World: Leveraging
Social Media and Emerging Technology in Crisis and Disaster. UNA Scholarly
Repositor, Department of Politics, Justice, and Law College of Arts and Sciences,
USA, 2018, pp. 35–46.
[16] I.M.P. Bezerra, State of the art of nursing education and the challenges to use
remote technologies in the time of corona virus pandemic, Journal of Human
Growth Development 30 (1) (2020) 141–147.
[17] S. Bierweiler, Shelter from the Storm: how enterprise open source technology can
improve disaster preparedness and response, Am. City County 133 (8) (2018)
6–10.
[18] A. Bogner, B. Littig, W. Menz, Introduction: Expert Interviews—An Introduction
to a New Methodological Debate. Interviewing Experts, Springer, 2009, pp. 1–13.
[19] V. Braun, V. Clarke, Using thematic analysis in psychology, Qual. Res. Psychol. 3
(2) (2006) 77–101.
[20] W.N. Carter, Disaster Management: A Disaster Manager’s Handbook, Asian
Development Bank, Mandaluyong City, Philippines, 2008.
[21] D. Chernobrov, Digital volunteer networks and humanitarian crisis reporting,
Digital Journalism 6 (7) (2018) 928–944.
[22] J. Choi, O.-C. Kwon, W. Jo, H.J. Lee, M.-W. Moon, 4D printing technology: a
review, 3D Print. Addit. Manuf. 2 (4) (2015) 159–167.
[23] J. Collin, K. Hiekkanen, J.J. Korhonen, M. Hal´en, T. It¨
ala, ¨ M. Helenius, IT
leadership in transition-the impact of digitalization on Finnish organizations,
Science + Technology 7 (2015).
[24] D.J. Cook, M. Youngblood, E.O. Heierman, K. Gopalratnam, S. Rao, A. Litvin,
F. Khawaja, MavHome: an agent-based smart home, in: PerCom03 - Proceedings
of the First IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and
Communications, IEEE, Fort Worth, Texas, USA, 2003, pp. 521–524.
[25] J. Cramer, A.B. Krueger, Disruptive change in the taxi business: the case of Uber,
Am. Econ. Rev. 106 (5) (2016) 177–182.
[26] T. Crouse, P. Lowe, Snowball Sampling, SAGE Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA,
2018.
[27] F. Damanpour, M. Schneider, Phases of the adoption of innovation in
organizations: effects of environment, organization and top managers 1, Br. J.
Manag. 17 (3) (2006) 215–236.
[28] S. Das, A. Dey, A. Pal, N. Roy, Applications of artificial intelligence in machine
learning: review and prospect, Int. J. Comput. Appl. 115 (9) (2015).
[29] D.A. De Vaus, D. de Vaus, Research Design in Social Research, Sage, 2001.
[30] Deloitte, Digital government transformation: the Journey to government’s digital
transformation [online]. Deloitte Digital. Available from: https://www2.deloitte.
com/global/en/pages/public-sector/articles/digital-government-transformation.
html, 2015. June 2nd.
[31] R. Depietro, E. Wiarda, M. Fleischer, The context for change: organization,
technology and environment, in: L.G. Tornatzky, M. Fleischer, A.K. Chakrabarti
(Eds.), The Processes of Technological Innovation, Lexington books, 1990,
pp. 151–175.
[32] R.D. Dewar, J.E. Dutton, The adoption of radical and incremental innovations: an
empirical analysis, Manag. Sci. 32 (11) (1986) 1422–1433.
[33] C. Dirican, The impacts of robotics, artificial intelligence on business and
economics, Procedia-Social Behavioral Sciences 195 (2015) 564–573.
[34] P. Diwakar, V. Dadhwal, G.S. Rao, Challenges in Using Remote Sensing
Technology for Disaster Management India: National Remote Sensing Centre
(NRSC) and Indian Space Research Organisation, 2015.
[35] C. Dremel, J. Wulf, M.M. Herterich, J.-C. Waizmann, W. Brenner, How AUDI AG
established big data analytics in its digital transformation, MIS Q. Exec. 16 (2)
(2017).
[36] C. Ebert, C.H. Duarte, Digital transformation, IEEE Software 35 (4) (2018) 16–21.
[37] W.D. Eggers, J. Bellman, The Journey to Government’s Digital Transformation
[online], Deloitte University Press, 2016. Available from: https://www2.deloitte.
com/uk/en/pages/public-sector/articles/the-journey-to-governments-digital-tra
nsformation.html, 15 July.
[38] J. Fang, J. Hu, X. Shi, L. Zhao, Assessing disaster impacts and response using
social media data in China: a case study of 2016 Wuhan rainstorm, International
Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 34 (2019) 275–282.
[39] N. Faruk, N.T. Surajudeen-Bakinde, A.A. Ayeni, O.W. Bello, O.A. Fadipe-Joseph,
O. Kolade, Technology options for public safety and disaster relief networks, Arid
Zone Journal of Engineering, Technology and Environment 14 (1) (2018) 1–25.
[40] A. Featherstone, Learning from Disaster: How Governments Gain Insight and How
Regional and International Bodies Can Help, ALNAP Study, London, 2014.
[41] M. Fitzgerald, N. Kruschwitz, D. Bonnet, M. Welch, Embracing digital technology:
a new strategic imperative, MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 55 (2) (2014) 1.
[42] E. Garba, A. Ahmadu, ICT implementation framework for integrated national
security, emergency and disaster management for Nigeria, West African Journal
of Industrial Academic Research 15 (1) (2015) 27–37.
[43] H. Gimpel, M. Roglinger, ¨ Digital Transformation: Changes and Chances–Insights
Based on an Empirical Study, Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Information
Technology FIT, Denmark, 2015.
[44] GovUK, Policy paper: government transformation strategy, United Kingdom
(2017-2020), July 3rd. [online]. UK: Cabinet Office. Available from, https://www
.gov.uk/government/publications/government-transformation-strategy-2017-to
-2020, 2017.
[45] J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic, M. Palaniswami, Internet of Things (IoT): a vision,
architectural elements, and future directions, Future Generat. Comput. Syst. 29
(7) (2013) 1645–1660.
[46] K. Gyarmathy, 5 IoT Statistics You Need to Know in 2019, 2019 [online].
vXchnge Available from: https://www.vxchnge.com/blog/iot-statistics, 15
August.
[47] C. Hagar, Crisis informatics, J. Geogr. Nat. Disasters: Editorial 4 (1) (2014).
[48] D.-M. Han, J.-H. Lim, Smart home energy management system using IEEE
802.15.4 and zigbee, IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. 56 (3) (2010) 1403–1410.
[49] N.P. Hapuarachchi, The usage of geo-information technology in disaster
management by sub national level organizations case study–Ratnapura in Sri
Lanka (Msc.). ITC University of Twente, https://webapps.itc.utwente.nl/lib
rarywww/papers_2008/msc/gim/hapuarachchige.pdf, 2008.
[50] R. Harper, Inside the Smart Home, Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
[51] H.-F. Hsieh, S.E. Shannon, Three approaches to qualitative content analysis, Qual.
Health Res. 15 (9) (2005) 1277–1288.
[52] C.L. Iacovou, I. Benbasat, A.S. Dexter, Electronic data interchange and small
organizations: adoption and impact of technology, MIS Q. 19 (4) (1995) 465–485.
[53] G.C. Kane, D. Palmer, A.N. Phillips, D. Kiron, N. Buckley, Strategy, not
technology, drives digital transformation, MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 14 (2015)
1–25.
[54] N. Kapucu, Collaborative emergency management: better community organising,
better public preparedness and response, Disasters 32 (2) (2008) 239–262.
[55] N. Kapucu, T. Arslan, F. Demiroz, Collaborative emergency management and
national emergency management network, Disaster Prev. Manag.: Int. J. 19 (4)
(2010) 452–468.
[56] N. Kapucu, V. Garayev, Collaborative decision-making in emergency and disaster
management, Int. J. Publ. Adm. 34 (6) (2011) 366–375.
[57] A. Katal, M. Wazid, R. Goudar, Big data: issues, challenges, tools and good
practices, in: Sixth International Conference on Contemporary Computing (IC3),
IEEE, New Delhi, India, 2013, pp. 404–409.
[58] T. Keeley, IoT to IoAT: Internet Of Autonomous Things Devices Provides Solutions
[online]. Control Engineering, 2016. Available from: https://www.controleng.
com/articles/iot-to-ioat-internet-of-autonomous-things-devices-provides-solutio
ns/. July 23.
[59] Y.D. Kim, G.J. Son, H. Kim, C. Song, J.H. Lee, Smart disaster response in vehicular
tunnels: technologies for search and rescue applications, Sustainability 10 (7)
(2018).
[60] E. Kirac, A.B. Milburn, A general framework for assessing the value of social data
for disaster response logistics planning, Eur. J. Oper. Res. 269 (2) (2018)
486–500.
[61] R. Kitchin, The real-time city? Big data and smart urbanism, Geojournal 79 (1)
(2014) 1–14.
[62] P. Koellinger, The relationship between technology, innovation, and firm
performance—empirical evidence from e-business in Europe, Res. Pol. 37 (8)
(2008) 1317–1328.
[63] K. Krippendorff, Validity in content analysis, in: E. Mochmann (Ed.),
Computerstrategien für die Kommunikationsanalyse, Campus, Frankfurt,
Germany, 1980, pp. 69–112.
[64] K. Kumar, G.S.M. Thakur, Advanced applications of neural networks and artificial
intelligence: a review, Inf. Technol. Comput. Sci. 6 (2012) 57–68.
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
18
[65] J. Lee, M. Azamfar, J. Singh, A blockchain enabled Cyber-Physical System
architecture for Industry 4.0 manufacturing systems, Manufacturing Letters 20
(2019) 34–39.
[66] G. Leeming, J. Ainsworth, D.A. Clifton, Blockchain in health care: hype, trust, and
digital health, Lancet 393 (10190) (2019) 2476–2477.
[67] J. Leigh, C. Vasilica, R. Dron, D. Gawthorpe, E. Burns, S. Kennedy, R. Kennedy,
T. Warburton, C. Croughan, Redefining undergraduate nurse teaching during the
coronavirus pandemic: use of digital technologies, Br. J. Nurs. 29 (10) (2020)
566–569.
[68] C. Lin, W.E. Braund, J. Auerbach, J.-H. Chou, J.-H. Teng, P. Tu, J. Mullen, Policy
decisions and use of information technology to fight coronavirus disease, taiwan,
Emerg. Infect. Dis. 26 (7) (2020) 1506.
[69] A. Mamalis, Recent advances in nanotechnology, J. Mater. Process. Technol. 181
(1–3) (2007) 52–58.
[70] A. Martin, Digital literacy and the “digital society”, Digital literacies: Concepts,
policies and practices 30 (2008) 151–176.
[71] N.O. Martins, Technology and Isolation: clive Lawson on the impact of technology
on the economy and society, Real-world Economics Review 125 (2018).
[72] P. Mayring, Qualitative content analysis, A companion to qualitative research 1
(2) (2004) 159–176.
[73] M.P. McDonald, A. Rowsell-Jones, The Digital Edge, Gartner, Incorporated, 2012.
[74] D. Miller, The architecture of simplicity, Acad. Manag. Rev. 18 (1) (1993)
116–138.
[75] V. Mirkovi´c, J. Luki´c, S. Lazarevi´c, Z. ˇ Vojinovi´c, Key characteristics of
organizational structure that supports digital transformation, in: 24th
International Scientific Symposium on Strategic Management and Decision
Support Systems in Strategic Management Subotica, 2019. Republic of Serbia
17th May.
[76] M.A. Mody, C. Suess, X. Lehto, The accommodation experiencescape: a
comparative assessment of hotels and Airbnb, Int. J. Contemp. Hospit. Manag. 29
(9) (2017) 2377–2404.
[77] M. Mylrea, S.N.G. Gourisetti, Blockchain for smart grid resilience: exchanging
distributed energy at speed, scale and security, in: 2017 Resilience Week (RWS),
IEEE, 2017, pp. 18–23.
[78] MySociety, Fix My Street, 2019 [online]. UK: Available from: https://www.
fixmystreet.com/. July 3rd.
[79] N.O. Nawari, S. Ravindran, Blockchain and building information modeling (BIM):
review and applications in post-disaster recovery, Buildings 9 (6) (2019) 149.
[80] D.N. Nguyen, F. Imamura, K. Iuchi, Public-private collaboration for disaster risk
management: a case study of hotels in Matsushima, Japan, Tourism Manag. 61
(2017) 129–140.
[81] T. Oliveira, M.F. Martins, Literature review of information technology adoption
models at firm level, Electron. J. Inf. Syst. Eval. 14 (1) (2011) 110.
[82] A. Ozsomer, ¨ R.J. Calantone, A. Di Bonetto, What makes firms more innovative? A
look at organizational and environmental factors, J. Bus. Ind. Market. 12 (6)
(1997) 400–416.
[83] J.G. Palfrey, U. Gasser, Born Digital: Understanding the First Generation of Digital
Natives, Basic Books, NY, USA, 2008.
[84] K. Panetta, What Conventional Companies Can Learn from Organizations that
Consider Digital Technologies a Core Competency, 2016 [online]. Gartner.
Available from: https://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/10-managementtechniques-from-born-digital-companies/. July 2nd.
[85] S. Paul, S. Sosale, Witnessing a disaster: public use of digital technologies in the
2015 South Indian floods, Digital Journalism (2019) 1–17.
[86] N. Perkin, P. Abraham, Building the Agile Business through Digital
Transformation, Kogan Page Publishers, 2017.
[87] B. Radhakrishnan, A.S. Joseph, S. Sudhakar, Securing blockchain based electronic
health record using multilevel authentication, in: 5th International Conference on
Advanced Computing & Communication Systems (ICACCS), IEEE, Coimbatore,
India, 2019, pp. 699–703.
[88] J.R. Ragini, P.M.R. Anand, V. Bhaskar, Big data analytics for disaster response
and recovery through sentiment analysis, Int. J. Inf. Manag. 42 (2018) 13–24.
[89] K.H. Rao, P.S.S. Rao, Disaster Management, Serials Publications, 2008.
[90] S.Z.A. Rasid, S.A. Saruchi, R.S.M. Tamin, The eminence of the 4th industrial
revolution: how it transformed management accountants, in: 16th International
Symposium on Management (INSYMA 2019), Atlantis Press, 2019.
[91] C. Reddick, Information technology and emergency management: preparedness
and planning in US states, Disasters 35 (1) (2011) 45–61.
[92] C. Reddick, Information technology and emergency management: preparedness
and planning in US states, Disasters 35 (1) (2011) 45–61.
[93] J. Reis, M. Amorim, N. Mel˜
ao, P. Matos, Digital transformation: a literature
review and guidelines for future research, in: World Conference on Information
Systems and Technologies, Springer, 2018, pp. 411–421.
[94] R.J. Reisman, Air Traffic Management Blockchain Infrastructure for Security,
Authentication, and Privacy, NASA Ames Research Center, 2019.
[95] D.L. Rogers, The Digital Transformation Playbook: Rethink Your Business for the
Digital Age, Columbia University Press, NY, USA, 2016.
[96] E.M. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations, fourth ed., The Free Press, New York,
1995.
[97] T. Schempp, H. Zhang, A. Schmidt, M. Hong, R. Akerkar, A framework to
integrate social media and authoritative data for disaster relief detection and
distribution optimization, International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction (2019)
101143.
[98] K. Schwab, The Fourth Industrial Revolution, Currency, 2017.
[99] D. Schweer, J.C. Sahl, The Digital Transformation of Industry–The Benefit for
Germany. The Drivers of Digital Transformation, Springer, 2017, pp. 23–31.
[100] A. Schweizer, Digitalization In the Financial Services Industry: Fostering
Innovation through Fintechs And Blockchain Technology. (PhD), University of
Bayreuth, 2019.
[101] A. Seba, N. Nouali-Taboudjemat, N. Badache, H. Seba, A review on security
challenges of wireless communications in disaster emergency response and crisis
management situations, J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 126 (2019) 150–161.
[102] D. Seo, A.I. La Paz, Exploring the dark side of IS in achieving organizational
agility, Commun. ACM 51 (11) (2008) 136–139.
[103] C. Sheridan, Fast, portable tests come online to curb coronavirus pandemic, Nat.
Biotechnol. 10 (2020).
[104] S. Singh, Eight Reasons Why 5G Is Better than 4G, 2018 [online]. Altran.
Available from: https://connect.altran.com/2018/03/eight-reasons-why-5g-is
-better-than-4g/. July 23.
[105] B. Solis, R. Lieb, J. Szymanski, The 2014 State of Digital Transformation–How
Companies Are Investing in the Digital Customer Experience, 2014 (San
Francisco).
[106] A. Somech, A. Drach-Zahavy, Translating team creativity to innovation
implementation: the role of team composition and climate for innovation,
J. Manag. 39 (3) (2013) 684–708.
[107] P.R. Srinivas, P. Barker, S. Srivastava, Nanotechnology in early detection of
cancer, Lab. Invest. 82 (5) (2002) 657.
[108] E. Stolterman, A.C. Fors, Information Technology and the Good Life, Information
systems research, 2004, pp. 687–692.
[109] F. Tao, J. Cheng, Q. Qi, M. Zhang, H. Zhang, F. Sui, Digital twin-driven product
design, manufacturing and service with big data, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 94
(9–12) (2018) 3563–3576.
[110] H.-H. Teo, K.K. Wei, I. Benbasat, Predicting intention to adopt interorganizational
linkages: an institutional perspective, MIS Q. 27 (1) (2003) 19–49.
[111] A. Tezel, E. Papadonikolaki, I. Yitmen, P. Hilletofth, Preparing Construction
Supply Chains for Blockchain: an Exploratory Analysis, CIB World Building
Congress 2019 Constructing Smart Cities, Hong Kong SAR, vol. 6, 2019. China,
17–21 June 2019.
[112] L.G. Tornatzky, M. Fleischer, A.K. Chakrabarti, Processes of Technological
Innovation, Lexington books, 1990.
[113] H. Treiblmaier, I. Onder, ¨ The Impact of Blockchain on the Tourism Industry: A
Theory-Based Research Framework. Business Transformation through
Blockchain, Springer, 2019, pp. 3–21.
[114] M.L. Tushman, P. Anderson, Technological discontinuities and organizational
environments, Adm. Sci. Q. 31 (3) (1986) 439–465.
[115] UK Cabinet Office, Digital Efficiency Report, 2012 [online]. Uk Government.
Available from: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/digital-efficien
cy-report/digital-efficiency-report. July 3rd.
[116] UK Cabinet Office, Policy Paper: National Cyber Security Strategy 2016 to 2021,
2016 [online]. Uk Government. Available from: https://www.gov.uk/govern
ment/publications/national-cyber-security-strategy-2016-to-2021. July 3rd.
[117] E.G. Ularu, F.C. Puican, A. Apostu, M. Velicanu, Perspectives on big data and big
data analytics, Database Systems Journal 3 (4) (2012) 3–14.
[118] UNISDR, Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, United
Nations, Geneva, Switzerland, 2015.
[119] United Nations, UN E-Government Survey 2018: Gearing E-Government to
Support Transformation Twards Sustainable and Resilient Societies, Department
of Economic and Social Affairs, New York, 2018 (United Nations).
[120] D. Wan, C.H. Ong, F. Lee, Determinants of firm innovation in Singapore,
Technovation 25 (3) (2005) 261–268.
[121] Y. Wang, L. Kung, T.A. Byrd, Big data analytics: understanding its capabilities and
potential benefits for healthcare organizations, Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change
126 (2018) 3–13.
[122] Z. Wang, N.S.N. Lam, N. Obradovich, X. Ye, Are vulnerable communities digitally
left behind in social responses to natural disasters? An evidence from Hurricane
Sandy with Twitter data, Appl. Geogr. 108 (2019) 1–8.
[123] P. Weill, S.L. Woerner, Optimizing your digital business model, MIT Sloan Manag.
Rev. 54 (3) (2013) 71.
[124] T. Wengraf, Qualitative Research Interviewing: Biographic Narrative and Semistructured Methods, Sage, 2001.
[125] M.A. West, N.R. Anderson, Innovation in top management teams, J. Appl.
Psychol. 81 (6) (1996) 680.
[126] G. Westerman, C. Calm´ejane, D. Bonnet, P. Ferraris, A. McAfee, Digital
Transformation: A Roadmap for Billion-Dollar Organizations, vol. 1, MIT Center
for Digital Business & Capgemini Consulting, 2011, pp. 1–68.
[127] WFP, Using mobile phone activity for disaster management during floods
[online]. UN Global Pulse. Available from: http://unglobalpulse.org/sites/defaul
t/files/Mobile_flooding_WFP_Final.pdf, 2014. July 5th.
[128] M. Whalen, A Digital Transformation Maturity Model and Your Digital Roadmap,
2014 [online]. IDC. Available from: http://www.agendaconference.com/wp
-content/uploads/2014/12/Whalen_IDC.pdf. June 2nd.
[129] B.K. Wiederhold, Social Media Use during Social Distancing, Cyberpsychology,
Behavior, and Social Networking, vol. 23, Mary Ann Liebert, Inc, 2020,
pp. 437–438.
[130] World Economic Forum, The Global Risk Report 2018, 2018 (Geneva).
[131] X. Xu, L. Zhang, S. Sotiriadis, E. Asimakopoulou, M. Li, N. Bessis, CLOTHO: a
large-scale internet of things-based crowd evacuation planning system for disaster
management, IEEE Internet of Things Journal, Internet of Things Journal, IEEE,
IEEE Internet Things J. (5) (2018) 3559.
[132] S. Yost, 5G—It’s Not Here yet, but Closer than You Think, 2017 [online].
ElectronicDesign. Available from: https://www.electronicdesign.com/embeddedrevolution/5g-it-s-not-here-yet-closer-you-think. July 23.
Y.S. AlHinai 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 51 (2020) 101851
19
[133] S.A. Youngblood, N.E. Youngblood, Usability, content, and connections: how
county-level Alabama emergency management agencies communicate with their
online public, Govern. Inf. Q. 35 (1) (2018) 50–60.
[134] G. Zaltman, R. Duncan, J. Holbek, Innovations and Organizations, John Wiley &
Sons, 1973.
[135] G. Zervas, D. Proserpio, J.W. Byers, The rise of the sharing economy: estimating
the impact of Airbnb on the hotel industry, J. Market. Res. 54 (5) (2017)
687–705.
[136] D. Zhang, Big Data Security and Privacy Protection, 8th International Conference
On Management And Computer Science (ICMCS 2018), Atlantis Press, Shenyang,
China, 2018.
Y.S. AlHinai 