African Journal of Business Management Vol. 6(21), pp. 6324-6330, 30 May, 2012
Available online at http://www.academicjournals.org/AJBM
DOI: 10.5897/AJBM11.2709
ISSN 1993-8233 ©2012 Academic Journals
Review
A literature review of small and medium enterprises
(SME) risk management practices in South Africa
Yolande Smit* and J. A. Watkins
Department of Internal Auditing and Management Accounting, Cape Peninsula University of Technology, South Africa.
Accepted 3 January, 2012
The inherent characteristics of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) afford these enterprises the
potential to absorb unskilled labour and to nurture and develop entrepreneurial skills. However, in the
South African economy, these benefits are not forthcoming due to the high failure rate of SMEs. The
impediments to SME success includes numerous and varied obstacles. Studies conducted confirmed
SME owner-managers ignorant pertaining to the risks their enterprise face with risk management
techniques deployed reactively and ineffectively. By embedding a structured approach to enterprise
risk management within SMEs, potential benefits such as reducing the over-management of risks and
organisational alignment towards the SME’s vision can be realised.
Key words: Small and medium enterprises (SMEs), risk, risk management, strategic risk management.
INTRODUCTION
Small and medium enterprises (SMEs) operate in the
same environment as their larger counterparts, but
without the associated benefits such as adequate capital
and extended human resources of the larger
organisations. SMEs encounter increasing competitive
pressure fuelled by globalisation, legislation and the
relaxing of trade barriers, as well as an increase in
market expansion due to emerging technologies and
innovation. Small and medium enterprises often flourish
on their adaptability and agility such as their close
proximity to their customers, their openness towards new
ways of working, and their risk taking approach, but many
micro, small and medium enterprise are susceptible to
major external shocks (Berry, 2002; Laforet and Tann,
2006). Although SMEs experience difficulties in
absorbing and coping with these obstacles, they need to
develop an ability to deal with the ever increasing
challenges, that is, risks faced by the organisation
(Leopoulos, 2006).
SME owner-managers need to escalate the importance
of risk identification and minimisation in their
*Corresponding author. E-mail: smity@cput.ac.za. Tel: +27 (0)
21 864 5264, +27 (0) 84 423 275. Fax: +27 (0) 21 864 5262.
organisations or they can suffer catastrophic
consequences if they are ill prepared for the outcome of a
possible risk. This entails that entrepreneurs in SMEs
need to be conversant with risk identification and analysis
to manage risks from a diverse range of sources
(Schultz, 2001). By incorporating risk management into
SMEs operations, SMEs are better equipped to exploit
their resources, thereby enabling organisations to
transform an expenditure activity into an activity that can
yield a positive return (Kirytopoulos et al., 2001; Banham,
2004).
DEFINING SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
(SMEs)
Although the term SME or SMME is used interchangeably worldwide, there is no common definition of
these terms. The geographical placement of SMEs as
well as country specific legislation influences the
numerous SME definitions (Leopoulos, 2006). In South
Africa, the National Small Business Act 102 of 1996
(South Africa, 1996) amended by Act 29 of 2004 (South
Africa, 2004) categorise small organisations into four
categories namely micro enterprises, including survivalist
 enterprises; very small enterprises; small enterprises; 
and medium enterprises. The differentiating factor
between these categories, excluding micro enterprises, is
the number of employees. For micro enterprises, the
criterion is turnover level (South Africa, 1996, 2004; Von
Broembsen, 2003).
Importance of small and medium enterprises (SMEs)
to the economy
The importance of small businesses is recognised in
numerous African countries such as Togo, Uganda,
Ghana, Cote d’Lvoire, Nigeria, Kenya, Malawi, Burkina
Faso, as well as others. According to Rwigema and
Karungu (1999), SMEs are dominant in numbers in most
economies. In First World countries like the United States
of America and the United Kingdom, small enterprises
play an important role in the economy, accounting for an
estimated one third of industrial employment and a lower
percentage of output. In Third World countries where
SMEs dominate economically active enterprises, the
SMEs prosperity is considered far more important than in
First World countries (Rwigema and Karungu, 1999).
The activities of SME enterprises in Africa (Rogerson,
2001a), is of vital importance for the promotion of
economic growth, job creation and the mitigation of
poverty. However, research conducted on SMEs in Africa
by Mead and Liedholm (1998) confirmed that on average,
there are more SME closures than expansions, with
approximately only 1% of micro enterprises growing from
five or less employees to ten or more. It has long been
debated that SMEs are pivotal to employment creation
and economic growth, particularly in countries such as
South Africa that has a high unemployment rate,
estimated at up to 40% (Friedrich, 2004; Watson, 2004).
Upgrading the roles of the SME sector in the South
African economy to improve economic growth through
increasing competitiveness, and by generating employment and redistributing income (Rogerson, 2004, 2006),
has been the focus of new development policies since
the democratic transition (Berry et al., 2002; GCIS, 2002).
In order to aid in the facilitation of the SME environment,
the South African government tabled the National Small
Business Act of 1996 amended with Act 29 of 2004 to
provide equal standing to SME enterprises (Rwigema
and Venter, 2004; Ntsika, 2001) in South Africa’s
economy. The vital role the SME sector plays in the
South African economy in addressing sustainable
development, was highlighted by the 2003 Human
Development Report (UNDP, 2003) for South Africa
(Rogerson, 2004).
In South Africa, it is estimated that 90% of all formal
businesses are small, medium or micro enterprises
(Rwigema and Karungu, 1999). The SME sector is one of
the largest contributors to the South African economy.
The SME is not only seen as an employment creator, but
this sector also acts as an absorbent of retrenched
people coming from the private and public sector
Smit and Watkins 6325
(Ntsika, 2001).
Although the SME sector is responsible for 75% of new
jobs, largely due to the emergence of new micro
enterprise formations, it compares poorly to Asian
countries where SME employment contribution is
estimated at 80% (Friedrich, 2004; Watson and Godfrey,
1999). Even in countries less developed than South
Africa, their SME sector contributes a much higher
proportion to the GDP and employment (UNDP, 2003;
OECD, 19971
 cited by Watson and Godfrey, 1999). It is
noted that the majority of South African SMEs are micro
and survivalist enterprises which show no signs of
enterprise growth due to inadequate firm dynamics,
resulting in SMEs conservative contribution to employment compared to other countries. Even in dynamic
South African SMEs, it seems that a ‘jobless growth’
strategy (Kesper, 2000) is employed.
The South African government has identified the SME
sector as the means to achieve accelerated economic
growth. However, this objective was not achieved partly
due to the high failure rate of 80% of enterprises
(Watson, 2004; Van Niekerk, 2005) in the SME sector. As
SMEs growth depends to a larger extent on the macro
economic growth, it can be said that the slack micro
economic growth of the past few years has inhibited
entrepreneurial performance and therefore SMEs to grow
to their full potential (Watson, 2004; Berry et al., 2002).
SME failure can further be partly ascribed to the lack of
management skills. South African SMEs do not aspire to
corporate governance best practices such as the noncompulsory implementation of King III (King, 2009). Risk
management, a component of King III, is therefore, also
regarded as an optional organisational activity, and not
as a vital component to organisational success.
Critical success factors for small and medium
enterprises (SMEs)
Caution should be levied against viewing SMEs as
smaller versions of larger enterprises as SMEs do not in
any regard resemble large organisations. Generally,
SMEs experience a scarcity of resources (Wong, 2005;
Jun and Cai, 2003) such as time, financial and human
resources.
Studies have identified a number of factors that
influence enterprise expansion and success. A
fundamental element (McGrath and King, 1996;
Rogerson, 2001a) that has a positive impact on an
organisation’s growth is the depth of “human capital” or
“brain power”. The importance of human capital as a
critical success factor was also confirmed in a study
conducted on African enterprises where it was
determined that successful entrepreneurs more likely

1
 Small Business Research and Policy 1997b, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). Retrieved August 10,2004 from
http://strategic.ic.gc.ca/epic/internet/insbrp-rppe.nsf/en/rd00259e.html 
6326 Afr. J. Bus. Manage.
have education and training beyond the primary school
level (Rogerson, 2001a).The merit of this finding is based
on the argument that entrepreneurs with a greater level of
education and training are more able to adapt their
business to the ever changing business environment. In a
study conducted on enterprise success factors in SMEs
Gauteng, South Africa, it was concluded that a lack of
technical and managerial skills (Brink et al., 2003;
Rogerson, 2008) impedes on business development.
Research conducted on SME failures in South Africa
revealed that failure was primarily caused by a lack of
management skill and training. This finding is confirmed
(Rogerson, 2008) by 90% of a sample of 1000
entrepreneurs who believe that SME failure is due to a
lack of managerial skills. However, taking the importance
of training and skill into account, it is cautioned by
Rogerson (2008) that skills are not the only or even
primary answer to the challenges facing SME
development.
It can be gleaned from various literature sources
(Berger and Udell, 2001; Reynolds and Lancaster, 2006;
Bank of England, 2001) that a high percentage of small
organizations fail in the first five years of trading, often as
a result of over trading and financial strain. Access to
finance has therefore featured prominently in a number of
studies as a constraint on SME development. According
to Rogerson (2001b) and Skinner (2005), a lack of credit
is a major constrained experienced by emerging African
SME entrepreneurs, who is depended on personal
savings or loans from relatives and friends, as the source
of their start-up capital. Finance, skills, business training
and less rigid regulations are the key elements to
promote entrepreneurship, to enhance the enterprise
environment, to improve competitiveness and capacity in
the SME enterprise (Rogerson, 2008).
Problems experienced by small and medium
enterprises (SMEs)
SME owner-managers are most conversant with their
enterprises, but are frequently not able to identify all the
factors impacting on their enterprise activities and/or
overrate the significance of external factors, while
underrating internal weaknesses (Kesper, 2000).
According to Naicker (2006), problems experienced by
SMEs can be categorised as follows:
i. Economic based problems: SMEs success is tied in
with the local economic conditions as the SME sectors
market growth is usually at the same rate as the macro
economy as a whole, therefore, if there is an economic
downturn, SMEs will usually also experience difficulty
(Berry et al., 2002).
ii. Enterprise based problems: Internal factors such as
human resource problems encompassing poor staff
planning, multi-functional management, high employee
turnover rate, inadequate trained employees, low
productivity and difficulties in recruiting quality staff
 (Rogerson, 2004; Beaver, 2002; Williamson, 2000;
Lighthelm et al., 2002; Watt, 2007) are impediments to
SME success. It is argued that the role of labour, labour
markets and skills levels are the most important factors
contributing to small enterprise growth (Berry et al.,
2002).
Managerial skills not only influence owners perceptions
regarding their business, but various literature sources
(Watson, 2004) acknowledge that a lack of managerial
skills and training is an important cause of enterprise
failure (Naicker, 2006) complimented by lack of
experience and lack of organisational culture acting as an
impediment to the establishment of SMEs. The ownermanagers characteristics (O’Gorman, 2001) can also act
as a barrier to growth in that the personality, managerial
skills and style including the entrepreneur’s and/or
management’s negative attitude towards change can
negatively influence an enterprise (Leopoulos, 2006;
Naicker, 2006).
South African bankers are less inclined to finance
SMEs (Pretorius and Shaw, 2004), due to their perceived
high level of risk and a weak expected return (St-Pierre
and Bahri, 2006) and this is emphasised by the South
African micro enterprise surveys, with the inaccessibility
to finance listed as one of the primary external constrains
faced by SMEs. Some of the factors that contribute to the
complex financing problem are the insufficient knowledge
of the SME entrepreneur, for example, their inability to
draw up a business plan; the lenders inability to
determine the SMEs credit risk attributed to their lack of
enterprise information; and general communications
issues (Berry et al., 2002) leading to low levels of
entrepreneurship and a high failure rate (Kotze and Smit,
2008) of South African SMEs (Rajaram, 2008).
It is therefore important to develop an effective and
efficient process whereby all SME dimensions is
evaluated when measuring the borrower’s risk. The
development of a more inclusive SME risk measurement
framework will enable lenders to make rapid and
objective decisions based on the actual business
environment, while SME management cannot criticise the
banking environment of over-valuating the risk. At
present, few risk evaluation models exists that allows for
an overall evaluation of SME risk. The lack of suitable
risk models is emphasised by the banking sectors
continued reliance on financial models where information
is derived by way of financial statements, as this
information is considered more objectives than
information obtained from other sources.
iii. Industry related problems: According to Naicker (2006)
and Haung and Brown (1999), market related factors that
exerts the most negative influence on enterprise success
are increase competition, limited market size, low
demand, inefficient marketing, poor competitor
understanding, poor location and market understanding 
and the inability to identify the target market (Naicker,
2006; Watt, 2007). South African SMEs are hampered by
a structural problem, in that, South African SMEs,
contrary to SMEs in other developing countries, do not
complement larger organisations with specialised
products or services, but they compete with larger
enterprises in the same product markets (Rogerson,
2004), albeit for different consumer segments. For SME
owner-managers it is important to identify the most
problematic areas in managing their small enterprise. By
identifying the problem areas, owner-managers can
address problems through education, training and
information gathering activities (Huang and Brown, 1999).
EXPLOITING RISK
According to Plourd (2009), the importance of risk
management is now escalated above issues such as
long-term and short-term financing constrains. Proclaiming the existence of a risk management strategy is
insufficient, enterprises need to actively engage in risk
management practices to address the convergence of
major risks as experienced in the current economic
climate where the credit crisis risk, fluctuating commodity
prices, increased government debt, rising unemployment
and declining consumer spending are impacting
individually and combined, on enterprises.
The use of enterprise risk management (ERM) can be
viewed as a business competency enabling managers to
optimise opportunities associated with risks (Hofmann,
2009). ERM should apply basic risk management
activities, embedding the risk champion’s knowledge of
exposures, across the entire scope of an enterprise’s
risks such as strategic risks, operational risks, financial
risks and regulatory compliance risks (Engle, 2009), and
should not be reduced to a process based solely on risk
formula’s (Bradford, 2009).
A structured risk management approach enables an
enterprise to pursue its strategies aggressively and
efficiently as management can anticipate the risk
exposure of each activity engaged in, thus achieving
more acceptable results at a reduced cost (Ntlhane,
1995).
Risk management for small business
Risk and risk management is a major concern for all
companies, especially small and medium sized
enterprises which are particularly sensitive to business
risk and competition (Alquier and Lagasse, 2006). In
SMEs, the risk management function usually resides with
the owner’s assessment of threats and opportunities
pertaining to the enterprise (Watt, 2007). Although risk
management principles are common to all types of
enterprises, the owner-manager’s risk perception and his
Smit and Watkins 6327
attitude towards risk management influences the
adequacy of the enterprise’s risk management actions
deployed (Ntlhane, 1995).
Implied in SME, risk management is the core principle
that entrepreneurial or management focus should be
focussed at recognising future uncertainty, deliberating
risks, possible manifestations and effects, and formulating plans to address these risks and reduce or
eliminate its impact on the enterprise (Ntlhane, 1995).
One of the skills required of entrepreneurs is the ability to
identify and analyse risks to ensure that advantage is
taken of calculated risks (Watson, 2004). According to
Watt (2007), SME owner-managers should take regard of
the following steps in their risk management process:
i. Establishing the SMEs risk strategy
ii. Determining the SMEs risk appetite
iii. Identification and assessment of risk
iv. Prioritising and managing risks
The fact that a risk is beyond the control of the ownermanager, does not absolve the owner-manager from the
need to anticipate the risk, and reducing the impact of the
risk occurrence to achieve organisational goals. Ownermanagers should furthermore take cognisance of
managerial risks that arise as a result of the ownermanagers own actions when planning and executing
business strategies (Berkeley et al., 1991). South African
SMEs owner managers should be educated in risk
management principles, risk handling techniques
available and risk control programmes that can be used,
but care should be taken in the application of risk
management principles, as although risk principles are
common to all types of enterprises, the application
thereof differs substantially between small and larger
enterprises. However, many SMEs practice intuitive risk
management when they assess the risk involved in
decisions (Ntlhane, 1995; Dupre, 2009).
Components of risk in small and medium enterprises
(SMEs)
Determining the components of total risk in SMEs is
complex due to SMEs great heterogeneity as well as
difficulty in separating property from management (StPierre and Bahri, 2006). Entrepreneurs have implied (StPierre and Bahri, 2006), inconsistent (LeCornu et al.,
1996), and in certain instances, unique (Naffziger et al.,
1994) objectives that exerts both direct and indirect
influences on management practices, rendering
comparisons between SMEs difficult. Information derived
by way of financial data analysis cannot yield all the
dimensions of enterprise performance, as emphasised by
St-Pierre and Bahri (2006). Strategic information such as
quality, client satisfaction, and innovation reflects the
enterprise’s competitiveness and performance, but are 
6328 Afr. J. Bus. Manage.
not forthcoming in the income earned. Cumby and
Conrod (2001) emphasises that long term sustainable
financial performance is attributable to non-financial
factors like client loyalty, employee satisfaction
and internal processes. This view is affirmed by Ittner
and Larcker (1998) who states that the investment in
intangible assets, that is, client satisfaction, is not
accommodated in the accounting data. The same
argument applies to the risk of an enterprise that is
difficult to understand if attention is solely directed at the
financial statements. Through the incorporation of nonfinancial data, the problems associated with the
manipulation of financial statements are reduced. By
following a systematic approach and by taking into
account both financial and non-financial information
related to the organisation, an enhanced understanding
of SME risks can be achieved (St-Pierre and Bahri,
2006).
Small and medium enterprises inadequately manage
their risk
Few SME owners and managers are risk aware and they
focus their risk actions on “loss control” programmes in
areas of fire, safety, security, health, and quality
assurance. These “loss control” programmes are
overseen either by the entrepreneur or other
management along with their other duties; therefore,
increasing the chance of mismanagement as adequate
time is not spent on the risk function. As no structured
risk identification is undertaken by SMEs, SMEs assume
unaware or unplanned risk exposure to their limited
financial resources. Control measures implemented to
counter risk are ineffective as controls are reactive and
non-automated (Ntlhane, 1995).
To limit the effect of risks on the enterprise, risks need
to managed/controlled once it has been identified. In
SMEs, the control of risk exposure is construeded
reactively, holding disastrous consequences for the
enterprise as losses are taken on while the enterprise is
ill prepared to finance the loss. In most SMEs, risks are
left unmanaged till it realise, only then spurring on action
to address it (Ntlhane, 1995).
Through interviewing, Ntlhane (1995) confirms that
SME owners and managers are not versed in the
availability and use of risk reduction techniques (that is,
risk elimination/avoidance, reduction, transfer or
acceptance) to reduce the adverse effects of risks on the
enterprise. It can be gleaned from the interviewee results
that entrepreneurs prefer avoiding risks, but they fail to
take into account that every risk action undertaken by
them has an effect on the risk pattern. Thereby, although
a specific risk is avoided, the probability or impact of
other risks may change and new and potentially serious
risks can be created. The study identified that entrepreneurial actions are centred on avoiding risk, rather
than devising risk control methods. This impedes on the
economic progress of a country as every business can be
defined by its ability to take on greater risks. Apart from
risk avoidance, the study identified risk transfer as the
alternative risk technique used by SMEs, whereby
insurance brokers were contracted to undertake all risk
actions, that is, risk identification, risk assessment, risk
control and risk financing. Risk retention techniques
whereby risks are financed by internal reserves such as
current income are little known and rarely applied in
SMEs (Ntlhane, 1995).
CONCLUSION
The impediments to SME success are numerous and
varied, and include inherent organisational obstacles
such as poor managerial skills and education and
training; industry-related problems such as the
entrepreneur’s inability to understand market expectations, and poor market access; and economy-based
obstacles such as interest rate fluctuations.
SME owner-managers are primarily responsible for the
management of their enterprises’ activities. Studies
conducted confirmed SME owner-managers’ ignorance
pertaining to the risks their enterprises face from internal
and external sources, including risks emanating from
entrepreneurial actions. SME risk management techniques are primarily limited to risk avoidance actions, and
to a lesser extent, risk transfer through insurance
activities. Most risk activities tend to be construed
reactively, thereby affecting the availability of enterprise
resources in addressing these risks.
By embedding a structured approach to enterprise risk
management within SMEs, potential benefits such as
cost reductions, reducing the over-management of risks
and organisational alignment towards the SME’s mission
and objectives can be realised.
Rationale for developing a strategic risk management
strategy
Entrepreneurs operate in a macro, micro and market
environment that is affected by numerous internal and
external influences which continuously change. These
‘change factors’ enable an entrepreneur to identify
opportunities and threats (Watson, 2004). It is therefore
essential that an entrepreneur has the capability to
evaluate decisions to determine the enterprise’s future
strategy (Watson, 2004). Strategic risk management
enables SME owner-managers to objectively evaluate
their actions. One of the difficulties encountered in risk
management is that most risk assessments are linked to
a specific discipline which is not necessarily known by
owner-managers. Furthermore, owner-managers may be
able to identify the obvious risk, but their depth of risk 
knowledge may impede on their activities to identify
indirect risks, or to take cognisance of the interconnectness of risks (Watt, 2007).
Watson (2004) emphasizes that owner-managers
should develop a risk strategy to avoid, reduce or
respond to potential risks. It is therefore essential that
owner-managers are equipped with the necessary skills
to compare risks and to identify appropriate risk
strategies in adequately addressing these risks. Depending on the specific circumstances, owner-managers
should engage in actions limiting the probability of risk
occurrence, or if need be, to plan strategies that
maximise the probability of recovery (Watt, 2007).
By embedding a strategic risk management strategy in
the SMEs processes, significant advantages can be
achieved, such as (Watt, 2007):
i. It ensures that the SMEs activities are aligned to its
mission and objectives, and not diverted by external
influences.
ii. It ensures that organisational activities comply with
industry best practices and that regulative compliance is
achieved.
iii. It may provide legal protection if difficulties occurs.
iv. It may result in cost savings by reducing insurance
expenses.
Strategic risk management facilitates an effective risk
approach by prioritising risks, thereby reducing surprises,
and directing the focus on important risks. This has the
effect of reducing the possible over-management of
insignificant risks. In the risk management process,
management should be aware that risk actions should be
tailored to the specific needs of the enterprise taking into
account its resources, needs and opportunities that
prevail. Although risk assessment should be a comprehensive function, guard should be taken into devising an
excessive risk strategy (Watt, 2007). Given the size and
managerial structure of SMEs, the process of
establishing and using a strategic risk management
function is relatively simple given the close relationship
between owners, managers and operators of the
enterprise. Compared to larger enterprises, it is easier for
SME executive management to embed a risk
management policy and to be routinely and actively
involved in the application of the strategic risk
management policy, especially if these activities is seen
as a performance enhancing processes (Watt, 2007).
In a study conducted by Friedrich (2004) on South
African SMEs, it is emphasised that personal initiative
consisting of the owner’s characteristics such as being a
self-starter, having a proactive approach, specifically
regarding risk management, and persistent actions, is a
vital key to enterprise success. In addition to a proactive
business approach, innovation and learning, goal setting
and achievement orientation was linked to enterprise
success. Where SME owners follow a reactive business
approach including reactive risk management practices,
Smit and Watkins 6329
the enterprise was more likely to fail.
SME owner managers need to be aware that through
joint discussion of risk with SME employees, which
include an effective feedback process and a risk
valuation process, organisational trust is established. The
way of conducting risk management, that is, the shape of
the risk management process will depend on all the
participants risk propensity as well as the situational
control that is exercised at present. Therefore, risk
tolerant participants may prefer an informal risk review
process, while risk adverse participants will favour
comprehensive contractual arrangements (Beckett,
2005). Through experience, it has been gleaned that:
i. The creation of a positive organisational risk culture
whereby all participants concerns are understood and
experiences are shared, is facilitated through a constant
evolving process of risk identification and the planning of
containment strategies.
ii. Through joint proactive identification of risks, and by
employing holistic risk management practices,
management can establish a positive environment to deal
with all issues.
Regardless of the risk propensity of the participants, a
structured approach to risk management will assist in
providing a goal orientated and consistent risk
management process (Beckett, 2005).
REFERENCES
Banham R (2004). Enterprising View of Risk Management. J. Account.,
197(6): 65-71.
Bank of England (2001). Quarterly Report on Small Business Statistics.
Bank of England, London, January: pp 1-46.
Beaver G (2002). Small Business, Entrepreneurship and Enterprise
Development. Harlow: Pearson Education.
Beckett RC (2005). Collaboration now a strategic necessity. Handb.
Bus. Strategy, 6(1): 327-332.
Berger AN, Udell G (2001). Small business credit availability and
relationship lending: the importance of bank organisational structures.
FEDS Working Paper No 2001–36. [Online].
http://ssrn.com/abstact=285937 [10/4/2010].
Berkeley D, Humphreys PC, Thomas RD (1991). Project risk action
management. Constr. Manag. Econ., 9: 3-17.
Berry A (2002). The role of the small and medium enterprise sector in
Latin America: implications for South Africa. Unisa Latin American
Report, 18(1): 4-14.
Berry A, Von Blottnitz M, Cassim R, Kesper A, Rajaratnam B, Van
Seventer DE (2002). The Economics of SMMES in South Africa. T. &
I. Policy Strategy, December, 2002.
Alquier BAM, Lagasse TMH (2006). Risk management in small- and
medium-sized enterprises. Prod. P. & C., 17(3): 273-282.
Bradford M (2009). Sovay turns risk into opportunity. Bus. Ins., 43(20):
4-28.
Brink A, Cant M, Ligthelm A (2003). Problems experienced by small
business in South Africa. [Online].
http://sbaer.uca.edu/research/icsb/2003/230.doc [13/4/2010]
Cumby J, Conrod J (2001). Non-financial performance measures in the
Canadian biotechnology industry. J. Intel. Cap., 2(3): 261-272.
Engle P (2009). Enterprise risk management time. Ind. Eng., 41(5): 20.
Friedrich C (2004). Taking it personally: The crucial success factor for
small businesses is its entrepreneurs. Finance. Week, 51, December.
GCIS (2002). Government Communications South Africa Yearbook 
6330 Afr. J. Bus. Manage.
2001/2002. [Online]. http://www.govza/yearbook/2001/economy
 [3/3/2010]
Hofmann MA (2009). Interest in enterprise risk management is growing.
Bus. Ins., 43(18): 14-16.
Huang X, Brown A (1999). An analysis and classification of problems in
small business. Int. Small Bus. J., 18(1): 73-85.
Ittner CD, Larcker DF (1998). Are nonfinancial measures leading
indicators of financial performance? An analysis of customer
satisfaction. J. Account. Res., 36(3): 1-35.
Jun M, Cai S (2003). Key obstacles to Edi success: from the US small
manufacturing companies’ perspective. Ind. Manag. Data Sys.,
103(3): 192-203.
Kesper A (2000). Failing or not aiming to grow? Manufacturing SMMEs
and their contribution to employment growth in South Africa. T. & I.
Policy Sect. Working Paper. 15: 1-36.
King K (2009) refer to the Institute of Directors Southern Africa.
Kirytopoulos K, Leopoulos V, Malandrakis C (2001). Risk management:
A powerful tool for improving efficiency of project oriented SMEs.
Proceedings of the 4th SME International Conference. 2001.
Denmark.
Kotze L, Smit A (2008). Personal Financial Literacy and Personal Debt
Management: The Potential Relationship With New Venture Creation.
SAJESBM, 1(1): 35-50.
Laforet S, Tann J (2006). Innovative Characteristics of Small
Manufacturing Firms. J. Small Bus. Entrep. Dev., 13(3): 363-380.
LeCornu MR, McMahon RGP, Forsaith DM, Stanger AMJ (1996). The
small enterprise financial objective function. J. Small Bus. Manag.,
34(3): 1-14.
Leopoulos V (2006). Editorial. Prod. Plan Cont., 17(3): 225-228.
Ligthelm AA, Cant MC (2002). Business Success Factors of SMEs in
Gauteng: A proactive entrepreneurial approach. Research Report
311, Faculty of Economic and Management Science, UNISA Bureau
of Market Research.
McGrath S, King K (1996). Learning to Compete: African Education,
Training and Small Enterprise Development in the Era of
Globalisation. Int. J. Urban Lab. Leis., 2(2): 1976-96. [Online].
http://www.ijull.co.uk/vol2/2/000016.htm [26/3/2010]
Mead DC, Liedholm C (1998). The Dynamics of Micro and Small
Enterprises in Developing Countries. World Dev., 26(1): 61-74.
Naffziger DW, Hornsby JS, Kuratko DF (1994). A proposed research
model of entrepreneurial motivation. Entrep. Theor. Pract., 18(3): 29-
42.
Naicker NI (2006). Factors contributing to women being successful in
the SMME sector. A mini dissertation submitted in partial fulfilment of
the requirements for the degree Masters in Business Administration
in the Faculty of Management at the University of Johannesburg.
Ntlhane KE (1995). The application of risk management principles to
smaller enterprises. A research report submitted in partial fulfilment of
the requirements for the degree of Masters of Business
Administration in the Faculty of Management at the University of the
Witwatersrand.
Ntsika Enterprise Promotion Agency (Ntsika) (2001). State of Small
Business Development in South Africa. Annual Review 2001 [Online].
http://www.transformationaudit.org.za/researchdatabase/government-1/other-government-output/2000-
2006/2001ntsika/ [3/3/2010].
O’Gorman C (2001). The sustainability of growth in small and mediumsized enterprises. Int. J. Entrep. Behav. Res, 7(2): 60-75.
Plourd K (2009). Rethinking risk. CFO. January: 66-69.
Pretorius M, Shaw G (2004). Business plans in bank decision-making
when financing new ventures in South Africa. South Afr. J. Econ.
Manage. Sci., 7(2): 221-241. [Online].
http://www.journals.co.za/ej/ejour_ecoman.html [3/3/2010]
Rajaram R (2008). A need analysis of financial management and
accounting skills in the SME sector in KwaZulu-Natal. A research
report submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Commerce in the School of Management at the University
of KwaZulu-Natal.
Reynolds PL, Lancaster G (2006). A scheme to increase profitability in
entrepreneurial SMEs. J. Small Bus. Entrep. Dev., 13(3): 395-410.
Rogerson CM (2001a). Growing the SMME Manufacturing Economy of
South Africa: Evidence from Gauteng Province. J. Contemp. Afr.
Stud., 19(2): 267-291.
Rogerson CM (2001b). In search of the African miracle – debate on
successful small enterprise development in Africa. Habit Int., 25: 115-
142.
Rogerson CM (2004). The impact of the South African government’s
SMME programmes: a ten year review (1994-2003). Dev. South. Afr.,
21(5): 765-784.
Rogerson CM (2006). The Market Development Approach to SMME
Development: Implications for Local Government in South Africa.
Urban Forum, 17(1): 54-78.
Rogerson CM (2008). Tracking SMME Development in South Africa:
Issues of Finance, Training and the Regulatory Environment. Urban
Forum, 19(1): 61-81.
Rwigema H, Karungu P (1999). SMME development in Johannesburg’s
Southern Metropolitan Local Council: an assessment. Dev. South.
Afr., 16(1): 101-124.
Rwigema H, Venter R (2004). Advanced Entrepreneurship. Cape Town:
Oxford University Press.
Schultz AG (2001). Risk assurance model for the small medium and
micro enterprise sector. A dissertation submitted in partial fulfilment
of the requirements for the degree of Master Technologiae in the
Faculty of Management at the Cape Technikon.
Skinner C (2005). Constraints to Growth and Employment in Durban:
Evidence from the Informal Economy. Research Report No. 65,
School of Development Studies, University of KwaZulu-Natal,
Durban.
South Africa (1996). National Small Business Act, No. 102 of 1996.
Notice No. 1901, 27 November. [Online].
http://www.info.gov.za/view/DownloadFileAction?id=70848
[2/10/2009]
South Africa (2004). National Small Business Amendment Act, No. 29
of 2004. Government Gazette, 461 (25763), November. [Online].
http://www.acts.co.za/national_small_business_act_1996.htm
[27/1/2010]
St-Pierre J, Bahri M (2006). The use of the accounting beta as an
overall risk indicator for unlisted companies. J. Small Bus. Entrep.
Dev., 13(4): 546-561.
UNDP see United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) (2003). The
challenge of sustainable development in South Africa: unlocking
people’s creativity. South African Development Report, 2003. Cape
Town: Oxford University Press.
Van Niekerk L (2005). Information security risk management in the
South African Small, Medium and Micro Enterprise Environment: The
Peculium Model. A dissertation submitted in fulfilment of the
requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Informatics in the
Faculty of Science of the University of Johannesburg.
Watt J (2007). Strategic risk management for small businesses. [In:
Reuvid, J. (ed.). Managing Business Risk 2nd Edition – a practical
guide to protecting your business. London – Philadelphia: Kogan
Page].
Watson GEH (2004). A situational analysis of entrepreneurship mentors
in South Africa. A dissertation submitted in fulfilment of the
requirements for the degree Masters of Commerce in Business
Management at the University of South Africa.
Watson LM, Godfrey NF (1999). Entrepreneurial Support for Rural
Small, Medium and Micro Enterprises (SMMEs) in South Africa.
University of South Africa (UNISA) & Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR), South Africa. [Online]
http://161.31.108.27/research/icsb/2005/119pdf [23/7/2008]
Williamson IO (2000). Employer legitimacy and recruitment success in
small business. Entrep.: Theory Pract., 25(1): 27.
Wong KY (2005). Critical success factors for implementing knowledge
management in small and medium enterprises. Ind. Manag. Data
Syst., 105(3): 261-279. 