A Proposed: Integration of the Monte Carlo model and the Bayes network to Propose Cyber Security
Risk Assessment Tool for Small and Medium Enterprises in South Africa
Tabisa Ncubukezi
Information Technology Department
Cape Peninsula University of
Technology
Cape Town, South Africa
Ncubukezit@cput.ac.za
Laban Mwansa
Electrical Engineering Department
Cape Peninsula University of
Technology
Cape Town, South Africa
Mwansal@cput.ac.za
Francois Rocaries
Electrical Engineering Department
Cape Peninsula University of
Technology
Cape Town, South Africa
Rocariesf@cput.ac.za
Abstract—Cyber-risks have become a serious concern and a
considered perspective in enterprise risk management configuration
and reporting. Cyber-risks has the potential to harm information
assets in this era of the internet of things, which ultimately
quantifies cybersecurity crimes. For big corporations, it is now a
legal requirement to report cyber-security preparedness to
corporate shareholders as part of good governance. It is not clear
whether small and medium-sized enterprises (SME) have a clear
framework in place to combat cyber risks potential to harm
information assets. There is minimal research done on the
integration of the Monte Carlo simulation tool and artificial
intelligence to recommend a proactive cybersecurity risk response
plan. So, this paper proposes a cyber-risk assessment tool for small
and medium-sized enterprises (SME's) in South Africa. Also, the
article forms part of the on-going doctoral research about the
analysis and design of cybersecurity risks framework within the
SME's in South Africa. The proposed cybersecurity risk assessment
tool aims to predict the risk cause, impact, cyber-risk likelihood,
and the systematic trends within small businesses in South Africa.
Keywords— Bayesian network, cyberattacks, cybercrimes,
cyber threats, Monte Carlo model, risk impact; risk
probability; cyber risk assessment; risk response plan
I. INTRODUCTION
Small businesses are vulnerable to sorts of risks, which could
be planned or unplanned exposure to harm or put in danger the
organization's assets. The risks are often associated with the
loss of valuable assets or resources. However, the literature
explains risk as a planned event, which leads to uncertain
results [13]. The term risk relates to possible exposure to harm,
danger, or uncertainty. However, various industries interpret
and use the term differently and loosely. Within the business
sector, it is impossible to separate the risk from the business
cycle. Also, one cannot separate cyber threats from the
internetworked world [2, 13]. Cyber risks are commonly
interpreted as the lack of privacy, confidentiality on the
personal or organizational data due triggered by cyber threats,
and ransomware [15]. The term cyber risk is interchangeably
used as the cyber-attack or cyber-crimes.
As the world becomes smart by connecting through smart
devices to keep up with the technology, cyber risks also
increase in number through innovative ways [3,14]. The cyber
threats aim and penetrate all sorts of interconnected businesses
regardless of the size, number of employees, and the annual
turnover [16]. The primary focus for cyber attackers is mainly
on the lucrative benefits than the size of the business sector. As
a result, SMEs' has become the primary target for cyber threats.
As cited by [1], the Federation of Small Businesses (FSB)
announced the monetary value amounting to £5.26 billion to
the U.K. economy caused by cybercrimes. [4] says 8.8 Million
South Africans have fallen victims to cybercrimes. The
Minister of Telecommunications and Postal Services (TPS),
Siyabonga Cwele, said in Cape Town Parliament that an
estimated 32 percent of small and medium enterprises in South
Africa are affected by the cyber threats and phishing attacks
[9]. At the moment, the country currently does not have the
public or national document that records cyber risks affecting
the SMEs'.
[16] says that the study conducted by Ponemon Institute in the
U.K. and U.S.; the main cyber-attacks which have hit the
SME's were the use of weak passwords by employees,
ransomware, data breaches, phishing. Asian Pacific SME's
explained that the primary sources of the cyber-attacks are the
malfunctioning of the SME systems, which affects the business
continuity and eventually loses data. However, at this stage, it
is not whether the loss of data is through the system itself or the
human error. The human error could either be through the loss
of the company devices with information or an employee
unintentionally divulging due to the lack of skill [10].
Due to the high cybercrimes which SME's experience, the
proposed work aims to develop a cybersecurity framework
tool that will integrate Monte Carlo and the Bayesian network
to combat cyber risks.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
This proposed paper will look and focus on SME in South
Africa. The study will look at SMEs' from all business sectors.
The research suggests the design, development, and evaluation
of cyber-risk assessment tool to proactively mitigate the cyber
risks within the South African SME's. The main aim of the
proposed structure is to reduce the time spent on cybersecurity
risk management.
International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security (IJCSIS),
Vol. 18, No. 3, March 2020
152 https://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/
ISSN 1947-5500 
A. Cyber threats, attacks, targets, and impact
The following section addresses cyber threats,
cyberattacks, cyberattack platforms, as well as the ultimate
cybercrimes, as shown in table 1. Cyber threats are possible
malicious attempts that could damage or disrupt a computer
network or SMB systems. Cyber threats are mostly caused by
cyberattacks such as malware, data breaches, denial of service,
and network exploitation. All these cyberattacks could happen
through a standalone computer, or the connection to the
cyberspace on a networked computer, or use of external
storages.
 Tab 1. Initiation of cybercrimes (Source: [14], Unpublished)
B. Cyber Risk Management
All adverse cyber-security risks exist to harm, interruption,
damage, dent, and affect business growth and day-to-day
operation [2]. Cybercrimes come in various forms of attacks in
business with the primary goal that is to benefit in every
possible way, for as long as they will get a lucrative portion of
the company [7].
C. Application of NIST Framework for risk mitigation
The NIST cybersecurity framework represents the U.S.
policy framework that provides the computer security
guidance, best practices, and standard practices for helping all
organizations to evaluate and improve the capacity to prevent,
detect and respond to all cyber-attacks (NIST, 2014). The
framework focuses on defining the standard methodology for
managing cyber risks. NIST provides a broader and balanced
cybersecurity that suits all business sectors.
The framework works around a sound set of five concurrent
and continuous functions addressing different steps to process
cyber threats: Identity, Protect, Detect, and Respond, Recover.
III. PROPOSED APPROACH
This paper will involve a detailed process of carrying out the
research to offer specific answers for every problem provided
through supporting literature and the data collection [6]. The
research process will include the discussions of the research
methodology, data collection methods, a sampling of the
informants. The proposed method of inquiry will be carried
out in five phases, as shown in Error! Reference source not
found. to find answers to the research questions posed in this
study.
Phase one reviews the relevant sources of literature, and
conduct both the qualitative and quantitative study, one after
the other. Qualitative research will be performed to gather
common cybercrimes within the South African SME sectors.
The quantitative research will be done to categories the
dependent and independent variables. The data collection to
form the knowledge base for the following phases.
Phase two will develop a knowledge base for the Monte Carlo
model using the collected data to determine dependent and
independent variables.
Phase three will use the Monte Carlo simulation model to
determine the probability and what-if's situations.
Stage four will develop the cybersecurity risk framework by
integrating the Monte Carlo model with the Bayesian network
to generate conditional outcomes to combat cyber risks.
Stage five will evaluate the proposed structure and come up
with five sample case studies that will test the effectiveness.
Fig. 1: Methodology Phases (Own work, 2020)
A. Data collection methods
The qualitative interviews with SME stakeholders will
help to identify and describe critical themes. The study will use
the focus groups to gather information from a group of
participants within the same business. The questionnaires will
be deployed on Google forms to collect qualitative and
quantitative data about the existing cybersecurity risks, risk
cause, effect of risk, risk likelihood, and risk probability. The
questionnaire will also be the guideline for interviews.
B. Sampling
Fig. 2. Elements of selecting strata (Own work, 2019)
C. Adoption of the Monte Carlo Model
Monte Carlo, risk simulation model, will analyze the
likelihood, impact, and the proximity of cyber-security risks
within the small-medium enterprises in S.A. It will further
investigate the systematic trends of the dangers. Monte Carlo,
the risk simulation model, is selected among others based on its
high sensitivity in the domain of enterprise. Secondly, it
extremely grounded in the sense that it highly supports privacy
and confidentiality security features.
International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security (IJCSIS),
Vol. 18, No. 3, March 2020
153 https://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/
ISSN 1947-5500 
D. Integration of Bayesian Network
In the proposed study, the Bayes' model will evaluate the risk
and updates predicted probabilities of the risk event by
incorporating new information through mathematical formulas
to calculate the conditional probability of the possible cyber
risk cause for a given observed outcome [8]. The conditional
likelihood computed from knowledge of the likelihood of each
cyber risk cause and the probability of the outcome of each
cause [5]. Thomas Bayes's model predicts to determine the
likelihood and its conditions. In this study, the Bayes theorem
will evaluate the risk probability of an event based on the prior
knowledge of the terms that relate to the event.
E. Link to existing research
This research links to a significant Ph.D. research work on
the design and development of cybersecurity. The researcher
produces papers that report about various phases from the first
to the last stage. Each article will address how the ultimate
cybersecurity risk response framework has been planned,
designed, developed, and evaluated.
F. Ethical considerations
 The university's ethics committee issued an ethical
clearance certificate which explained the rules and
regulations. Every participant on the research project will
receive the consent letter requesting their voluntary
participation. The signed consent letter will represent legal
practice. Research participants will receive the assurance
that their details and the data collected would remain
private and confidential.
IV. RESEARCH OUTCOMES
The proposed study will draw and contribute to the
literature on cyber-security risks within the SMEs. Use the
Monte Carlo model to analyze quantitative cyber threats within
the SMEs. Develop the knowledge base for the Bayesian
approach.
V. CONCLUSION
This position paper links to the main doctoral research
project. Outcomes of each framework development phase will
be shared in the form of research papers. Cybercrime has
become the main risk within SME's business cycle. The
probability of cybercrimes could disrupt the businesses and
eventually discontinue the business progress and performance.
One of the outcomes of this study will identify the common
cyber crimes and their impact on SME's. Another report will
look at the dependent and independent cyber risks, which will
involve the probabilities of cyber threats. Lastly, the study will
develop a cyber-framework which SME's could use to combat
risks using the Bayesian model.
AUTHORS
Tabisa Ncubukezi is a lecturer and a Ph.D. candidate at
the Cape Peninsula University of Technology in South Africa.
She has more than ten years of teaching experience at the
University of Technology and colleges. Her primary teaching
focus is on communication networks and security. Her
research focus is on cybersecurity.
Laban Mwansa
Senior Lecturer in the department of electrical, electronic and
computer engineering. Laban obtained his Ph.D. in computer
engineering from the Czech Technical University in Prague.
He currently lectures and supervises postgraduate students in
the department. He was also a visiting professor at the
University of Paris (UPEC) in 209
Francois Rocaries
Professor Francois is a scientific director at the French South
Africa Institute for Space studies. (FSATI). He has published
and graduated many postgraduate students in France and
South Africa
REFERENCES
[1] A. Sword, "SMEs hit with 7 million cybercrime attacks per year in £5.26
billion blow to U.K. economy," Computer Business Review, 2018.
Available in:
http://www.cbronline.com/news/cybersecurity/business/smes-hit-with-7-
million-cyber-crime-attacks-per-year-in-526-billion-blow-to-ukeconomy-4919992/ [Accessed on 2 February 2020)
[2] B. Van Niekerk, "An analysis of cyber-incidents in South Africa". The
African Journal of Information and Communication (AJIC), 2017, Vol.
20, pp. 113-132.
[3] C. Fripp, "Cybercrime costs South Africa about R5.5 billion a year".
Available from https://www.htxt.co.za/2014/11/11/cybercrime-costssouth-africa-about-r5-8-billion-a-year/ 2015, [Accessed: on 06
September 2019]
[4] D. Linington, "8.8 Million South Africans have fallen victims to
cybercrime". Retrieved on 15 February 2020.
http://www.itnewsafrica.com/tag/cybercrime-stats/, 2016
[5] D.S. Gupta, "Introduction to Conditional Probability and Bayes theorem
for data science professionals" available from
https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2017/03/conditional-probabilitybayes-theorem/ 2017, [Accessed: 11 February 2020]
[6] E. Barbie, J. Mouton, "The practice of social research. South African
edition Oxford University Press", Cape Town, South Africa, ISBN 0 19
571854 2, 2001
[7] F. Almeida, I. Carvalho, F. Cruz, "Structure and Challenges of a
Security Policy on Small and Medium Enterprises." KSII
TRANSACTIONS ON INTERNET AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS
VOL. 12, NO. 2, Feb. 2018. Page 747-763.
[8] F.X. Aguessy, O. Bettan, G. Blanc, V. Conan, H. Debar, "Hybrid Risk
Assessment Model Based on Bayesian Networks." 11th International
Workshop on Security, IWSEC 2016, Sep 2016, Tokyo, Japan. pp.21 -
40,
[9] L. Peyper, "32% of SMEs in S.A. at risk of cyber-attacks – Cwele"
Retrieved from https://www.fin24.com/Economy/32-of-smes-in-sa-atrisk-of-cyber-attacks-cwele-20160309, 2016 [Accessed on 8 March
2020]
[10] L.S. Howard., "SMEs Underestimate Cyber Risks Which Could Prove
'Fatal': Allianz Report." Available from
https://www.insurancejournal.com/news/international/2018/02/21/48111
3.htm, 2016 [Accessed on 12 January 2020]
[11] R. Koeze, "Designing A Cyber Risk Assessment Tool For Small To
Medium Enterprises." The Delft University Of Technology, Faculty of
Technology, Policy and Management Research conducted at KPMG
Advisory N.V. November 2017 Electronic version available at
http://repository.tudelft.nl. [Accessed: 15 June 2018]
[12] S. Dilek, H. Çakır, and M. Aydın, "Applications of artificial intelligence
techniques to combating cybercrimes: A review". International Journal
of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, 2015.
[13] T. Aven, O. Renn, "On risk defined as an event where the outcome is
uncertain" Journal of Risk Research, 2009, vol.12, No.1, pp. 1-11.
International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security (IJCSIS),
Vol. 18, No. 3, March 2020
154 https://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/
ISSN 1947-5500 
[14] T. Ncubukezi, L. Mwansa, F. Rocaries, "A review of the current
cybercrime hygiene within the small and medium-sized enterprises"
(unpublished).
[15] T. Rid, B. Buchanan, "Attributing Cyber Attacks." Journal of Strategic
Studies, 2014, Vol 38(1-2), pp. 4–37, 2014.
[16] W. Ashford, "SMEs more vulnerable than ever to cyber-attacks," survey
shows https://www.computerweekly.com/news/450428246/SMEs-morevulnerable-than-ever-to-cyber-attacks-survey-shows, 2017 [Accessed: 8
March 2020]
[17] NIST (2014). Cybersecurity Framework. From
https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework [Accessed: 10 January 2020]
International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security (IJCSIS),
Vol. 18, No. 3, March 2020
155 https://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/
ISSN 1947-5500 