Round Table
Engaging with startups: MNC perspectives
Shameen Prashanthama,
*
,1
, K. Kumarb,2
a China Europe International Business School (CEIBS), Shanghai, China
b Indian Institute of Management Bangalore, Bangalore, India
Received 10 July 2018; revised form 20 October 2018; accepted 25 January 2019; Available online 29 March 2019
Abstract Through a conceptual note and round table discussion, this article builds upon Buckley and Prashantham’s (2016) “division of entrepreneurial labour” notion to consider more
closely the perspective of multinational corporations (MNCs) in relation to partnering with startups. First, the capability dimension suggests that there is potential for value creation resulting
from complementarity between the strengths of corporations and startups. Second, the connectivity dimension is concerned with how this potential is realised; the rise of corporations’ programmatic initiatives and third-party specialists are highlighted. Third, the contextuality
dimension highlights spatial differences, noting MNCs’ unique opportunities and challenges visa-vis startup partnering in emerging markets. 
© 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of Indian Institute of Management Bangalore. This is
an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc-nd/4.0/)
KEYWORDS
Corporation-startup
partnering;
Multinational
corporation;
Startup;
Alliance;
Ecosystem;
Innovation;
Emerging market;
Dancing with gorillas
Academic perspective
Introduction
Research at the intersection of strategy and entrepreneurship has drawn attention to the phenomenon of large corporations partnering with startups (Diestre & Rajagopalan,
2012; Katila, Rosenberger & Eisenhardt, 2008; Prashantham
& Birkinshaw, 2008; Vandaie & Zaheer, 2014; Weiblen &
Chesbrough, 2015). Many of these operate globally as
multinational corporations (MNCs). Corporation-startup
partnering entails a tension: the vast differences between
these disparate sets of organisations give rise to potential
complementarities; yet, at the same time these very differences render engagement difficult due to asymmetries in
power and structure. This is reflected in some of the phrases
coined to describe these partnerships, such as “swimming
with sharks” (Diestre & Rajagopalan, 2012; Katila et al.,
2008), “dancing with gorillas” (Prashantham & Birkinshaw,
2008) and “surviving bearhugs” (Vandaie & Zaheer, 2014).
Therefore, partnering between corporations and startups
represents “business as unusual”; both sets of firms need to
make special efforts to forge these relationships, and make
them work. In a previous round table article, Prashantham
and Kumar (2011) addressed the question: How do new ventures in MNC ecosystems proactively overcome interfirm
*Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: sprashantham@ceibs.edu (S. Prashantham),
kumark@iimb.ac.in (K. Kumar). 1 Phone: 86-21-28905689.
2 Phone: 91-80-26993277.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iimb.2019.01.003
0970-3896 © 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of Indian Institute of Management Bangalore. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
IIMB Management Review (2019) 31, 407–417
available at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/iimb
asymmetries? Their focus was on synthesising insights from
the perspective of four highly successful startups based in
Bangalore, on how low-power actors (startups) could cope
effectively with inevitable interorganisational differences
with their high-power partners (large corporations). The key
message was that some startups are more adept than others
at partnering with large corporations because they are more
proactive in relational terms.
Specifically, we noted that new ventures are asymmetric
vis-a-vis the focal MNC in terms of organisational size, structure and power which could impede relationship-building
between these disparate sets of firms. We therefore considered how new ventures might overcome interfirm asymmetries to develop and leverage social capital with large MNCs.
Our synthesis of the academic literature and discussion with
the panellists highlighted the importance of proactiveness in
forming, consolidating and extending relationships with
large MNCs. We concluded that while proactiveness is
undoubtedly crucial, its role at different stages of the relationship may be subtly different – for instance, in establishing the startup’s credibility early on with a specific unit
versus building multiple touchpoints with the MNC later on.
Bringing in the multinational’s perspective
Since we conducted the last round table in 2011, there has
been a perceptible rise in systematic initiatives from corporations to partner with startups. Weiblen and Chesbrough
(2015: 67) note: “During the last few years, corporate
efforts to reach out to the startup ecosystem seem to be on
the increase. In its quest for speed and innovation, the tech
industry, in particular, has produced a variety of ways of
engaging with startups. Established models, such as corporate venture capital, are now complemented by newer models that seem to better bridge the gap between both worlds
in some cases”. This was not the case for the four startups
that participated in the 2011 round table; in those cases,
the entrepreneur had to be proactively path-breaking and
had to creatively find ways to form links with a large corporation. By contrast, today, several large corporations have
put in place some form of initiative that is explicitly targeted at startups.
Therefore, the time seems ripe to consider more closely
the perspective of MNCs in relation to partnering with startups. This allows us to build upon insights from our previous
round table by examining recent developments in corporation-startup partnering which connect with concepts and
issues identified in the past discussion (Startup perspective).
For example, some of the issues identified by startups earlier
such as “What is the small and medium enterprise (SME)
offering?”, “Who is the SME talking to in the big organisation?”, and “Diligence required in prioritising target company” seem to be addressed by the evolution of
programmatic initiatives and third party specialists identified in the current discussion.3
In structuring this article, we consider three aspects: (1)
the why, (2) the how, and (3) the where of corporationstartup partnering. This approach echoes the three
dimensions of Buckley and Prashantham’s (2016) notion of
the “division of entrepreneurial labour” between multinationals and entrepreneurial smaller firms. First, the capability dimension suggests that there is potential for value
creation in interfirm networks resulting from differentiation
between entrepreneurial ventures and multinationals primarily in terms of exploration and exploitation capabilities,
respectively. Second, the connectivity dimension is concerned with how this potential is realised. Drawing on
resource dependence theory, they argue that the two facets
of interdependence occur through different mechanisms:
mutual dependence is facilitated by network orchestration
by the corporation and participation by ventures, and power
imbalance is redressed through dialogue between these sets
of firms. Third, the contextuality dimension highlights spatial differences, noting in particular that in emerging markets MNCs often need to work harder to address institutional
deficits – but also may enjoy opportunities (e.g. frugal innovation) that they don’t have access to in Western markets
(Krishnan & Prashantham, 2019).
Why do MNCs partner with startups?
An important rationale for corporations to seek to engage
with startups is the pursuit of exploration as opposed to
exploitation. In other words, working with startups can offer
an additional avenue for pursuing new knowledge and innovation that may be complementary to its own platform technologies – for instance, Microsoft wishing its software tools
to become the building blocks of startups’software products
(Gawer & Cusumano, 2014). Additionally, there is a particular sense of urgency in industries perceiving disruption
through digitisation, such as the automotive sector, leading
to initiatives such as BMW’s Startup Garage through which
that corporation seeks out startups that can supply – without
being acquired or even invested in – valuable new technologies that improve the driving experience (e.g. through
enhanced autonomous driving competence) or manufacturing process (e.g. through better cybersecurity features).
Fundamentally, the rationale for engagement between
corporations and startups, particularly in the context of
innovation ecosystems, is scope for complementarity
between the strengths of corporations and startups. Weiblen
and Chesbrough (2015: 66) observe: “Each side has what the
other one lacks. The corporation has resources, scale,
power, and the routines needed to run a proven business
model efficiently. The startup has none of those, but typically has promising ideas, organizational agility, the willingness to take risk, and aspirations of rapid growth”. In a
similar vein, the “entrepreneurial division of labour” notion
portrays corporations and startups as focussing on different
opportunities – opportunities relating to exploration
(startup) and exploitation (corporation) – as a fundamental
rationale for MNCs seeking to partner with startups (Buckley
& Prashantham, 2016).
How do MNCs partner with startups?
How corporations are partnering with startups has matured
over time, giving rise to programmatic initiatives initiated
3 We thank an anonymous reviewer for helping us make this link to
the prior round table.
408 S. Prashantham, K. Kumar
by corporations and the involvement of third-party specialists. We briefly discuss these practices.
Programmatic initiatives
Weiblen and Chesbrough (2015) have identified a number of
ways in which corporations may seek to work with startups.
In contrast to Prashantham and Birkinshaw’s (2008) work on
“dancing with gorillas” which describes several cases of
largely ad hoc partnering efforts, by the time Weiblen and
Chesbrough (2015) wrote their article on how large corporations engaged with startups, it was clear that several corporations had instituted systematic partnering initiatives.
While they take a comprehensive view to include both
internal and external entrepreneurship, as well as equity
and non-equity engagement, our focus is on non-equity
partnering between corporations and startups.
There are programmatic initiatives from many other
corporations such as IBM’s Global Entrepreneur Program or
SAP’s Startup Focus that at least give a startup an initial
point of contact with these corporations. These corporations have recognised the importance of adopting an “ecosystem mindset” – the idea that innovation and growth
occur through interdependent relationships with other
complementary actors – in a complex and dynamic world
(Adner, 2013). This is particularly true of information
technology (IT) corporations – as in the examples of IBM
and SAP – that have adopted a platform strategy. An industry platform consists of building blocks provided by a hub
orchestrating firm and components developed by different
“complementors” who together create an ecosystem of
interdependent actors (Gawer & Cusumano, 2014).
Increasingly, these large platform-orchestrators – which
include well-known corporations such as Apple, Facebook,
Google, Microsoft and SAP – actively seek to undertake
win–win collaborations with startups (Weiblen &
Chesbrough, 2015).
However, it is no longer just IT – and specifically software
– corporations that are reaching out to startups; even corporations in traditional industries are doing so. Unilever’s
Foundry programme through which it sources digital solutions to marketing-related pain points and BMW’s Startup
Garage which leads to close partnerships with startups possessing complementary technologies illustrate this shift.
Part of the benefit of programmatic efforts is that they
afford startups an identifiable starting point when seeking
to engage a corporation; managers who work as part of these
programmes – such as SAP’s Startup Focus or Unilever’s
Foundry – represent a valuable first port of call for an entrepreneur. But even more profoundly, the “how” of corporation-startup partnering has to go beyond merely offering a
viable conduit to more actively assuring startups that they
will receive fair treatment. This is important because of the
concern that startups often have regarding the risk of misappropriation at the hands of the larger corporation (Alvarez &
Barney, 2001). This concern is evocatively conveyed in
expressions such as “swimming with sharks” (Katila et al.,
2008), “dancing with gorillas” (Prashantham & Birkinshaw,
2008) and “surviving bear hugs” (Vandaie & Zaheer, 2014).
Given the rise in startup partnering initiatives from corporations, in a sense these firms are competing with each other
for the hearts and minds of startups; thus being seen as
“safe” partners for startups is likely to be of growing
importance as a source of competitive advantage while
seeking to attract suitable startup partners.
Corporate accelerators, an area that Microsoft is active in
as noted, has emerged as a popular practice – some would
even say “fad” – that a wide range of corporations has
recently adopted. As indicated earlier, this includes a large
number of non-IT corporations, who are seeking to access
cutting-edge innovation from startups in a bid to combat disruptive forces and keep up with technological shifts. An
example is Bayer, the European pharmaceutical company
that makes Aspirin (and a whole host of other medications).
Prashantham (2017: 1) describes their startup engagement
activities:
“In 2013, Bayer made a concerted effort to enter the digital health startup engagement space through its Grants4Apps (G4A) program...In 2014, Bayer added a 100-days
accelerator format, providing €50,000 financial support
and deep mentoring to selected digital health startups
from across Europe. Notably, the startups were provided
office space inside Bayer's premises in Berlin, partly to
expose Bayer's employees to the entrepreneurs' novel
ideas and fresh energy. In 2015, the accelerator program
was repeated, this time with two variations: it was open
(1) to startups from anywhere in the world and (2) to
internal Bayer employees with startup ideas. One of the
five selected startups was from Shanghai, co-founded by
a Malaysian Bayer employee in that office along with her
German husband – a truly international startup! In 2016,
its third cohort ran from late August-early December
2016 and included four startups: one each from Germany,
Ghana, Hungary and South Korea.”
Specialist third parties
Another interesting development in terms of practices has
been the rise of specialist third parties that help to connect
corporations and startups. US-based Techstars runs several
corporate accelerators that bear the tag line “powered by
Techstars”. An example is the Barclays accelerator which
entails a 13-week programme for selected startups, which is
run by a team from the third-party specialist.
Other intermediaries have arisen in emerging markets as
well. In Bangalore, an example is Kyron, the innovation
arm of ANSR, which helps multinationals to establish corporate accelerators that tap the Indian entrepreneurial ecosystem. Kyron’s parent company had helped the retail MNC
Target to establish a global innovation centre in Bangalore
and when Target expressed an interest to engage with local
startups, Kyron helped to set up a corporate accelerator
for Target in Bangalore. Kyron works with other MNCs as
well, to qualify and curate prospective startup partners in
terms of their ability to scale up, their risk profile, and
long-term viability. The emphasis is not only on ensuring
technology fit but also cultural fit. Entities like Kyron may
also be relevant to technology based MNCs that are wellentrenched locally, such as Google and Microsoft. If one of
Kyron’s clients (say, Target) has issued a set of “problem
statements” for which it is seeking innovative solutions,
then Kyron is in a position to pass these on to relevant Google and Microsoft alumni-startups who may have expertise
in addressing these problems.
Engaging with startups: MNC perspectives 409
Thus, while Kyron is a feeder of startups to MNCs like Target (the classic match-making function) it is also a “destination” for startups coming through the programmes of other
MNCs like Google and Microsoft. Recently a joint venture
between Techstars and ANSR was announced (Inc42, 2017).4
In China, Shanghai-based XNode works with multinationals
to engage with Chinese startups as one way, among others,
to enhance corporate innovation outcomes. In Brazil, 100
Open Startups is an organisation with the tag line “large
companies and startups co-creating the future” which seeks
to foster the development of contractual activities between
these disparate sets of organisations.
Where do MNCs partner with startups?
As previously noted, Buckley and Prashantham (2016) have
argued that in relation to MNCs working with smaller
entrepreneurial partners, it is important to take into
account contextuality – in other words, the “where” of their
engagement. In particular they distinguish between
advanced and emerging markets. They observe, “To be globally effective, adaptation across space (the where) is typically warranted such that institutional support for
entrepreneurship in advanced economies is complemented,
whereas deficits in such support are substituted for in
emerging economies” (Buckley & Prashantham, 2016: 41).
Indeed, while considerable anecdotal evidence on corporation-startup partnering is associated with clusters with
high reputations, notably Silicon Valley (Monteiro & Birkinshaw, 2017; Weiblen & Chesbrough, 2015), it is important to
recognise that such engagement is not confined to advanced
economies; corporations are increasingly recognising the
prospect of identifying talented startups in settings like
Zhongguancun in China or Bangalore in India (Prashantham,
2015; Prashantham & Yip, 2017a). Indeed, panellists featured in Prashantham and Kumar (2011) illustrate this
extremely well: for instance, Ittiam worked closely with
Texas instruments, Mango with Qualcomm, and Skelta with
Microsoft. But since then there have been even more efforts
made by corporations in emerging markets, and not just by
IT-related multinationals.
The previously mentioned examples of 100 Open Startups, Kyron and XNode also highlight the growing corporation-startup partnering taking place in emerging markets.
Based on interviews in China, India and South Africa, Prashantham and Yip (2017a) found that emerging markets offer
unique challenges and opportunities to multinationals seeking to engage with startups. The challenges include the perceived outsider status of multinationals (although this may
be more of a challenge in China and India) and the immaturity of entrepreneurial ecosystems, while acknowledging the
rapid development of specific pockets like Bangalore in India
and Shenzhen in China. Addressing the former challenge –
which emphasises the difficulty in identifying suitably capable and compatible startup partners – could take the form of
working with third-party specialists, the rise of which was
noted earlier. The latter challenge calls for multinationals
to proactively compensate for deficiencies in the ecosystem
and help to build the ecosystem.
The opportunities include the scope to access novel technologies, including frugal innovations, and the growing
appetite for entrepreneurship in emerging markets. Mango,
one of the ventures featured in our last round table (Prashantham & Kumar, 2011), illustrates the former point about
novel technology. That company had developed a software
product targeting low-end handsets which complemented
Qualcomm’s expertise in high-end handsets. Mango ended
up working closely with Qualcomm which ultimately
acquired the venture’s intellectual property. As for the latter point, in India, as in China, entrepreneurship is a priority,
but – unlike China where state intervention plays a critical
role – its private sector efforts have historically been more
salient. A notable example is the “10,000 startups” initiative
of NASSCOM, the trade association of the Indian software
industry, which has attracted Amazon, Google, IBM and
Microsoft as prominent sponsors.
Furthermore, the government has also been making
efforts to promote entrepreneurship, as evident from the
launch of a “Startup India” government initiative at which
Google made its presence felt through a startup context
that it organised in conjunction with this event. Also, notably, MNCs have sought to align with the government’s “Make
in India” campaign; for instance, Intel launched its Intel
India Maker Lab initiative involving startups in the nascent
hardware ecosystem. Other notable efforts have come from
non-IT corporations like Bosch and Swiss Re.
Synthesis: the imperative to develop startup
partnering capability
Prashantham and Yip (2017b) document the learning process
that Microsoft has undergone over the past decade. Confronted by the open software movement, Microsoft introduced BizSpark, a programmatic initiative that provided
software ventures with free tools to encourage (or “evangelise”, to use a term often invoked by technology companies)
them to build their software products on top of Microsoft
platform technologies. A couple of years later, following the
enormous success of BizSpark – within two years over 10,000
startups around the world had signed up – Microsoft launched
its BizSpark One programme to work closely with the 100
most innovative startups from the BizSpark pool. Within a
couple of years of that, a new initiative was launched in the
form of accelerators being established in Bangalore, Beijing
and Tel Aviv. Additional accelerators followed in Berlin, London and Paris. Subsequently, a corporate venture capital
arm was also established in parallel to the fore mentioned
non-equity partnering initiatives.
The Microsoft example draws attention to the importance of – and effortfulness involved in – developing a
startup partnering capability on the part of MNCs. Corporations that are serious about developing win–win relationships with startups have a strategic imperative to develop a
startup partnering capability. This is distinct from alliance
management capabilities that tend to be primarily oriented
toward symmetric relationships i.e. between firms of similar size and power. This is also different from other
approaches to engaging with startups such as corporate
venturing and from internal efforts to promote entrepreneurial behaviours by employees, sometimes referred to as 4 https://inc42.com/buzz/techstars-india-ansr-accelerator/
410 S. Prashantham, K. Kumar
intrapreneurship (Weiblen & Chesbrough, 2015). Developing startup partnering capability is a nontrivial challenge,
even for corporations with a long track record of building
alliances with other (similarly large) organisations.
Engaging with startups – MNC perspectives:
panel discussion5
Anchors
K Kumar and Shameen Prashantham
Panellists
Jitendra Chaddah, Senior Director, Operations and Strategy, Intel India
Amit Kalra, Managing Director, Swiss Re Group; Head –
Global Services, Bangalore. Swiss Re Global Business Solutions India Private Limited
Varadarajan Krishna, Managing Director, Induct Solutions
Laxman Soman, Head – Sales and Business Development,
Bosch Automotive Electronics India Private Limited
K. Kumar: Welcome to the panel discussion on “Engaging
with Startups – MNC perspectives”. The challenges most startups faced some years ago was that for the products and services they were coming up with, the primary customers or
ecosystem in which they had to embed them was the community of large companies. Very specifically, in the Bangalore
ecosystem these large companies always happened to be multinational companies (MNCs). Given the lack of legitimacy and
credibility which most of the startups begin with, it had
always been a challenge for startups to engage with large
MNCs and get a foothold in their ecosystem. This was a real
issue we observed when working closely with startups, and
while we were trying to address this issue, I met Shameen Prashantham whose research was around the problem of “how do
small companies engage with larger counterparts in the course
of building their businesses?”. He gave it a very catchy phrase
“dancing with gorillas” which was an excellent conceptualisation of this problem. He has been working on it very diligently
over a decade. We have been spending a lot of time and effort
in trying to understand this phenomenon a little better.
A few years ago, we both did a similar round table on
startups engaging with large companies but that was more
from the perspective of the startup companies (see Prashantham & Kumar, 2011). This time around we wanted to go to
the other side and talk to those people who we wanted to
engage with the startups. The timing of this round table
could not have been better because to all of you who work
out of Bangalore in particular and in India in general, the
last few years have been absolutely path breaking when it
comes to how the large companies have helped shape the
world of startups. There is an increasing willingness to
engage more with startups for a variety of reasons, the least
being the innovations that the startups can bring, the kind
of nimbleness with which they can move ideas through the
path of evolution and the superior talent which most startups seem to attract today. Given this, we see an increased
level of willingness and interest from large MNCs to engage
with startups. So, we thought this would be an opportune
time for us to bring the representatives of large MNCs who
are engaging with startups actively, and get their perspectives about the benefits, problems, and challenges of the
engagement, which could be good inputs for both practitioners and researchers like us.
I invite Shameen to introduce the topic and explain the
format of the discussion.
Shameen Prashantham: As Professor Kumar mentioned,
a few years ago we did a round table from the point of view
of the startups. Skelta was one such startup that came out
of Bangalore and was among the first to try to make a switch
from software services to a software product. They tried to
develop intellectual property (IP) and formed a relationship
with Microsoft because they made a decision to build the
software product on proper Microsoft platform technology.
Back in 2006, Microsoft had no obvious way for a startup to
work with them in general and certainly not in India in particular where a local startup playing the IP game was virtually unheard of.
Another startup was called Mango. They were incubated
here at IIM Bangalore. They were also very IP focussed from
the start but were trying to develop something that would
help rural markets use handsets more efficiently while the
rest of the world was thinking of smart phones. They ended
up working closely with Qualcomm who found that they
were working on a similar endeavour for a couple of years
with much less success than this startup had in six months!
These were two of the four startups that were on our panel
back then.
Since then, large companies have also been going through
a journey where they are recognising the importance of
looking beyond their organisational boundaries for new ideas
and innovation. So, over these past few years, in addition to
looking at the “dancing with gorillas” from the point of view
of the startups, I have become interested in the dancing
gorillas themselves. I hope the big company representatives
here do not take offence, but what we were trying to say
with that metaphor was big companies can be attractive to
work with, but it also can be scary from the point of view of
the startups. Actually, big companies have their own challenges too dealing with startups, but more and more larger
companies are taking this seriously as opposed to when
Skelta was working with Microsoft and it happened almost
by accident. Microsoft has been a company that I have
tracked now for over a decade and been very impressed by
how they have been working very hard at improving the
startup engagement process.
Nevertheless, asymmetry between large companies and
startups in terms of power, structure and decision-making
speed remains a challenge, making it difficult to forge mutually beneficial connections. There is an interesting tension.
Startups and corporations are attracted to each other
because they are different and they represent different
skills. Working together is not easy because they are different. So, the attractiveness and the challenge would seem to
5 The Round Table panel discussion on “Engaging with startups: MNC
perspectives”, was held in January 2018 and was organised by IIMB
Management Review. This part of the article carries edited excerpts
of the presentations made at the panel discussion. The views
expressed by the panellists are personal and academic in nature and
not necessarily the views of their organisations. The presentations
of the panellists were made in an academic context in an academic
institution.
Engaging with startups: MNC perspectives 411
stem from a similar set of issues around their asymmetry. As I
continue researching this, I find that in emerging markets in
particular, this is magnified – both the opportunity because
some interesting technologies are coming out of emerging
markets that you don’t see in the advanced markets, and a
lot of the complications that are again even more intense. It
is appealing but complicated. Over time though it is not just
the Microsofts of the world who are engaging with startups.
In case of Microsoft, it was very obvious what they were getting out of this. They had the platform, the technology and
they would invite other digital software companies to build
on top of it and it is a joint revenue model. Every time a
product license of the software startup’s product is sold a
license of the underlying technology has to be sold. Over
these past six or seven years, a lot of other kinds of firms too
have been getting into this game, companies very different
from Microsoft, who are either in the hardware space or
actually not in IT. For example, Bayer and BMW are talking
very seriously to digital startups. This is a huge change and
represents a huge shift from the way these big companies
have been typically doing things. Furthermore, I was
recently able to get insight in Israel into how there is growing sophistication in terms of how these companies are coming together, including the role of specialist third parties.
I will conclude my opening remarks with three observations which I hope will resonate with the panellists. First,
developing a startup partnering capability takes time and
often involves trial and error learning. Everybody is figuring
this out. Microsoft in 2008 started Bizpark which was giving
away free software trying to get people on board startups to
work on their solution, and then developed Bizpark 1 where
they selected 100 startups worldwide from among the tens
of thousands to work with them very closely and do something meaningful. Then they created Microsoft Ventures
where they tried to bring under one umbrella some of these
different initiatives. Then they created the Microsoft accelerator programme in the last five years. Frankly, this took a
lot of time and is not as linear as presented here, with different entities within the company promoting different ideas
both in terms of their functions as well as their geographical
locations. The accelerator, for example, was driven by
Microsoft in Israel very differently from Microsoft Bizpark 1
which was driven by their Silicon Valley campus.
Second, startup partnering comes in different forms. The
corporate accelerator is one such form. When I went into
the Microsoft Accelerator in Beijing for the first time, there
were about 10 startups, and maybe on the desks of 7 of
them were large Apple Macintosh computers, in the Microsoft facility! The Director of the accelerator told me that
this would be the only place in Microsoft’s entire empire
where you would find this because they were trying to tell
startups, “We are interested in your success. We are going
to be technology agnostic, and we will obviously incentivise
you to use our technology, but we keep an open mind for different types of synergies.” Corporations are constantly
debating whether they should work with early stage startups
and get in there while the price is low or wait for them to be
mature because that is when there is sometimes a usable
solution.
My final observation is that developing startup partnering
capability calls for entrepreneurial behaviours. The BMW
Startup Garage logo and the interior decor of its of  fice in
Munich is rather different from the typical BMW template.
The manager leading this startup partnering initiative
believed it was important for him to act entrepreneurially
and challenge the status quo. This is the sort of mindset corporations need when partnering with startups. There are a
lot of exciting things happening, and there is room for
improvement, and companies have a lot of opportunity to
share from each other and learn from each other. We hope
that the panellists, the audience and all of us find some
cross-pollination and learnings from each other.
K. Kumar: We would like to introduce and welcome
today’s panellists – Mr. Jitendra Chaddah is the Senior Director, Operations and Strategy at Intel, India, with responsibility for multi-site complex R&D operations with a very large
employee pool; in addition, he has responsibility for investments and forming strategic alliances internally and with
external ecosystems, government, academia, media and
industry to maximise value creation for Intel from the India
centre. Mr. Chaddah’s leadership journey has contributed to
building large award winning global organisations and new
businesses. He has 22 years of industry experience of which
21 years have been with Intel. Mr. Chaddah is on the executive council of IESA, and on the governing council of NASSCOM IoT Centre of Excellence.
Next I welcome Mr. Laxman Soman from Bosch; he heads
the sales and business development team at Bosch Automotive Electronics India Private Limited. He has been with the
Bosch group for over 16 years. In his current responsibility,
Mr. Laxman is in pursuit of making a paradigm shift in conventional business models and engaging with startups and
new business domains.
We also welcome Mr Amit Kalra, Managing Director at
Swiss Re group, and head of Global Services at Bangalore for
Swiss Re Global Business Solutions India Private Limited.
Amit is the author of several studies published under Swiss
Re's Sigma publications on trends and emerging markets,
covering topics such as food security, micro insurance and
urbanisation. He also heads the global Swiss Re startup initiative – InsurTech accelerator which curates innovative
ideas and solutions in the reinsurance sector in collaboration
with startups.
We also have with us Mr Varadarajan Krishna, MD of
Induct Solutions which is a 100% subsidiary of Induct Software AS, Norway. Currently, he specialises in enterprise
innovation management and open innovation in verticals
such as healthcare, energy, automotive, aerospace and public systems. Mr. Krishna blogs on innovation and research and
is actively involved in the clean tech sector worldwide.
Jitendra Chaddah
Let me give you a little bit of a background about what
Intel does in India so that it sets up a context on why we are
engaging with the startup ecosystem. Intel India is a large
engineering organisation, with over 90% of our employees
based in Bangalore working in multiple business groups in
areas such as the server division, client services, IoT, wearables, and so on. Intel India is a microcosm of Intel with the
presence of all business groups here. In the last 20 years of
its inception, Intel India has grown to become a mature R&D
organisation in all aspects.
Innovation is the DNA of Intel; over the last 50 years, the
company has been relentlessly accelerating innovation and
technology. We engage with the ecosystem in India in
412 S. Prashantham, K. Kumar
multiple innovation-focussed programmes such as technology related labs for students (K-12), Atal Tinkering Labs, or
IoT labs in about 100 engineering colleges. In addition, Intel
India also supports many contests and similar activities
towards fostering innovation and entrepreneurship. With
the growing startup ecosystem in India, our challenge was to
find a meaningful way to connect with these startups.
As the tech startup ecosystem in India was developing
fast, we observed a couple of key trends: A lot of startup
enablement was happening in software and application
areas. Some of the leading software companies were helping
develop the ecosystem. Also, venture capital activities were
starting to pick up in that space.
We were engaged with some good startups in the hardware and systems space but we did not have a programme
that could develop a sustainable collaboration model with
these startups. The hardware startup ecosystem was at a
nascent stage and we felt there was an opportunity to support and grow this ecosystem.
For us the goal was to use our assets such as our engineering talent, business connects, and infrastructure to support
the hardware startup ecosystem. The second opportunity
was to develop the ecosystem by involving the government,
industry and academia.
In late 2015, we set up Intel India Maker Lab to realise our
goal of building a robust hardware incubation platform. This
platform provides infrastructure and space, access to equipment for testing, tools for designing, and mentoring by our
technologists. In the first year, we engaged with 18 startups
of which 8 to 9 have products in the market.
The learning and success from the first year of Intel India
Maker Lab gave us confidence to expand the programme by
actively collaborating with other accelerators, government
and industry players. In 2017, we launched a collaborative
hardware and systems incubation programme called Plugin
in collaboration with DST and IIT-Bombay. This is a collaborative effort where IIT Bombay trains these startups and connects them to many ecosystem players. Intel provides the
technology and technical mentoring support, and the government of India through DST provides the funding. The second batch of startups has now graduated and many of the
startups have products in the market.
Our learnings from these startup engagements: (1) In
addition to design wins and revenue opportunity, we also got
connections to new customers since these startups were
building unique solutions that cater to a new set of customers. (2) We saw a lot of excitement among our employees to
get an opportunity to work with the startups. It was mentoring from both sides. The startups bring in a lot of ecosystem
information or business acumen back to the employees,
while getting technical support from them. (3) The visibility
in the tech ecosystem which helps amplify our technology
leadership position.
Laxman Soman
I am from Bosch Automotive Electronics India Pvt. Ltd.,
part of the Bosch group in India. We are part of the 77 billion
Euro Bosch group with 10 legal entities, 18 manufacturing
plants and around 32,000 associates, at end of 2017. With
the largest Bosch development centre outside Germany,
Bosch in India fosters associations with startups. There is a
lot happening, especially in Bangalore, within the startup
community, which prompted us to engage with them quite
early. The other part I want to emphasise is the new
approach of getting out of “product only” based selling. We
believe it would be best to engage with startups who have a
different mindset, break conventional thinking and conceptualise new business models. The business group for mobility
is the largest within the Bosch group, and we have business
units ranging from powertrain systems, chassis control,
automotive steering, and automotive electronics, to name a
few. With such a wide spectrum of business units operating
out of India, we felt it apt to engage with like-minded startups. From the Automotive Electronics division, what we
could offer was expertise and experience in control units,
both for powertrain and for body electronics. We also have
electric mobility solutions in our portfolio. New areas that
we now engage with include IoT, consumer goods and home
automation. We have a host of electronic control units
(ECUs) and sensors that we can offer from our portfolio to
engage with these startups. This is just to put in perspective
what we can offer both from the automotive and non-automotive domains – the latter we call the multi-market
domain. This is where consumer electronics, connected solutions and light e-Mobility solutions come in. The Bosch India
startup engagement is known as the DNA programme – that
is for Discover, Nurture and Align. We have DNA 2.0 where
we get into the planning phase first, discuss with different
business units, understand where they would want to engage
with startups based on problem statements, try and accelerate the product development, and then support as the goto-market partners. We offer space for incubation, engagement with subject matter experts, and open up our sales
channels and marketing channels as well to these startups.
The nurture programme is where there is a four-month
engagement. There is mentoring which is done with subject
matter experts across the different legal entities, and during
this nurturing programme we also see if there is a good connect that we can establish with these startups and identify
the win–win for both Bosch and the startup. The alignment
process would mean that we sign contracts with them either
directly, or help the startups engage with other partners and
get to the market as early as possible.
When I visited IIMB last October I was asked, “Is somebody
looking at areas like light e-Mobility and so on?”. Today I am
happy to mention that we are engaging quite actively with a
startup that incubated at IIMB. There are two aspects here –
we are open to engaging with startups which are not yet in
the mature phase, as well as with startups who are already
there and want to establish themselves in the market. What
we can offer is a host of technology or access to it. We have
one of the best EMI and EMC labs and some of the best testing infrastructure in India. In the electric mobility programme for two wheelers for instance, we offer access to
the core competence centres headquartered in Shanghai.
We offer startups services and solutions to get their product
to a mature state. There is much more than automotive solutions that Bosch offers. Automotive is one part of it, but we
are now engaging with many startups in areas such as agriculture, healthcare, transportation and logistics to name a
few. This is where we want to make a change and actively
engage with like-minded startups.
Amit Kalra
Swiss Re is a 154-year-old reinsurance company; reinsurance is about insuring the risk of insurance companies.
Engaging with startups: MNC perspectives 413
Ninety percent of our business comes from reinsurance.
Then we are into B–B business, for life as well as non-life,
through our two different business units, Corporate Solutions and Life Capital. We make the world more resilient –
that is our purpose. As an employee, I feel very happy that
Swiss Re will be supporting people and businesses affected
by last year's severe natural disasters with estimated payouts of USD 4.7 billion. That is the value proposition of insurance and reinsurance – to help people and economies
recover from calamities and other setbacks.
Swiss Re Bangalore is the third largest office of the Swiss
Re Group, with 950+ employees here and we mirror the
entire value chain. Our build-up over 16 years has been such
that we started off with a business function, and now we
have the entire value chain component of Swiss Re located
out of Bangalore, right from underwriting and so on. Now we
are building up capabilities around technology and finance.
For us, it is a great opportunity to bring all the business functions together and drive innovation from here.
Our story in the startup engagement space started in
2015. At that point of time the entire Swiss Re global organisation was evolving, addressing issues such as how to innovate or engage with startups. While for underwriting and
risk management Swiss Re group has 150+ years of expertise,
when it comes to innovation, we are new. So, there was an
opportunity here. We are a risk management company and
how could we go ahead with embedding innovation technology? We thought that since we saw the entire value chain
from Bangalore, we had an advantage. Why not start up
something in Bangalore and bring it to the global organisation? We started with a global mindset that we would launch
a global programme from India. The objective was exploratory, to experiment and explore topics like IoT, which is
extremely relevant for insurance and reinsurance companies
across themes like health, automotive, and industrial IoT
because whatever risk we mitigate helps with the reduced
claim severity over a period of time.
Differentiation is an extremely difficult component.
When we started off on the exploratory journey, we did not
know what would happen. But in the first batch itself we
were successful because we could transform one of the disruptive ideas into an actual insurance product. We tied up
with Max Bupa and the startup GOQii, which was not an early
stage startup but an evolved startup. We told them they
were accelerating into insurance and that is where Swiss Re
with its global expertise could help. Swiss Re brought its
global expertise, GOQii brought its tech platform and Max
Bupa brought in the distribution product development platform. We came together and the product is with the IRDAI
regulator, and will be launched soon. Max Bupa was not even
a client of Swiss Re before this engagement. Something that
we originated from Bangalore, by engaging with the tech
ecosystem, and not just in India but the global tech ecosystem, provided global mentorship on the expertise, and then
transformed and conceptualised a product which could be
launched in the Indian market. We are already working on
some other pilots for Australia and so on. That was the entire
two-year journey for us through the accelerator, and in this
journey, we became the pioneers because we were the first
InsurTech accelerator in India. Swiss Re is the global accelerator, and now we are in the process of transforming the
accelerator into an open innovation platform.
Varadarajan Krishna
I will talk about the innovation community that we have
created. After the perspective from different corporates,
you are going to hear another viewpoint where the problem
statements of large corporations are connected and
matched with the solutions from the startups and researchers and others in the innovation ecosystem. The company I
work for is called Induct. We build innovation communities
worldwide, in different verticals like healthcare where we
are a world leader. We have also been building innovation
communities in education – for example we are connecting
universities to the problem statements from corporates and
startups. We have been working in public systems such as
governments and municipalities, and also for large standalone enterprises. If they want to build open innovation
communities, they can use our Innovation Management solution. We are also building innovation communities for
humanitarian causes.
100 Open Startups is a global network where large corporations and startups interact in the pursuit of high impact
innovations to the market and society. We work together
with those who know that the world is changing at an
increasingly fast pace and that continuous change is the new
rule. Professionals in every industry will do things differently
tomorrow than they do today. Having access, knowing and
monitoring startups in your area is a way to keep updated
and open to innovation in your industry. By joining this group
of executives, investors and specialists you will get access to
the most relevant startups. The results from the 2014–15
cycle inspired all participants to run for the next cycle during the year 2016–17. Considering all the learning from the
previous cycle and with much more visibility and partners,
the 100 Open Startups became a global movement. With
more than 650 large companies the programme received
3900 applications from startups from 13 different countries,
and with the help of a multitude of 5000 executives from 23
countries the startups received significant feedback and
evaluation. As a result, 680 startups found matches with 83
large companies, producing 2000 active negotiations that
has already generated a total of 700 contracts.
These metrics received recognition from the international entrepreneurship and innovation management academic community and became a case study for the Katz
School of Business, University of Pittsburgh, and it was
referred as a showcase for the 5th Effectuation Conference
at Darden Business School, University of Virginia. Now, leading startup and innovation organisations from different
countries have shown interest in deploying the 100 Open
Startups platform and methodology as a way to promote and
increase ecosystem efficiency in connecting established
industry and startups for innovation.
This is something which should be very interesting to all
of you in the entrepreneurship academia here because we
are presenting an open innovation and effectuation perspective which researchers can understand and leverage. This
programme evolved out of UC Berkley under Dr. Henry Chesbrough who created the practice of Open Innovation in the
year 2003, and did a lot of work on different aspects like
product innovation, business model innovation and so on.
This is also to do with experimental entrepreneurship. Just
as open innovation was a big challenge for the corporates,
the biggest challenge for startups is effectuation. This also
414 S. Prashantham, K. Kumar
has to do with lean startups, and so much related work that
has happened in the entrepreneurship community. We combined open innovation with effectuation resulting in the
global movement known as the 100 Open Startups.
The year 2015 is when corporates began to look at startups seriously. Professor Shameem spoke about dancing with
gorillas, we present a different perspective – the
innovator's dilemma. Imagine a scenario where an elephant
stands amidst a swarm of birds. The big elephant here is the
big company, his/her challenge is – Do I collaborate or can I
do it on my own? In our scenario, the swarm of birds are the
startups. We always cite fintech as an example because it is
being disrupted massively as we speak. The big company or
the elephant wants to get the business but the same is being
taken away by the swarm of birds, the startups.
We know that entrepreneurship is all about you building
something unique and innovative. But many entrepreneurs
think, “I build it, people will come”, whether it is business
or investors. This is one of the biggest myths. The second
myth is that of a self-made entrepreneur. Nothing like that
exists. You are learning all the time from other entrepreneurs to become successful. A successful entrepreneur
builds on the failures of many others.
Take the example of how a platform like Android was
developed. Android was first developed by Andy Rubin as an
operating system for cameras. It was then used to build into
an operating system for mobiles. Google acquired it, and so
this is an example of how a large entity acquired a startup
and made it into a huge platform. What we say in 100 Open
Startups is that those that know can be big, by collaborating
with the big ones. Number 2, we believe in innovation movements, innovation platforms and swarming of startups. This
combination of open innovation with effectuation led to the
creation of the 100 Open Startups programme. Fifteen thousand highly qualified startups are a part of our database that
anybody can engage with. It started out in 2007 as a programme and it has evolved into a massive movement, the
100 Open Startups movement. Big brands and startups can
co-create and create innovations that can have impact for
themselves as also for society. Corporates basically look at
many ways to engage; however, people don’t have time,
they need to go to one place, find all this consolidated, and
they would rather engage with that.
This is the heart of the 100 Open Startups programme:
The corporations define the Grand Challenges or Problem
Statements in 24 verticals and seek solutions from startups
and entrepreneurs. In the process, the startups are taken
through five levels and are graded leading to Top 100 ranking
in a particular country or region. The startups also source
contracts from global corporations and investments from
the investor community. Level 1 is where the idea is still not
validated; there are professors, experts, consultants and
successful entrepreneurs in Level 5 from previous cycles
who give a thumbs up in what is called positive voting, indicating the relevance of the solution against the challenge.
Once the startup receives four votes, it moves into Level 2.
The validation of the idea/solution happens here with people who have the knowledge of the market, namely the
executives of corporations and the startup begins to build
value. The startups selected here move to Level 3 which is
the pitch event where they meet with investors. Thus,
through Levels 1, 2 and 3, the startups engage with the most
important stakeholders in an innovation ecosystem. The
ones that clear this stage move to Level 4 which is our own
event called the Open Innovation Week or the OIWEEK. In
two months’ time we are celebrating the tenth anniversary
of the Open Innovation Week, where we are bringing 500
startups worldwide to work with 600 corporations, where
startups and corporations sign a contract.
There are 600 corporations right now that are fully
engaged in our programme, and we are continuing to engage
with more corporations. Levels 3 and 4 are live events. Levels 1 and 2 are virtual and online. How can you join the programme? From the perspective of the startup, there is an
application form that a startup has to fill out and it is very
detailed. Similarly, the executive at a corporation also fills
out a form and the inbuilt algorithm matches them. In many
events all around the world, there is a mismatch we see – an
expert in health care is asked to evaluate a startup in
energy, for example. Due to our entrepreneurship background and the experiences gained through multiple exits,
we built such a system where the match making is perfect.
We have been organising a number of events across India,
typically Level 3 events, where the startups are selected
from about 200 to 300 that apply. The process helps to bring
it down to 30 who make a pitch. From the 30 that pitch, 3 or
4 of the best are selected as winners that would qualify for
Level 4. Some of these winners at the last OIWEEK included
8 from India that came out of 750 startups that applied at
different Level 3 events in India. They travelled to Sao Paulo
last year and they were able to sign contracts. One such is
Minimac, a startup that is into re-use of motor oil. They won
the 10th position in that event. It is a great success for us. In
2016, there were 1157 active matches and 630 formalised
contracts. We work with almost everybody in the ecosystem.
We bring value for the corporations so that they don’t waste
time going to events. The benefit for the startups is the biggest. We bring access to large corporate resources not available in the VC world. “Why compete when you can
collaborate!” is the key message for both corporations and
startups in our movement.
Discussion
K. Kumar: Since all of you are multinational companies, is
what you explained today the way you engage with startups
in the Bangalore ecosystem, or, within your organisations,
are you running similar initiatives in other locations? And if
so, how different or similar are those engagements compared to what you are doing here?
Laxman Soman: Within Bosch, we want to bring in this
kind of entrepreneurship spirit. There are programmes for
the Associates to start working as startups, and there are
accelerator programmes which are sponsored by our principals in Germany. Incidentally, two of my team members are
in Germany this week. One of the ideas which was created
at our end in Naganathapuram, was selected by our accelerator team, and now they will mentor it to see how this could
be taken forward. We will also take some learnings from this
to see how we can engage the startup community on a similar platform. The accelerator programme is an internal
learning, and we want to extend this to startup communities
within RBAI automotive electronics, as well as startups that
have been identified by the DNA programme of Bosch.
Engaging with startups: MNC perspectives 415
Jitendra Chaddah: Each geography or country would
have innovation-led programmes catering to their needs and
capabilities. In the US, we recently had America’s Greatest
Makers programme which is like American Idol. In Intel India,
we have programmes such as Ideas to Reality, which enable
employees to come out with an idea and develop that into a
product or a solution. Moreover, the differentiating thing
about the Intel India Maker lab programme is that we are
connecting our employees to the startups, which we can
only do in the countries where we have design centres. The
other uniqueness is our collaboration with the government
(DST) and academia (IIT-Bombay) towards developing the
hardware and design startup ecosystem.
Amit Kalra: In 2015, when we started off our accelerator
within our global group, our strategy was “let a thousand
flowers bloom”, to trigger innovation in various specific markets and different functions. Then, over a period of time as a
group we evolved our strategy. We now have a tech strategy
which is much more broad-based and holistic. For instance:
Engaging with startups is good but how should we engage
with startups? Should we engage directly with the startup or
should we go through the venture capitalist route? Should we
limit ourselves to startups or should we also engage with large
organisations? At the end of the day what we are trying to do
is drive value. We want to innovate to drive value, and we do
not want to keep innovation as a separate arm from the business. Our aspiration is to bring innovation and integrate it
into the business, and that is where our new tech strategy is
giving us a broad direction. When it comes to the accelerator,
we continue that from Bangalore but it is called innovalue
exchange, which will not just touch upon startups and the
external ecosystem, but could also include mid-sized and
large-sized organisations. By also encouraging entrepreneurs,
we have close to a thousand people. There is lots of expertise, so how do we bring them together to create a different
value proposition? We organised a couple of global hackathons
last year where the winning team was from Bangalore. We are
now conceptualising an insurance product which will have
application in the Brazil and India markets. That is the level
of innovation that we are looking at for which technology will
act as an enabler. We also have some global initiatives such as
on blockchains. Swiss Re was a pioneer in formulating the B3I
initiative in the insurance sector, where Swiss Re and its competitors came together because of technology and innovation
to co-curate that ecosystem, plus multiple insurance companies across America, Europe and Asia also came together.
Now in the B3I consortium, we have 30 plus companies and
the number keeps increasing every six months. We are looking
at more large-scale holistic innovation driven initiatives and
Bangalore will continue to drive that value through the local
ecosystem as well.
Audience Q1: I am one of the incubators here in IIMB.
Frequently I hear a typical question from many of the founders that they face a lot of stonewalling when they approach
MNCs with their ideas. For example, they do not know whom
to approach, and if they physically go to the company, they
are blocked by the security outside. Is there any methodology being put across to these MNCs now that they are interested in decentralising the innovation and aligning with the
startups, for the startups to engage with them?
Shameen Prashantham: I think that is an experience that
many startups have. But over the last decade, and certainly
over the last five years, it is now much easier to have the
first point of contact because now you actually have people
who have startup in their job title – Director of Startup Ecosystem. The situation is a little bit better. From the startups’
point of view, doing their homework and research is very
critical. But having that first conversation has become a little bit easier. So, if you are having difficulty even finding
that, probably what you need to do is try to find mentors
who have that sort of expertise because you have specialist
third parties who link startups with corporations. The problem that still exists though is that a startup can end up
spending a lot of time and effort dialoguing with the corporation and having nothing to show for it after six months.
From the startups’ point of view that is like bleeding an
important resource. Here, very early on when those initial
dialogues are taking place, it is important for the startup to
be able to align itself very clearly with some priority of the
corporation.
Laxman Soman: To break this barrier Bosch last year
organised an IoT conclave in New Delhi. This was something
new that we did. Typically, we hinge on to some agency to
promote this, but this time it was to go all out and try to tell
the world what exactly we are doing specifically on IoT and a
host of startups were invited. It was an eye opener for these
startups that Bosch is open to engaging with them and the
different ideas that they are working on. We are also
actively promoting hackathons. In the last couple of years
we organised three hackathons where we invited around 800
startups, and where we not only tried to bring in the best
talent to start working together, but also advertised that we
are open to engaging in a more engaging manner with our
facilities and with our products.
Audience Q2: You talked about the asymmetry that
exists between the large corporates and the startups in
terms of structure, power, decision making and so on. That
is natural in the sense that they come from different backgrounds. I believe there is an asymmetry in the recognition
of the capabilities of what one is bringing to the table. For
example, what a startup is bringing to the table is its ability
to run the first mile very fast, with very rapid ideas. What
the large corporates are bringing to the table is the ability
to run the last mile with all the resources, scaling up and all
of that. But if you look at the general commentary in this
forum, there is a slight flavour that the large corporates are
doing a favour. There are resources, there are grants and all
of that but an equal recognition on an equal partnership
footing is not seen. There is a lot that the corporates are
also gaining from the startups, whether it is the energy and
the enthusiasm that they bring to the table, or the business
that they will be able to generate given the idea that they
will plug it in as a part of their building blocks or a pin point
solution and so on. Does your research show up any pointers
towards that? Is it a partnership of equals?
Shameen Prashantham: That is a great question. My
sense has been very much that what you are saying is absolutely correct in that corporations get a lot out of their relationships. There has been a big change: while in the
beginning it was all very ad hoc, now the dancing gorillas are
taking this seriously and trying to do it systematically. Big
companies are increasingly realising that they compete with
each other for the best startups. Therefore, they are trying
to build a reputation for being a good startup partner. I think
416 S. Prashantham, K. Kumar
there are risks on both sides. From the startups’ point of
view, they are worried about what in literature we call the
benevolence trust. But the corporation is concerned about
competence trust. When you find a good match between
these two, there is mutual respect on both sides.
K. Kumar: We have had a productive and interesting discussion. I am extremely thankful to all the panellists for
being here today.
Contribution and conclusion
Our primary contribution through this round table has been
to shed light on contemporary partnering practices that
MNCs have put in place to facilitate their ability to partner
with innovative startups. These examples make it clear that
opportunities to introduce such efforts into the Indian – and
specifically Bangalore – ecosystem are substantial. These
insights into current cutting-edge practice have valuable
normative lessons for practitioners, and also raise interesting questions.
First, it may be interesting for future research to unpack
the differential outcomes of different partnering
approaches. In the round table discussion, it could be seen
that the drivers and adopted approaches in the programmatic initiatives of the MNCs featured in the round table varied considerably. Intel’s initiative was aligned with its core
competence of hardware design, Bosch’s initiative was
aimed at solving specific problem statements, while Swiss
Re had a more open and exploratory approach broadly within
the fintech and insurance space. For instance, would a more
exploratory approach like Swiss Re’s be more productive in
pre-empting disruptive innovations/business models? Would
a more systematic problem statement driven approach of
Bosch be less successful in pre-empting disruptive developments and more suitable to shoring up competitiveness
within the current business landscape? Would Intel’s model
of leveraging core competence be a source of competitive
advantage in becoming an ecosystem of choice for local
startups? Second, the rise of third-party specialists raises
another question for MNCs: How do they decide the balance
between their own programmatic initiatives and using third
party specialists? Third, how are these initiatives organised?
Are they part of the organisation’s regular R&D/new business development efforts or are they organised separately?
How much of top management attention do these initiatives
receive? These factors may be critical in determining the
sustainability and success of these initiatives.6
It would also be valuable to examine the evolution of
MNCs’ startup partnering practices as they seek to learn
from past experiences and refine their approaches. Also, it
would be intriguing to understand better how these corporations balance – and possibly even synergise – their efforts at
partnering with external startups with those focussed on fostering internal entrepreneurs (sometimes referred to as
intrapreneurship). In similar vein, another issue of importance concerns how they balance and synergise their initiatives for equity and non-equity engagements with external
startups. Furthermore, given the global reach of MNCs, it
would be interesting to examine how startup initiatives
developed locally by an MNC subsidiary (e.g. Intel India) fit
into that company’s global strategy for startup partnering,
with the prospect in some cases of informing or inspiring
what headquarters does. Such research would be both of
theoretical interest and provide valuable guidance to managers and entrepreneurs. As such, corporation-startup partnering continues to represent a fascinating topic of study at
the intersection of entrepreneurship, international business
and strategy.
References
Adner, R. (2013). The wide lens: What successful innovators see that
others miss. Penguin.
Alvarez, S.A., & Barney, J.B. (2001). How entrepreneurial firms can
benefit from alliances with large partners. The Academy of Management Executive 15 (1), 139–148.
Buckley, P.J., & Prashantham, S. (2016). Global interfirm networks:
The division of entrepreneurial labor between MNEs and SMEs.
The Academy of Management Perspectives 30 (1), 40–58.
Diestre, L., & Rajagopalan, N. (2012). Are all ‘sharks’ dangerous?
New biotechnology ventures and partner selection in R&D alliances. Strategic Management Journal 33 (10), 1115–1134.
Gawer, A., & Cusumano, M.A. (2014). Industry platforms and ecosystem innovation. Journal of Product Innovation Management 31
(3), 417–433.
Inc42. (2017). After Y combinator, Now Techstars looks to tap into
Indian startup ecosystem, announces launch. Retrieved 3/5,
2018.
Katila, R., Rosenberger, J.D., & Eisenhardt, K.M. (2008). Swimming
with sharks: Technology ventures, defense mechanisms and corporate relationships. Administrative Science Quarterly 53 (2),
295–332.
Krishnan, R.T., & Prashantham, S. (2019). Innovation in and from
India. Global Strategy Journal 9 (3), 357–377.
Monteiro, F., & Birkinshaw, J. (2017). The external knowledge sourcing process in multinational corporations. Strategic Management
Journal 38 (2), 342–362.
Prashantham, S. (2015). Born globals, networks, and the large multinational enterprise: Insights from Bangalore and beyond. Routledge, London.
Prashantham, S. (2017). Lessons from Bayer & BMW on partnering
with startups. The Economist. http://viewswire.eiu.com/index.
asp?layout=ebArticleVW3&article_id=1405361324&channel_id
=&category_id=&refm=ebHome&page_title=Latest++manage
ment+thinking.
Prashantham, S., & Birkinshaw, J. (2008). Dancing with gorillas: How
small companies can partner effectively with MNCs. California
Management Review 51 (1), 6–23.
Prashantham, S., & Kumar, K. (2011). How do new ventures in MNC
ecosystems proactively overcome interfirm asymmetries. IIMB
Management Review 23 (3), 177–188.
Prashantham, S., & Yip, G.S. (2017a). Engaging with startups in
emerging markets. MIT Sloan Management Review 58 (2), 51.
Prashantham, S., & Yip, G.S. (2017b). Microsoft starts up, 86. Strategy + Business.
Vandaie, R., & Zaheer, A. (2014). Surviving bear hugs: Firm capability, large partner alliances, and growth. Strategic Management
Journal 35 (4), 566–577.
Weiblen, T., & Chesbrough, H.W. (2015). Engaging with startups to
enhance corporate innovation. California Management Review
57 (2), 66–90.
6 We thank an anonymous reviewer for helping us articulate these
interesting questions.
Engaging with startups: MNC perspectives 417