Environmental and Sustainability Indicators 11 (2021) 100127
Available online 3 June 2021
2665-9727/© 2021 Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Harnessing artificial intelligence and big data for SDGs and prosperous
urban future in South Asia
Md. Arfanuzzaman
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, House # 37, Road #08, Dhanmondi R/A, Dhaka-1205, Bangladesh
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Artificial intelligence
Big data
Climate resilience
Data infrastructure
South Asia
SDG
Technological readiness
Urban transformation
ABSTRACT
Artificial intelligence (AI) and big data solutions are currently being utilized to offer low cost and efficient solutions in solving pressing urban socio-economic and environmental problems globally. The study found big data
and AI have the potentiality to solve the common urban problems in South Asia and upsurge the efficiency of
urban industries, increase competitiveness and productivity of the human and natural resources, reduce the cost
of urban service delivery, and build climate resilience. The study has assessed the current AI and big data initiatives and technologies in mitigating the urban development challenges and their potentiality for scaling up in
South Asian cities. The study also examined the latest innovations in AI and big data solutions for SDG monitoring and implementation in South Asia and their implication for transformational change. The study suggested
that South Asia can harness the maximum benefit of AI and big data technologies by building big data and
associated IT infrastructure, advancing research and innovations with regional cooperation, enhancing technological readiness, and eliminating week enabling conditions.
1. Introduction
As a heart of the development activities cities are currently producing 80% of the global GDP, and emit 75% of energy-related greenhouse gas where 70% of city residents live with limited access to at least
one fundamental service such as housing, water or electricity (WRI,
2020). It is projected that by 2050, 70% of the world’s population is
likely to live in the urban areas (UN, 2018a). It is also anticipated that by
that time, 90 percent of population growth, 80 percent of the increase in
wealth and approximately 60 percent of energy consumption will be fall
in the urban areas of the globe which will leave sustainability, environmental protection and natural resource management challenges in
the developing countries and emerging economies across the world (UN,
2018b). Though evidence suggests that South Asia is among the rapidly
rising regions in the world with robust economic growth, falling poverty
rates, and progressed human development indicators, 40% of the
world’s poor (399 million people) in the region are still breathing under
$1.25 per day, living in hardcore poverty (Twining-Ward et al., 2020).
Climate change-induced disasters such as flood, drought, coastal erosion
affected nearly 1.7 billion people and caused $127 billion damage from
1990 to 2017 in South Asia and approximately 800 million people in this
region are at risk of deteriorating incomes due to climate stress (Mani
et al., 2018). In addition, due to change in weather, living standards of
more than 80 percent of the overall population could be adversely
affected by 2050 (Mani et al., 2018).
The urbanization in South Asia is considered as an engine of economic growth that supports rapid industrialization, SMEs, employment,
migration, assorted socio-economic activities, and built up. The urbanization is increasing at an unprecedented speed and through enormous
social and environmental challenges, such as social vulnerability,
inequality, pollution, environmental degradation, food-water-energy
insecurity for growing population, decreased quality of life (Ellis and
Roberts, 2016). Urban environmental degradation, pollution, poverty,
high population growth, inequality, poor water and sanitation system,
deforestation, inappropriate land use, natural disaster, urban heat island
effect are the common challenges of South Asian cities (Arfanuzzaman
and Dahiya, 2019; Ellis and Roberts, 2016; Jacobs et al., 2019). In
addition, South Asia is found to be one of the least economically integrated territories in the world where regional trade accounts only 5% of
the overall trade (Kathuria, 2018). Due to high population pressure and
built up, most of the South Asian cities are debasing their tree covers,
open spaces, water sources, and clean air which significantly demean the
quality of life of the dwellers. Artificial intelligence (AI) and sustainable
big data innovation can provide low cost and efficient solutions in
solving pressing urban environmental problems i.e resource conservation, sustainable consumption and production, energy efficiency,
E-mail addresses: thisisarfan@gmail.com, md.uzzaman@fao.org.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Environmental and Sustainability Indicators
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/environmental-and-sustainability-indicators
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indic.2021.100127
Received 7 November 2020; Received in revised form 26 April 2021; Accepted 28 May 2021 
Environmental and Sustainability Indicators 11 (2021) 100127
2
ecosystems monitoring, environmental protection, and natural resource
management in South Asia (Dubey et al., 2017; Graham and Shelton,
2013; Dumbill, 2013). Besides, digital advances through AI and big data
solution can help South Asian cities to upsurge the efficiency of its
traditional industries, increase long-term competitiveness and productivity of the human and natural resources, build climate resilience,
create decent job opportunities for the young population while helping it
to develop newer cutting-edge technologies (Sun and Du, 2017; Keeso,
2014; Mayer-Schonberger ¨ and Cukier, 2013).
The 3rd Industrial Revolution (I3) ushered in the digital age, marked
most distinctively perhaps by the proliferation of internet (subsequently,
the internet of things-IOT), and the extensive utilization of information
technology to mechanize the production. Currently, the world is at the
edge of another momentum: a 4th Industrial Revolution (I4), an orderly
transformation that is discrete in its velocity, opportunity, and systems
impact, categorized by scientific and technological breakthroughs that
are disturbing industries and blurring terrestrial borders. It is now
widely accepted that the major driving force of the I4 Revolution is
Artificial Intelligence (AI) or software engine supported by the big data
revolution. Hence, it is very high time for South Asia to harness artificial
intelligence and big data for urban planning and monitoring, environmental management, smart cities, precision agriculture and food production, socio-economic advancement, effective law and enforcement,
urban sustainability, and carry out necessary investment on AI and big
data innovation and associated capacity building. The overarching goal
of this study is to review and assess the existing AI and big data technologies adopted in different parts of the world and evaluate their potentiality for scaling up in South Asian region. The study further
examined the potentiality of big data and AI for tracking and monitoring
the progress of urban related SDGs in South Asia. This contains immense
importance where the region has relatively less capacity in effectively
tracking and monitoring the SDG indicators. As technological readiness
is considered as one of the major perquisites of AI and big data innovation and execution, the study evaluated the technological readiness
indicators of the South Asian counties and provided evidence based
suggestions for advancing of AI and big data solutions for prosperous
urban future. The section 2 of the study systematically assessed the best
practice AI and big data solutions and their potentiality for scaling up in
South Asian region. The section 3 concentrated on the potentiality of big
data and AI solution for urban related SDGs in South Asia and provided
the real example for tracking the monitoring the advancement of SDG
indicators. Finally, the section 4 scrutinized the technological readiness
indicator in South Asia to better understand the overall readiness of this
region in adopting AI and big data technologies in effective manner. The
conclusion section of this study provided evidence based recommendation to advance the big data and AI-based sustainable development
and inclusive growth in South Asian cities.
2. Current progress on AI and big data and their potentiality for
scaling up
The world has made some remarkable progress on big data and AI
technology in urban and regional development, environmental monitoring, industrial efficiency, early warning, and disaster preparedness,
natural resource management and agriculture and food system. Nowadays, sensors for monitoring water quality variables (i.e. pH, dissolved
oxygen, electrical conductivity, and turbidity), tracking crop and soil
health and AI for predicting irrigation water requirement are commercially available (Illangasekare et al., 2018; Ellis and Roberts, 2016; Fu
et al., 2016; Bandara et al., 2010). Satellite data can help to track urban
green space, wetlands, and forests available across the country (Bibri,
2019a; UN 2015a; Prandi et al., 2021). South Asian cities can adopt and
upscale such solutions/approaches in addressing their own urban
socio-economic and environmental challenges. Table 1 presented a
concrete assessment of best practice AI and big data solutions with their
methodology, benefits, and potentiality for scaling up in South Asian
cities. It appears that some organizations including the United Nations
(UN), Microsoft, World Resources Institute (WRI), and National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) already invented, tested,
executed and promoted some solutions to tackle a number of pressing
urban and environmental issues of the world which has a large potential
for scaling up in South Asian cities.
It is evident in Table 1 that most of the AI and big data technologies
have robust potentiality for scaling up in South Asian region with a view
to eliminating crucial problems like environmental degradation, land
use change, pollution, extreme weather events, and agriculture and food
insecurity. However, some of the technologies have medium potentiality
in solving the problems such as humanitarian crises, urban heat effects,
inadequate early warning systems, limited disaster preparedness, and
deforestation, more testing and development is required before scaling
up. In addition, in the absence of integrated, cross-sectoral, inclusive and
whole-of-government approach, big data innovation and urban governance will be hampered. It deserves special mention that data-driven
smart urbanism, urban innovation, big data solutions and computing,
and underpinning technologies create a number of potential privacy
harms for several reasons such as i) Datafication, dataveillance and
geosurveillance; ii) inferencing and predictive privacy harms; iii) anonymization and re-identification; iv) obfuscation and reduced control;
and v) notice and consent is an empty exercise or is absent which require
serious attention (Kitchin, 2016; Bibri, 2019c).
During scaling up of big data solutions it is to be ensured that digital
technologies does not deepen inequality, digital insecurity and opportunities and challenges of such technologies are largely responded at
regional, national and local level.
3. Prospects of AI and big data for SDG monitoring and
implementation
Big Data gathers data every second. Currently available technologies
make it possible not just to obtain huge datasets, but also enables for
variety. The exercise in capturing and storing the big data and adoption
of AI have an impact on people’s wellbeing, global prosperity as well as
attainment of SDGs (UN, 2015a; UN, 2015b). AI and big data solution
can support to monitor people’s wellbeing, efficient use of urban forest,
water body, and land, healthcare administration and planning (i.e.
disease outbreak management and monitoring), contribute to the transition towards zero-emission future, reduce urban environmental
degradation, promote equity, and ensure aim for public benefits via
open data (Estoque, 2020; Bibri, 2019b; Pan et al., 2016; Kudva and Ye,
2017). AI and big data can shed light on discrepancies in society and
urban development in South Asia that were previously unrevealed and
urban policy-makers are faced with distinct opportunities to develop,
test, and advance big data practices related to sustainable development.
For instance, policymakers and law enforcement agencies can take immediate action against the encroachment based on the satellite
image-based encroachment tracking on public land and spaces in the
urban areas. Although AI is in its initial phases of execution, it is poised
to transform the way we manage and monitor urban issues. At the same
time, AI is also restricting the industry’s ecological impact at a time
when demand is progressively increasing, our goods production portfolio is diversifying, and we are observing the implications of fossil fuel
consumption on biodiversity, air quality, and quality of life (Saheb and
Saheb, 2020; Dubey et al., 2017; Saheb and Izadi, 2019). AI is improving
the state of agriculture in both the developing and developed countries
who currently have a head start. In the context of the SDGs, big data can
be applied to explore everything from analyzing large volume of data
collected by mobile phones, websites, apps, sensors, and satellites to
predict individual poverty, inequality, social welfare, to understand
gender gaps in urban mobility etc. Fig. 1 demonstrates how AI and big
data can be utilized in SDG tracking and monitoring which gives a useful
lesson to the South Asian cities to learn and adopt the modern technologies for prosperous urban future as well as accelerate urban
Md. Arfanuzzaman 
Environmental and Sustainability Indicators 11 (2021) 100127
3
Table 1
Best practice AI and big data solution and their potentiality for scaling up.
Initiative/approach Developer/
Responsible
organization
Solution/benefit Technology/method used Potential
for scaling
up*
Pulse Lab Jakarta (https://www.unglobalpulse.org/) UN Global Pulse,
United Nations
i. Identification of Potential
Positive Deviants (PDs) across
rice producing areas in
Indonesia to capture the ecofriendly and high productive
agricultural practices.
Merging traditional statistical
data with Earth Observation big
data
High
MIND (Managing Information for Natural Disasters)
(https://www.unglobalpulse.org/microsite/mind/)
Pulse Lab Jakarta i. Support effective logistics
planning and information
management following natural
disasters.
ii. Stakeholders can get useful,
accurate, and up to date data to
carry out humanitarian
assistance right after the
disaster.
The platform is built on an
automated data pipeline,
allowing it to stream and analyze
several non-traditional data sets
all in one place.
Medium
Improved early warning systems for natural hazards monitoring
(https://opengeospatialdata.springeropen.com/articles/10
.1186/s40965-016-0010-3)
Ministry of
Environment and
Natural Resources of
El Salvador
i. Establish warning and
management systems for
natural hazards in El Salvador.
ii. Disseminate hazard and early
warning information to people
in real-time through Mobile
applications
Using various spatial data (i.e.
census data, agro-meteorological
data, telemetry data, satellite
imagery data), they produce an
integrated and widespread
system and a big database to
manage and communicate
information on the extreme
weather events.
Medium
The Central Africa Regional Program for the Environment (htt
ps://carpe.umd.edu/)
USAID i. Prediction of future
deforestation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (DRC).
It followed the spatial modeling
approach to identify the most
important drivers of forest loss
and predict the likely location of
future forest loss in DRC.
Medium
Aqueduct (https://www.wri.org/aqueduct) World Resources
Institute (WRI)
i. Map and analyze present and
future water risks across regions
and understand and identify
associated water risks to
agriculture and food security;
and ii. Identify coastal and
riverine flood risks, and analyze
the costs and benefits of
investing in flood protection.
It’s a comprised of tools which
integrates higher temporal and
spatial resolution data,
indicators, and a holistic
hydrological model.
High
VADER (Visualization and Analytics of Distribution Systems with
Deep Penetration of Distributed Energy Resources)
(https://www.energy.gov/eere/solar/project-profile-visual
ization-and-analytics-distribution-systems-deep-penetration)
U.S. Department of
Energy’s Office of
Energy Efficiency
and Renewable
Energy
i. VADER models electricity
consumption and behavior of
distributed energy resources
such as rooftop or groundmount solar.
ii. It enables real-time optimization and automation of distribution planning and operation
decision for utilities.
Based on machine learning and
AI-based algorithms; it can model
potential changes in connectivity
and the behavior of Distributed
Energy Resources on the grid.
Medium
Big Data for Social Good (https://www.gsma.com/betterfuture
/aiforimpact)
GSM Association i. It pulls cellular operators’ big
data proficiencies to address
humanitarian crises, including
epidemics and natural disasters.
Utilization of mobile operators’
data
Medium
Digitization of healthcare (https://journalofbigdata.
springeropen.
com/articles/10.1186/s40537-019-0217-0#Sec39)
Dash et al. (2019) i. Cost-effective and efficient
disease treatment
ii. Early warnings of disease
conditions
iii. Discovery of novel biomarkers
and intelligent therapeutic
intervention strategies
Integration of bioinformatics,
health informatics and analytics
to provide personalized and more
effective treatment and
projection of epidemics
Medium
All of Us initiative (https://allofus.nih.gov/) National Institutes
of Health
i. Quickly assess patients medical
history
ii. Reduce errors in medication
dose and frequency
iii. Provide appropriate treatment
in a shortest time
Provide effective solution by
collecting and analyzing medical
imaging, socio-behavioral, and
environmental data
Medium
IoT in healthcare (https://academic.oup.com/bib/artic
le/18/1/105/2453255)
Shameer et al.
(2017)
i. Predict patients’ health
situation and his/her
progression from subclinical to
pathological state
ii. Modelling the spread of a
disease
Health-tracking wearable
devices, biosensors, clinical
devices collect patients’ health
data in every second and monitor
their health status
High
Predictive road crash maps (https://www.wired.com/story/waze
-data-help-predict-car-crashes-cut-response-time/;
Advanced big data and predictive
analytics systems can collect
Medium
(continued on next page)
Md. Arfanuzzaman 
Environmental and Sustainability Indicators 11 (2021) 100127
4
transformation. While the advent of urban big data and AI have the
potential to foster SDG targets and indicators, studies suggested urban
policy-makers to pinpoint the application of these innovations through
the development of mayoral institutions for urban big data governance,
progressing culture and common skill sets, strengthening capacity,
enabling environment, and dedicated research and learning programs
(Krishnamurthy et al., 2017; Kharrazi et al., 2016; Fluckiger and Seth,
2016).
4. The readiness of South Asia in adopting AI and big data
technology
Robust data infrastructure and technological readiness of South Asia
are the major prerequisites of AI and big data solution against pressing
urban issues. The readiness and the level of advantage depend on how
much a country is performing in the technological readiness indicator
(TRI) produced by the World Economic Forum (WEF). Table 2 presents
the TRI trend of South Asian countries from 2008 to 2017.
It appears that in 2017, Bangladesh and Nepal are performing very
well in the TRI compared to their neighbors signifying a better position
in adopting AI and big data solutions in addressing urban issues.
Whereas, as TRI is found to be least in Bhutan and Sri Lanka, they are in
a worse off situation in harnessing the advantage of AI and big data.
Though Bangladesh and Nepal are holding relatively higher TRI score in
South Asia in 2017, their TRI score has reduced by 4.76% and 8.5%
respectively than in 2008. While Bhutan is receiving TRI since 2014, its
performance is found to be unchanged. Though the TRI score of India
and Sri Lanka is not much high in 2017, they have made 55% and
29.27% progress compared to 2008. Though Pakistan has made 11%
progress in its TRI in 2017 than 2008, its score was better in 2011 and
2014. The current situation suggests that there is enough room for South
Asian countries to advance the data infrastructure and technological
readiness to seize the optimum benefits of AI and big data.
5. Conclusion and recommendation
By sheer weight of numbers, big data and the analytical tools applied
in its processing can process and analyze enormous past data than ever
before. The world today faces the multifaceted challenges of unsustainable urbanization can be mitigated to large extend by the AI and big
data solutions. It is evident in the study that AI and big data have the
great potential to mobilize integrated and scalable approaches and have
Table 1 (continued )
Initiative/approach Developer/
Responsible
organization
Solution/benefit Technology/method used Potential
for scaling
up*
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0
968090X17303315?via%3Dihub)
University of
California; Baso
et al. (2018)
i. Create predictive road crash
maps to pinpoint the high-risk
areas
ii. Alert warnings to the drivers to
be extra careful in the
identified risky areas
iii. Authorities can take immediate
measures to ensure road safety
in the risky areas
extensive data on car accidents
and identify the map of risky area
to car accident
Mapping urban surfaces and cooling our cities (https://globalcoo
lcities.org/key-initiatives/)
WRI and Global
Cool Cities Alliance
i. Detect urban surface changes to
diminish urban heat effects by
heat mitigation strategies
ii. Quantify the reflectivity of roof
and street and tree canopy
Integration on AI and remote
sensing
Medium
PulseSatellite (https://www.unglobalpulse.org/microsite/pulses
atellite/)
UN Global Pulse i. Identify and count structures in
refugee settlements
ii. Infer the size and proximity of
roofs for slum mapping
iii. Generate real-time maps of
flooded areas for damage
assessment
Analyze satellite imagery assisted
by neural networks that seeks to
incorporate humans-in-the-loop
at different stages in the model
inference process to enable
optimal results and expert
validation
Medium
Azure FarmBeats (https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/i
ndustry/agriculture/overview-azure-farmbeats)
Microsoft
Corporation
i. Assess farm health using
vegetation and water index
based on satellite imagery
ii. Track farm conditions by
visualizing ground data
collected by sensors from
different vendors
iii. Generate soil moisture map
and farm health advisories
Aggregation of agriculture
datasets across providers, and
generation of actionable insights
by building AI models by fusing
the datasets
High
NOAA Global Hydro Estimator (https://registry.opendata.aws/
noaa-ghe/)
Microsoft
Corporation/NOAA
i. Provide global rainfall estimates
in 15-min intervals at ~4 km
resolution which can be used for
urban hydrological planning,
monitoring, and build resilience
at global, regional, and national
levels.
Estimates are derived from
satellite imagery and data from
NOAA’s Global Forecast System
High
NOAA’s environmental big data (https://www.noaa.gov/org
anization/information-technology/big-data-program)
NOAA i. NOAA’s huge collection of
environmental big data can be
accessible at no cost from
Amazon Web Services (AWS),
Google Cloud, and Microsoft and
used for urban environmental
protection, ecosystem
monitoring, and restoration
NOAA generates tens of terabytes
of data each day from satellites,
radars, ships, weather models,
and other sources
High
Note*: High: Intervention is proved to have a positive result and accepted widely; Medium: Intervention is successfully piloted, generated positive outcome and require
further fine-tuning; and Low: Intervention is proved useful and require substantial testing and validation at different scales.
Md. Arfanuzzaman 
Environmental and Sustainability Indicators 11 (2021) 100127
5
a significant positive impact on urban socio-economic and environmental system, SDGs, well-being of population, climate resilience, inclusive development, increase in food production, and better social
cohesion through cooperation between the various actors in South Asia
as well as other regions of the world. Appropriate use of AI and big data
technologies can contribute to improving the performance of urban
socio-economic and environmental system, smarter exploitation of
natural resources, better inclusion of the various and particularly the
most vulnerable, and improved access to public services.
Scientists and governments of South Asian countries can work
together more efficiently in the future, not just to react to the urban
socio-economic and environmental problems of today, but work with
superior foresight today to make strong decisions for tomorrow. With
28% of the South Asian population younger than 15, the millions of
young people who today are growing more and more tech-savvy become
the consumers, entrepreneurs, and technicians of tomorrow and
advance the AI and big data revolution for prosperous South Asia. The
volume of data is increasing swiftly across the world. Studies found 90%
of the data in the world has been generated in the last two years, and it is
anticipated to increase by 40% cent annually. A large share of this
collected data deriving from everyday interactions with digital goods or
services, including mobile phones, credit cards, internet, and social
media. Hence, the necessity of utilizing big data and AI is increasing for
human development in South Asia. As South Asia is far behind the
developed economies it should take the prompt initiative to harness the
maximum benefit of big data and AI technologies to advance the SDG
attainment as well as well being of its population. Considering the poor
socio-economic condition, low TRI, and unsustainable urbanization, the
study suggests the following recommendation to advance the big data
and AI-based development in South Asian cities.
I. As AI leverages structured data, for instance, machine sensor
data, and unstructured data such as manuals, maintenance records, weather data, financial transaction, consumption, and
market/industry data to perform data processing and cuttingedge decision making without human intervention, reliable
data infrastructure is necessary to build at country level;
II. Research and innovation need to be promoted in the south Asian
countries to foster the development of big data solution and AI
products, startups, etc.;
III. Much of the big data related to public good is captured by the
private sector in South Asia. Hence, robust public-private partnerships are crucial to seizing the advantage of big data and AI
technologies;
IV. There is a broad range of actions needed, including building the
capacities of all South Asian countries on big data and AI;
V. Incentives need to be provided to the SMEs so that they invest in
big data, AI and associated infrastructure, Big Data Platform
Services, data and cyber security, and analytical services;
VI. Attention needs to be provided on data security, data integrity,
data protection and privacy, dataveillance, data quality and
ethics social and digital wellbeing;
VII. South Asian countries need to take measures to attract foreign
investment in the big data and AI-related services, capacity
building, IT and data infrastructure and platform services;
VIII. Removing regulatory and logistical challenges, and non-tariff
barriers for cross border trade can boost e-commerce and big
data-based digital services in South Asian countries and enhance
their regional exports, employment, and productivity as well as
urban economic development;
IX. The regional intergovernmental organizations such as South
Asian Association of Regional Cooperation (SAARC), Bay of
Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic
Cooperation (BIMSTEC), and Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) need to be better utilized and strengthened for
AI and big data-based regional and national development;
Fig. 1. Potential of big data and AI for urban related SDGs in South Asia.
Source: Adapted from UN Global Pulse.
Table 2
Technological readiness indicator in South Asia.
Country 2017 2014 2011 2008 % change from 2009 to 2017
Bangladesh 120 120 122 126 -4.76
Bhutan 105 105 0
India 107 121 93 69 55
Nepal 119 128 130 130 -8.5
Pakistan 111 114 115 100 11
Sri Lanka 106 94 85 82 29.27
Average 111 114 109 101 9.9
Source: World Economic Forum
Md. Arfanuzzaman 
Environmental and Sustainability Indicators 11 (2021) 100127
6
X. As the South Asian region is resource-poor and lags in the technological advancement a trust fund can be established under
SAARC to support research, innovation, and start-up in AI and big
data solution;
XI. South-South and triangular cooperation can be enhanced and
framed for solving pressing urban issues of South Asia through AI
and big data-based innovation, improved IT and data infrastructure, knowledge sharing, technology transfer, and capacity
building;
Disclaimer
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgement
The author thanks the editor of the journal and anonymous reviewers
for providing useful comments and suggestion to further improve the
paper.
References
Arfanuzzaman, M., Dahiya, B., 2019. Sustainable urbanization in Southeast Asia and
beyond: challenges of population growth, land use change and environmental
health. J. Growth Change 50 (2). https://doi.org/10.1111/grow.12297.
Bandara, V., Jayasumana, A.P., Pezeshki, A., Illangasekare, T.H., Barnhardt, K., 2010.
Subsurface plume tracking using sparse wireless sensor networks. Int. Electron. J.
Struct. Eng.
Basso, F., Basso, L.J., Bravo, F., Pezoa, R., 2018. Real-time crash prediction in an urban
expressway using disaggregated data. Transport. Res. C Emerg. Technol. 86,
202–219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2017.11.014.
Bibri, S.E., 2019a. Data-driven smart sustainable urbanism: the intertwined societal
factors underlying its materialization, success, expansion, and evolution. Geojournal.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10708-019-10061-x.
Bibri, S.E., 2019b. The anatomy of the data-driven smart sustainable city:
instrumentation, datafication, computerization and related applications. J. Big Data
6, 59. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-019-0221-4.
Bibri, S.E., 2019c. On the sustainability of smart and smarter cities in the era of big data:
an interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary literature review. J. Big Data 6, 25.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-019-0182-7.
Dash, S., Shakyawar, S.K., Sharma, M., et al., 2019. Big data in healthcare: management,
analysis and future prospects. J. Big Data 6, 54. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-
019-0217-0.
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S.J., Papadopoulos, T., Luo, Z., Wamba, S.F.,
Roubaud, D., 2017. Can big data and predictive analytics improve social and
environmental sustainability? Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.techfore.2017.06.020.
Dumbill, E., 2013. Making sense of big data. Big Data 1 (1). Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
Ellis, P., Roberts, M., 2016. Leveraging Urbanization in South Asia: Managing Spatial
Transformation for Prosperity and Livability. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Estoque, R.C., 2020. A review of the sustainability concept and the state of SDG
monitoring using remote sensing. Rem. Sens. 12, 1770.
Fluckiger, Y., Seth, N., 2016. Sustainable Development Goals: SDG indicators need
crowdsourcing. Nature 531, 448.
Fu, L., Dallas, P., Sharma, V.K., Zhang, K., 2016. Sensors for environmental monitoring.
J. Sensors 2016. https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/4108790, 1–1.
Graham, M., Shelton, T., 2013. Geography and the future of big data, big data and the
future of geography. Dialogues Human Geogr. 255–261.
Illangasekare, T.H., Han, Q., Jayasumana, A.P., 2018. Environmental underground
sensing and monitoring. Undergr. Sens. 203–246.
Jacobs, C., Singh, T., Gorti, G., Iftikhar, U., Saeed, S., Syed, A., Siderius, C., 2019.
Patterns of outdoor exposure to heat in three South Asian cities. Sci. Total Environ.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.04.087.
Kathuria, Sanjay, 2018. A Glass Half Full: the Promise of Regional Trade in South Asia.
World Bank, Washington, DC. South Asia Development Forum.
Keeso, A., 2014. Big Data and Environmental Sustainability: A Conversation Starter.
Oxford University. Smith School Working Paper Series: 14-04.
Kharrazi, A., Qin, H., Zhang, Y., 2016. Urban big data and sustainable development
goals: challenges and opportunities. Sustainability 8, 1293.
Kitchin, R., 2016. The ethics of smart cities and urban science. Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. A
374, 20160115.
Krishnamurthy, R., Smith, K.L., Desouza, C., 2017. Urban informatics: critical data and
technology considerations. In: Thakuriah, P., Tilahun, N., Zellner, M. (Eds.), Seeing
Cities through Big Data. Springer International Publishing, Basel, Switzerland,
pp. 163–188.
Kudva, S., Ye, X., 2017. Smart cities, big data, and sustainability union. Big Data Cogn.
Comput. 1 (1), 4. https://doi.org/10.3390/bdcc1010004, 2017.
Mani, Muthukumara, Bandyopadhyay, Sushenjit, Chonabayashi, Shun, Markandya, Anil,
Mosier, Thomas, 2018. South Asia’s Hotspots: Impacts of Temperature and
Precipitation Changes on Living Standards. South Asia Development Matters. World
Bank, Washington, DC.
Mayer-Schonberger, ¨ V., Cukier, K., 2013. Big Data: A Revolution that Will Transform
How We Live, Work and Think”. John Murray, London, UK.
Pan, Y., Tian, Y., Liu, X., Gu, D., Hua, G., 2016. Urban big data and the development of
city intelligence. Engineering 2 (2), 171–178, 2016.
Prandi, C., Nisi, V., Ribeiro, M., et al., 2021. Sensing and making sense of tourism flows
and urban data to foster sustainability awareness: a real-world experience. J. Big
Data 8, 51. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-021-00442-w.
Saheb, T., Izadi, L., 2019. Paradigm of IoT big data analytics in the healthcare industry: a
review of scientific literature and mapping of research trends. Telematics Inf. 41,
70–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2019.03.005.
Saheb, T., Saheb, T., 2020. Understanding the development trends of big data
technologies: an analysis of patents and the cited scholarly works. J Big Data 7, 12.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-020-00287-9.
Shameer, K., Badgeley, M.A., Miotto, R., Glicksberg, B.S., Morgan, J.W., Dudley, J.T.,
2017. Translational bioinformatics in the era of real-time biomedical, health care
and wellness data streams. Briefings Bioinf. 18 (1), 105–124. https://doi.org/
10.1093/bib/bbv118.
Sun, Y., Du, Y., 2017. Big data and sustainable cities: applications of new and emerging
forms of geospatial data in urban studies. In: Open geospatial data, softw. stand., 2,
p. 24. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40965-017-0037-0.
Twining-Ward, Louise, D., Mccomb, Jessie F., De Meneval, Philippe, Abakerli, B.,
Stefania, B., Simpore, Dahourou, Mansora, Adja, Afzal, Kiran, Canut, Sole, Albert,
Cerezo, Villascusa, Miguel, Jose, Mathur, Priya, Rabbany, Raihana, 2020. COVID-19
and Tourism in South Asia: Opportunities for Sustainable Regional Outcomes
(English). World Bank Group, Washington, D.C.
UN (United Nations), 2015a. Habitat III issue papers, 21—smart cities (V2.0). New York.
https://collaboration.worldbank.org/docs/DOC-20778.
UN (United Nations), 2015b. Big Data and the 2030 agenda for sustainable development.
Prepared by A. Maaroof. http://www.unescap.org/events/call-participants-bigdata-and-2030-agendasustainable-development-achieving-development.
UN (United Nations), 2018a. The World’s Cities in 2018: Data Booklet. Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations, New York.
UN (United Nations), 2018b. World Urbanization Prospects 2018. Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations, New York.
WRI, 2020. Making cities work better for everyone. available online at: https://www.
wri.org/cities.
Md. Arfanuzzaman 