international journal of critical infrastructure protection 37 (2022) 100526
Available online 27 March 2022
1874-5482/© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Digital transformation of the maritime industry: A cybersecurity
systemic approach
Evripidis P. Kechagias a,*
, Georgios Chatzistelios a
, Georgios A. Papadopoulos a
,
Panagiotis Apostolou b
a National Technical University of Athens, School of Mechanical Engineering, Sector of Industrial Engineering and Operational Research, Zografos, 15780, Greece b Hellenic Open University, School of Social Sciences, Patras, 26335, Greece
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Cybersecurity
Maritime
Cyberattack
Information Technologies
Digital transformation
System
ABSTRACT
Information system solutions are increasingly being applied to the maritime industry, and eventually, all aspects
of maritime operations will be aided by the digital transformation of the industry. The maritime industry is a
sector driven by compliance and historically deals with security and safety matters at an international level. It
has been recognized that safety and security in maritime heavily depend on cyber systems and cybersecurity
implementation requirements have started to get integrated into maritime’s regulatory context. This paper focuses on cybersecurity in the maritime industry, presenting an inside view of maritime cybersecurity aspects and
offering a detailed case study analysis based on a real-world company’s approach. The main objective of the
paper is, therefore, to connect research with practice, presenting a maritime company’s cybersecurity systemic
approach with references to procedures and policies. The findings of the case study and the cyber security vessel
audit survey that is performed show that the company was able to assess its current status, collect evidence and
objectively determine security gaps, and achieve cyber risks mitigation. The gained knowledge will be used in the
future to continuously improve the company’s systems and move to a more predictive and proactive maturity
level.
1. Introduction
World trade and economy depend on the maritime industry’s reliability and sustainability. Maritime transport system (MTS) enables
import and export of goods, supply in energy, trade, and transport of
passengers and vehicles. The following statistics reflect the vital
importance of shipping to societies and the global economy. According
to the International Chamber of Shipping (ICS), a global trade association for shipowners and operators, the international shipping industry is
responsible for 90% of world trade, while each year, 11 billion tons of
goods are transported by over 50000 ships, crewed by over 1.5 million
seafarers. The total value of the world shipping trade for 2019 is
estimated above 14 trillion US Dollars [1].
The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD) reports at the Annual Review of Maritime Transport for 2020
that the total world fleet consists of 98140 commercial ships of 100 gross
tons and above, equivalent to a capacity of 2.06 billion deadweight
tonnage (dwt). Especially during the pandemic, the shipping industry
managed to support the global economy providing stability by ensuring
the undisrupted delivery of critical supplies. Worth billions of dollars,
tens of thousands of merchant’s vessels are sailing the oceans at all
times. However, at the start of 2020, the average age of the global fleet
was 21.29 years in terms of the number of ships, while 41,85% of all
ships currently at sea are older than 20 years old. Since there was no
Abbreviations: BIMCO, Baltic International Maritime Council; BYOD, Bring Your Own Device Policy; COSCO, China Ocean Shipping Company; CMA CGM,
Compagnie G´en´erale Transatlantique and Messageries Maritimes; CSO, Company Security Officer; CBT, Computer-Based Training; CyRiM, Cyber Risk Management;
CSP, Cyber Security Plan; DCS, Data Collection System; ECDIS, Electronic Chart Display and Information System; ENC, Electronic Nautical Chart; ENISA, European
Union Agency for Cybersecurity; ACLs, Firewalls and Access Control Lists; HSQE, Health, Safety, Quality and Environment; IMS, Integrated Management System; ICS,
International Chamber of Shipping; IMSM, International Management Systems Marketing; IMO, International Maritime Organization; ISPS, International Ship and
Port Facility Security; IDS, Intrusion Detection System; IPS, Intrusion Prevention System; MTS, Maritime Transport System; NIST, National Institute of Standards and
Technology; UNCTAD, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development; WEF, World Economic Forum.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: eurikechagias@mail.ntua.gr (E.P. Kechagias).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijcip
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcip.2022.100526
Received 16 September 2021; Received in revised form 2 March 2022; Accepted 26 March 2022 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 37 (2022) 100526
2
cybersecurity by design providence at the time of their build, this statistic shows that most of these ships are now probably sailing with
outdated and vulnerable operational technology (OT) infrastructure [2].
According to the same report, the volume of international marine
trade was predicted to fall by 4.1% in 2020, mainly due to the coronavirus. Apart from the pandemic’s impact on the industry, other factors
also present a substantial risk for the industry. Climate-related challenges call for the industry to perform business in a more environmentally sustainable manner by reducing sulfur levels in marine fuel, such as
the industry’s commitment to decarbonize by 2050. Political instability
and piracy also represent significant threats to the industry. Risks
related to the advancement of technology in the sector also impose a
threat for the industry. Cyber-threats have risen since modern ships
today heavily rely on shore-based systems and onboard computers and
software for carrying out daily tasks, operations, and satisfying the
mariners’ communications needs [2]. Allianz reports on Safety and
Shipping Review 2020 that since the coronavirus pandemic began,
maritime sector companies have faced an increase of 400% in attempted
cyber-attacks [3].
Exploring the attributes of the maritime industry that make it
particularly vulnerable to cyber incidents and attractive to cybercriminals, one would name the following [4]:
• The low visibility of the industry to the public makes it attractive to
cybercriminals since cybercrimes targeting the maritime industry
usually do not get mass media attention.
• Large money transfers are occurring for daily business.
• An extensive number of interconnected businesses and authorities in
the industry share business-critical, data-sensitive, and commercially
sensitive information.
• There is the involvement of multiple stakeholders in the operation of
a ship which often results in a lack of accountability for securing it.
• Ships may be accessed and monitored by various shore parties.
Various vendors may provide remote support to ship equipment (OT
proprietary systems) or ship’s software.
• Many legacy information technology (IT) and OT systems are still
used. These systems run obsolete software that is no longer supported and cannot be secured. Automation systems may be
comprised of multiple sub-systems from various vendors, integrated
with no cybersecurity in mind.
• Use IT and OT systems that cannot be patched or updated due to type
approval issues.
• The low awareness of the industry operators and the immature cyber
risk management culture. Cybersecurity is a concept relatively new
to shipping, not yet understood, and most maritime operators and
managers have no training in related cyber risks.
The European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) names low
awareness as the first vulnerable point of the industry regarding
Cybersecurity [5]. Since cyber-attacks affect the attacked organization’s
reputation, many incidents do not get to the media and do not get
publicly known carried out an online questionnaire that experienced
maritime professionals answered [6]. The lack of knowledge regarding
cyber risks was reported to exceed 75% of the authors’ maritime experts
participating in the survey. The analysis of the results showed the lack of
general knowledge in maritime Cybersecurity and the necessity to increase training levels in the maritime sector and the port interface
connection with the supply chain. The authors also shed light on the
alarming finding that the survey participants believe that solely the
implementation of technological systems can address cyber threats
without considering any responsibility of the operator or the administration [6].
Regarding the level of today’s cybersecurity readiness, a shift in
mindset is essential to direct more attention and resources toward
Cybersecurity. Moreover, manufacturers need to improve the Cybersecurity of their products, as shipping systems currently remain vulnerable
to cybercriminals [7]. On one side, we have globally complex supply
chains, interconnected economies, and an emerging and rapidly
changing cyber threat environment. On the other hand, an aging shipping infrastructure that is designed with no cybersecurity in mind. Undoubtedly in the last 20 years, technology has changed tremendously.
Moreover, the fact that the vast majority of ships were built before
Cybersecurity is a significant concern. During the last decade, many new
technologies were adapted and implemented to existing infrastructure
or are currently in the process of implementation, but still, ship managers and marine vendors are not yet fully aware of the cyber risks
involved. This inevitably results in infrastructures of hardware and
software vulnerable to modern cyber threats.
Historically cybersecurity was not a big issue for ships as the dependency on the digital systems was limited (compared to today), and
ships were also considered isolated from the outside world therefore
inaccessible by hackers. There was a perception that the whole ship
environment was in an “air gap.” An air gap describes the occasion
“when one or more computers are physically isolated from unsecured
computer networks, such as the public Internet or an unsecured local
area network, for security purposes. Air gap computers are not connected by wire or wirelessly and (generally) cannot communicate
directly with each other” This perception was not true. Although the
vessel’s data connectivity with its outside environment while sailing an
ocean was not something permanent due to the high data usage cost and
low bandwidth capabilities of that time satellite communication systems, it still allowed short-term intra-daily data connections, usually for
e-mail exchange reasons. Therefore, the danger of receiving malicious
emails and attachments has existed for many years now [8].
Advancements in communication capabilities allowed the vessels to
frequently update their onboard software programs for route optimization, voyage planning, and reliable weather forecasting, to have
continuous and efficient communications with ship managers naming
the real-time exchange of data with the office side, the ability to resolve
issues and support a case by remote connection or video communication
or to use telemedicine to distribute health services remotely. They also
allowed better communication and data exchange with national and
port authorities to exchange forms and declarations and support
continued reporting satisfying the various stakeholders’ demands (e.g.,
charterers). Furthermore, these systems also satisfied the need to comply
with the latest regulations implied for reporting fuel consumption and
emissions, such as the Data Collection System (DCS) implied from the
International Maritime Organization (IMO) or the Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification (MRV) implied from European Union. Another
significant advancement is the transition from paper nautical charts to
paperless navigation systems using electronic nautical charts (ENCs).
Modern vessels nowadays rely heavily on the digitalization of systems and procedures. OT systems provide and transmit to shore parties
various real-time information and data of the vessel’s operation and
status, such as bunker fuel consumption. A vessel is now a data center
and IoT applications allow the connection of onboard sensors to shore,
providing real-time transmissions. This enables remote diagnostics and
configuration, enhances proactive maintenance, monitors vessel condition and performance, and promotes voyage optimization. The extended
range of cyber systems that vessels are equipped with, means that ships
are now complex computer-controlled platforms. The use of digital
communications to connect marine systems to land applications means
that ships are also part of the Internet-dominated world.
In the Futurenautics Crew Connectivity Survey in 2015, it was estimated that the average availability of Internet access across all fleet
sectors stood at 43% [9]. The 2018 repeated survey estimated this
characteristic at 75% —an increase of 32% since the previous survey
[10]. In conclusion, these numbers reflect the high Internet penetration
levels in all fleet sectors. These levels continue to rise, and Internet access is nowadays the most common form of crew connectivity available
while at sea.
This paper gives an insight into the current status of cybersecurity
E.P. Kechagias et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 37 (2022) 100526
3
concerning Maritime, presents how a real-world organization manages
it and adds to the development of overall awareness and knowledge on
protecting shipping from mounting cyberthreats. After a brief introduction to the concepts of cybersecurity and cyberspace, this paper
analyzes the importance, the characteristics, and the risk assessment of
cybersecurity in the maritime industry. Concluding the aforementioned
analysis, the main part of the paper unfolds. The main objective is to
present a Maritime company cybersecurity systemic approach with
references to procedures and policies. The first approach is the plan-docheck-act (PDCA) approach for continuous improvement. The second is
to effectively manage the three pillars of security: procedures, the
human factor, and technology. Moreover, to enhance the knowledge and
understanding of the subject, a Cyber Security Vessel Audit Survey is
presented along with its scope and findings.
2. Importance of cybersecurity and cyber risk management in
the maritime industry
2.1. Importance of cybersecurity
IMO refers to Maritime cyber risk as a “measure of the extent to
which a technology asset could be threatened by a potential circumstance or event, which may result in shipping-related operational, safety
or security failures as a consequence of information or systems being
corrupted, lost or compromised”. Maritime cyber risk includes not only
the cyberattack incidents but any incident that affect directly or indirectly the security properties of IT or OT systems [11].
Cyber risks are posed by cyber incidents that may include but are not
limited to the following events [4]:
• An unintended system failure occurring during software maintenance and patching.
• A failure of a system due to software crashes or “bugs”.
• Any crew interaction that could lead to loss of sensitive data or
introduction of malware to shipboard systems
• Ransomware or denial of service incident.
• Loss or the manipulation of external sensor data, critical for the
operation of a ship.
• Loss of availability of electronic navigational equipment or loss of
integrity of navigation-related data.
• Loss of essential connectivity with the shore
• Loss of availability of OT systems, including propulsion, auxiliary
systems, and other critical systems, as well as loss of integrity of data
management and control
Cyber risk is an emerging and complex risk of global nature since
connectivity can increase the magnitude of isolated cyber events into
having global effects. Cybersecurity must become a primary concern for
the maritime industry because cyber threats set the core of maritime
safety at risk. When we talk about Cybersecurity in maritime, it is not
only about protecting the information part of it that we do not see, but
we need to focus on cyber because this will have some consequent
physical effect and it needs to be well protected for that as well. A
possible cyberattack on a ship might affect the ship’s safety and its
personnel, the company in terms of financial cost and reputation, the
cargo, and possibly the environment in terms of pollution.
In some extreme cases, possible cyber-attacks on the cruise ship’s
navigation system, for example, could lead to property damage and even
loss of life [12]. Current threat implications of marine-based cyberattacks include business disruption, financial loss, damage to reputation,
damage to goods and environment, incident response cost, fines, and/or
legal issues [13]. Since such attacks impose such an essential risk for
shipping companies, the importance of Cybersecurity has increased
dramatically in recent years. Additionally, if a port facility’s electronic
or computer-based systems were to fail, malfunction, or be misused, this
would result in economic, operational, physical, or reputational loss or
damage or disruption of operations. Recent cyberattacks have shown
that ships, maritime companies, ports, and maritime terminals are not
immune from emerging cyber threats. In order to maintain safe and
efficient operations, cyber risk should be managed like other significant
threats, such as physical security, natural disasters, and industrial accidents. The magnitude of the threat depends on the actor’s intention,
opportunity, and capability. The threat factor, alongside the identified
vulnerabilities of a target, constitutes the likelihood of a cyberattack.
Finally, the overall risk level is the product of the likelihood of an attack
and its impact.
Since the maritime industry, ships, and onshore, becomes more
interconnected with the rest of the supply chain and more dependent on
digitalization and automation, the cyber threat increases. Nowadays,
vessels and their systems are part of online cyberspace. Cybercriminals
are becoming more capable and sophisticated, and the Maritime industry should acknowledge that with integrated IT and OT onboard the
vessels, cyberattacks on ships will become the norm, rather than an
exception. Industry regulators and associations are ringing the danger
bells for more to come and provide best practice guidance to address the
cyber risks and enforce cybersecurity measures. As presented above,
with the expansion of cyberspace, all components of risk have risen.
According to the Global Risks Report 2021 of the World Economic
Forum (WEF) [14], 39% of the 650 respondents forecast that the risk of
“cybersecurity failure” will become a critical threat to the world within
the short term of 0–2 years. Furthermore, in the Allianz Annual Risk
Barometer report [15], 40% of over 2700 risk management experts from
92 countries named cyber risk the third most considered business risk.
The Cyber Risk Management (CyRiM) report [16], published by Lloyd’s
of London, investigated the impact of a cyberattack on the global
economy, checking whether it impacted the systemic vulnerabilities
across ports significantly and forced them to close. The report describes
a cyber-attack from a hypothetical computer virus targeting and
infecting port management software and reveals its effect on the global
supply chain.
Some of the key findings and potential estimates of the attack are
presented below:
• Economic damage to the global economy would range between
$40.8 billion in the least severe scenario (6 ports affected) to $109.8
billion in the most severe scenario (15 ports affected)
• Various sectors would be affected by these losses, including Transportation/Aviation/Aerospace, Retail, Manufacturing, Business and
Professional Services, Real Estate/Property/Construction, Pharmaceuticals, Defense/Military, IT, and many others
• Productivity losses would also affect each country that has bilateral
trade with the attacked ports
• The insurance industry would have to pay claims estimated from
$3.6 to $8.3 billion
• Due to high levels of underinsurance for cyber-attacks on the marine
industry, 92% of the economic losses would be uninsured. The
expansion of the cyber insurance market is both necessary and
inevitable.
The various rapid technological developments allowed commercially
operated ships to operate in autonomous mode (without crew). These
are already being trialed in some sea areas and predicted to start operating on small voyages. Due to their need to connect to operational,
management, and administrative systems onshore, autonomous ships
are constantly exposed to the threat of cyber-attacks. An infiltration and
infection of critical systems subsequently imply a threat for the ship itself, the cargo, and the environment. Vinnem and Utne (2018) outline
the critical hazard that a hacked autonomous ship may even be used as a
weapon and cause significant structural damage to the coast or offshore
infrastructure (e.g., oil and gas platforms). For that reason, the design of
autonomous ships must involve strict international requirements and a
series of risk-reducing actions like, for example, a requirement to keep a
E.P. Kechagias et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 37 (2022) 100526
4
small crew onboard able to obtain local control [17]. The vulnerability
of the maritime industry to cyber-attacks is stressed out by the fact that
since September 2020, the largest four companies of the industry were
hit. More specifically, Maersk and Compagnie G´en´erale Transatlantique
and Messageries Maritimes (CMA CGM) Group suffered ransomware
attacks, while China Ocean Shipping Company (COSCO) Shipping and
Mediterranean Shipping Company’s (MSC) digital networks were also
hit. All attacks took place within a short period of time, starting in 2017
with the Maersk ransomware attack [18].
In June 2017, the largest container ship and supply vessel operator,
the Danish shipping company Maersk suffered the collateral damage of
the attack of NotPetya ransomware. The NotPetya attack allegedly
started as a Russian government cyberattack targeting the Ukrainian
economy and was designed to be technically impossible for the victim to
recover its files. While 80% of the infections with NotPetya were reported in Ukraine, incidents also took place in the US, UK, France, Italy,
Germany, Poland, and Russia. Their total worldwide cost is estimated at
$10 billion [19]. Particularly, at Maersk, it took only seven minutes to
spread across the company’s network and cause a major loss of data of
49000 laptops and 4000 servers and the disruption of operations for two
weeks. The cost of the cyberattack to the company is estimated at over
$300 billion [20]. However, it is true that while incidents happen all the
time, small or large incidents are rarely reported. Cyberattacks occur at
an even greater rate than everyone non-cyber professional is led to
believe, but only a few shipping cyber incidents get public attention.
Still, the threat imposed by cyberattacks on the maritime industry is
verified by incidents of the last decade, as seen in Table. 1.
2.2. Cyber risk assessment
IMO defines cyber risk management as “the process of identifying,
analyzing, assessing and communicating a cyber-related risk and
accepting, avoiding, transferring or mitigating it to an acceptable level,
considering costs and benefits of actions taken to stakeholders.”[22].
IMO emphasize that cyber is no different from other risks and encourages to focus on cyber risk through the objectives and functional requirements of the International Safety Management (ISM) code. This
means that there is no need to necessarily cover all threats, but need to
look at the risk that a given threat poses to operation, security, and
safety and then manage it accordingly. Imo has also stressed that no two
organizations are the same, and a fit-for-purpose delivery model should
be used based on a company’s performance, needs, and systems. In the
end, the goals of cyber risk assessment are to support safe and secure
shipping. In order to achieve these goals, the cyber risk assessment
approach should be resilient and evolve as a natural extension of
existing holistic control system practices.
Cyber risk frameworks assist organizations in addressing cybersecurity by providing the methodology, principles, and best practices that
ensure the incorporation of essential elements of protection and resilience into an enterprise. National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) developed a cybersecurity framework to protect the critical
sectors and infrastructure and consists of five core elements or activities
[23], Identify, Protect, Detect, Respond, Recover, which are divided into
22 categories that can be used to create a cyber security plan. These
activities are relevant also in the context of maritime services security
and IMO adopted these elements and provided these five core activities
as high-level recommendations that all form part of successful cyber risk
assessment [22]. Baltic and International Maritime Council (BIMCO)
and a coalition of industry bodies published such an approach of Maritime cyber risk assessment comprising of the following steps [4]:
• Identify threats
• Identify vulnerabilities
• Assess risk exposure
• Develop protection and detection measures
• Develop protection and detection measures
• Establish response plans
• Respond to and recover from cybersecurity incidents.
3. Case study–How a shipping company can integrate a cyber
security systemic approach
3.1. Company background
The ship Management Company that is examined specializes in the
management and operation of oil tankers and bulk carriers. The vessels
are owned by individual companies and are registered mostly under the
Greek Flag. All vessels are managed from a central Head Office which
occupies approximately 100 people. Fleet consists of more than 30
vessels, and the fleet’s deadweight capacity is close to 4 million deadweight tones, with an average age of about seven (7) years old. The
ships’ crew is multinational, mainly consisting of Greek officers and
international crew members.
3.2. Cybersecurity as part of the integrated management system
As a basic principle, Cyber Security management must be based on
the assumption that there will always be a way to compromise any
digital environment, even when it is among the most adequately
secured. Cybersecurity management includes everything an organization does to develop and continuously improve cybersecurity services
and procedures to protect its IT and OT systems and detect and timely
respond to security breaches from any malicious adversary. Specifically
in Maritime, Cybersecurity policies need to be implemented into existing
operational procedures, communicated and audited within a continuous
process of improvement that fits the already established management
systems of safety and security, Occupational Health & Safety, Quality,
Environmental, and Energy Performance which is the Integrated Management System (IMS).
Integrated Management System describes a system of policies, procedures, and instructions for the safe operation of ships and crews and
the avoidance of damage to the environment and property. Its contents
indicate conformity with the requirements of the International Safety
Management Code and the associated amendments. The scope and
application of the Integrated Management System include all the Ship
Management services and apply to all company’s departments ashore
and all vessels under management. The company maintains documented
information within the Integrated Management System to support the
company’s processes. It retains documented information and records to
ensure that the processes are being carried out as planned. With the
adoption of IMO regulatory context of MSC.428(98), cybersecurity is
now part of IMS as a continuing effort to protect the company’s assets,
Table 1
Selected maritime cyberattacks of the past decade (modified from [21]).
Date Victim
2010 Gulf of Mexico Offshore Drilling Rigs
Aug 2011 Iranian Shipping Line
2011-2013 Port of Antwerp
2012 Australian Customs and Border Protection Service agency
2012-2014 Danish Port Authority
Apr 2016 Ships in South Korea
Jun 2017 AP Moller Maersk
Jun 2017 Ships in Novorossiysk
Nov 2017 Clarksons
Jul 2018 Cosco US
Sep 2018 Ports of Barcelona & San Diego
Jan 2018 GPS and AIS interference in Eastern Mediterranean
Oct 2018 Austal
Jun–Aug 2019 GPS and communications interference in the Strait of Hormuz
Q1 and Q2 2020 Toll Group
Apr 2020 MSC Group
May 2020 Iranian Port Facility
Aug 2020 Carnival Corporation
E.P. Kechagias et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 37 (2022) 100526
5
systems, data, and operations and secure compliance with regulators’
requirements of the ISM and International Ship and Port Facility Security (ISPS) codes.
3.3. PDCA approach
A main systematic for management systems is the Plan – Do – Check –
Act cycle, also known as the Deming cycle, a four-step management
model for continuous improvement of products, people, and processes.
The company applies the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) 90001 quality management system, follows the
plan–do–check–act cycle in a process-oriented approach, and focuses on
risk-based thinking for each procedure implemented throughout the
organization. The objective of the PDCA cycle is to achieve planned
results and maintain a continual improvement of the system.
The four stages of PDCA are [24]:
• Plan: Address risks and opportunities, make plans and procedures to
accomplish target and objectives determined after sorting out any
issues identified.
• Do: Perform actual work based on what was planned.
• Check: Verify and evaluate whether the initial objectives were
accomplished in accordance with the plans or not. Identify any issues
with the process.
• Act: Improve the process and performance based on the result of an
evaluation.
A PDCA management cycle should also include Cybersecurity processes. As the cyber risk continuously changes, an ongoing control
procedure is needed to confirm that checklists and policies/procedures
and barriers are still effective, maintained, and kept up to date. Through
the PDCA approach and its continuous improvement cycles, the company’s cybersecurity maturity and resilience increase over time by
moving from a reactive to a more predictive and proactive maturity level
[25]. The basic steps for each PDCA stage specifically for cybersecurity
are now presented below:
3.3.1. Plan
Identify cybersecurity objectives
A company should examine its current cybersecurity status/level and
define what it wants to achieve. In this step, cybersecurity objectives for
both the office side and vessel side are identified. The company in focus
has identified its cybersecurity objectives and has included them in its
IMS section of the cybersecurity policy statement, which we present
later in this study.
1 Make an inventory of systems & software
If a company does not know what it has, it will not know how to
protect it. According to the company’s IMS procedure manuals, all IT
and OT hardware and software are recorded on the relevant office and
shipboard forms and reviewed according to the company’s policy.
1 Execute cyber risk assessment
A company should prepare an assessment methodology to identify
possible hazards in its operations/activities, estimate and evaluate risks
and establish appropriate controls to minimize the risk levels. The
company in focus has created a Risk Assessment (RA) Library where it is
sharing the mitigating measures and experiences concerning the various
identified risks. Therefore, before a job/operation, the RA library index
should be reviewed. If a job/operation is included, there is no need to
carry out a new RA. If not, then a new RA must be issued.
1 Set Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) for cybersecurity.
There is a need for a company to set cybersecurity metrics and keep
tracking them because they help understand how effective the cybersecurity efforts have been and whether they have improved or declined
over time. Some relevant examples of KPIs to monitor are the number of
items for which a risk assessment has been performed, the ratio of people
who have received cybersecurity training, the number of cyber incidents
that have occurred, the mean time to detect or to respond to incidents,
the security ratings of the company’s systems and many others.
3.3.2. Do
1 Establish cybersecurity policy & procedures
A company needs to establish dedicated cybersecurity procedures &
policy but also integrate cybersecurity into existing operational procedures as needed. In this manner, the company in focus has established
cybersecurity manuals, such as the “Cyber Security Policy” and “Cyber
security Plan” that define and describe the policies, procedures, guidelines, and work instructions that must be followed to ensure compliance
with cyber security statutory requirements and accomplish identified
cyber security objectives. Moreover, it has integrated cybersecurity into
existing manuals such as training, risk assessment, management of
change, drills-exercises, and others.
1 Define roles & responsibilities
Roles, responsibilities, accountabilities, and delegating authorities
must be clearly defined for each job description/procedure/operation
that an IMS manual describes. They are also presented collectively on
organization charts or matrixes of responsibilities.
1 Execute cybersecurity training
Having acknowledged the importance of the human factor in
cybersecurity, a company should develop company-wide cybersecurity
awareness training and competence-building programs for the
personnel. The training program of the company in focus is further
presented in this study as part of the human factor pillar approach.
1 Report cyber events & incidents
The company has established official forms and checklists for cyber
event reporting. Moreover, the company’s systems are 24/7 monitored
by a Security Operations Center (SOC) reporting cybersecurity incidents.
An incident response team is available 24/7 to be contacted and handle
reports from the SOC or those coming directly from a vessel.
3.3.3. Check
1 Evaluate the effectiveness of reaching objectives
In this step, a company investigates whether the objectives are
achieved or not. It reviews its objectives and targets and evaluates its
performance against the target’s key performance indicators (KPIs).
1 Analyze cyber incidents& event reports
A company investigates if the cyber incident reporting is followed as
it should and if they get actual learning outcomes from past incidents. A
company should investigate all reported cyber incidents by utilizing
relevant IMS-established forms and procedures. An investigation must
result in a better understanding of the threats the company and its ships
are facing and to new lessons learned. Cybersecurity risks and threats
are also reviewed as necessary.
1 Execute internal audits of cybersecurity
E.P. Kechagias et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 37 (2022) 100526
6
A company should establish a process for performing objective audits
to determine if cybersecurity has been effectively implemented and
maintained. An audit can be executed either internally or externally. By
performing audits, the administration receives reports on the status of
cybersecurity measures and consequently understands what needs to be
done. An insight into an accomplished cybersecurity survey/audit is
presented later in this study.
3.3.4. Act
1 Execute corrective & preventive actions
Lessons learned and information derived from the “Check” phase can
improve the company’s approach to cybersecurity. Having acquired a
better understanding, the company eventually determines the appropriate corrective actions needed to eliminate the causes of cyber incidents and avoid recurrence. After the identification of new or changed
technical and procedural controls, then these are updated and utilized
accordingly. The procedure requires that the proposed actions shall be
taken through a risk assessment before the implementation.
1 Strive for continuous improvement
The company should investigate whether it strives towards continuous improvement or not, evaluate if it fills the gaps identified and if
risks are successfully mitigated. The Company has established procedures that can be followed by company personnel (both shipboard and
office personnel) when they wish to make suggestions for improvement
or advise the shore administration of proposed changes. Periodic formal
administration review meetings occur to determine and improve the
efficiency of the Integrated Management System and ensure sustainability, adequacy, and effectiveness of Cyber Security measures.
In these meetings:
• performance data are presented and compared to appropriate
benchmarks to determine priorities and goals for improvement
• results of the internal audit program are presented, results are discussed, and areas, where improvement is required are identified.
• data and the effectiveness of the improvement projects are discussed,
and new improvement targets and projects are suggested
• data demonstrating the progress towards the achievement of
continual improvement goals are presented, and current and
completed improvement of cyber security are reviewed
3.4. Risk assessment
As part of the above PDCA process and as a major key element of any
effective risk assessment system, risk assessment process of the company
in focus will now be presented based on the ISO risk assessment process.
Risk assessment is the process for identifying hazards and assessing the
risk posed by each, and reviewing the acceptability of this risk based on
comparison with risk criteria. The company has prepared and documented in IMS, a risk matrix assessment methodology on board and
ashore as a tool for analyzing risk scenarios, identifying possible hazards
in its operations/activities, and evaluating and establishing appropriate
controls to minimize risk.
3.4.1. Identification of cyber threats and vulnerabilities
Cyber Threat (Hazards) Identification is the first step related to cyber
risk Assessment. It defines the activities that their risks are studied, and
it serves to identify “what could go wrong” with these activities. This
step identifies actual or potential incidents, hazards, or scenarios using a
systematic approach and deploys a detailed hypothetical risk scenario
describing the sequence of events leading to the incident. The key objectives of “Cyber Threat (Hazard) Identification” are to build a complete list of potential threats (both intentional and unintentional) and to
build knowledge and awareness based on past incidents and other work
issues. For the scope of Cyber Security Risk Assessment, the list of IT &
OT Hardware and Software in Office and Vessels is evaluated to determine the Cyber Risk per asset.
3.4.2. Cyber risk estimation
Cyber Risk Estimation considers both the cyber hazard effects (i.e.,
the severity of consequences) and the occurrence likelihood of the cyber
hazard. The severity scale of the consequences is based on criteria that
correspond to Confidentiality, Integrity & Availability of cybersecurity
properties, as seen in Table. 2.
Frequency (or Probability) Determination is used to estimate how
likely the various incidents or hazards will occur (i.e., the probability of
occurrence). The Risk Matrix of the company defines five probability
levels based on the frequency at which the hypothetical scenario is likely
to occur. The occurrence likelihood scale is displayed in Table. 3.
Risk (R) is a function of the severity of the possible Consequences (C)
for a hazard and the Frequency/ Probability of occurrence (F) of that
particular hazard. Therefore, it is customary to use the product of the
two to calculate the risk (R):
Risk (R) = Frequency (F) × Consequence (C)
Under existing control measures, once the cyber hazards for a system
or process have been identified and the frequency associated with these
events have been estimated, relative risks associated with the events are
evaluated. The Risk Matrix can be used as a mechanism for assigning risk
and making risk acceptance decisions using a risk categorization
approach. Each cell in the Risk Matrix corresponds to a specific combination of frequency and consequence and can be assigned a priority
number [26]. Below Risk Matrix (Table. 4) provides a traceable framework to rank hazards in order of significance, screen out insignificant
ones, or evaluate the need for risk reduction.
3.4.3. Cyber risk evaluation
The RA team shall evaluate the level of risk as estimated by the RA
process and categorize their possible combinations to be High, Medium,
or Low risk within the Risk Matrix [27]. Once the risk level has been
determined, the response can be defined in Table. 5 “Risk Categories”.
Higher risk levels require a greater level of response. The Company uses
this table as a guideline to assess the level of Risk by using risk criteria.
3.4.4. Risk reduction/ New control measures
The most important step in the RA process is identifying risk control
measures as improvements to the design or operation of the Cyber asset
applied to enhance the security level and mitigate the initially evaluated
Cyber Risk.
Table 2
Consequence categories and severity levels.
Consequences Criteria
5 Catastrophic/
Hazardous effect
Critical violations of confidentiality/integrity/
availability; critical asset/data/resource unavailable;
major violations of procedures / process / policies;
Problem known/unknown but cannot be controlled
4 Critical/Major effect Major violations of confidentiality/integrity/
availability; critical asset/data/resource unavailable;
major violations of procedures / process / policies;
Problem known and can be controlled
3 Moderate effect Minor violations of confidentiality/integrity/
availability; non-critical asset/data/resource
unavailable; major violations of procedures / process
/ policies
2 Minor effect Minor violations of confidentiality/integrity/
availability; minor effect on availability of asset/
data/resource available; minor violations of
procedures / process / policies
1 no effect No effect; confidentiality/integrity/availability not
endangered; asset/data/resource available; minor
violations of procedures / process / policies
E.P. Kechagias et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 37 (2022) 100526
7
Available risk reduction options include [25]:
• Avoidance – Circumvent the risk by changing the course of action.
• Reduction:
○ Prevention steps that reduce the probability of scenario incidents
and failures through better design, procedures, training, or other
actions.
○ Mitigation steps, which reduce the severity of incidents or the effect of failures.
○ Measures that reduce both probability and severity/consequences
of incidents.
• Acceptance – Accept the risk and take the chance of the negative
impact.
• Transfer – Risk outsourcing and sharing via third parties
The effort required to implement a risk-reducing measure in terms of
cost, time, difficulty, and necessary resources needs to be considered
against the benefits that are likely to be achieved. Following the selection of the appropriate new control measures, the risk ranking process
should be repeated to evaluate if the risk is reduced to a lower Category
(e.g., from High to Medium). The process should be repeated to reach
the lowest possible Category.
3.4.5. Follow up
In this step, implementation of the new control measures is followed
up and recorded. More specifically, in this step, the office team:
• Conducts follow-up evaluations of the controls to ensure they
remain in place and have the desired effect.
• Monitors for changes or alternative ways to conduct the work,
which may require further Risk Assessment.
• Takes corrective action when necessary.
• Identifies any required IMS amendments/improvements.
4. The three pillars of the cyber security approach
The company addresses its Cyber Security program through three
main pillars/elements: the procedures, the human factor, and the technology. The primary tool to manage all these components is the International Management Systems Marketing (IMSM) which, for the needs
of this study, was examined to identify the parts relevant to cybersecurity management. The three elements need to be coordinated, but they
also need to be integrated to work well together. Effective maritime
cybersecurity requires both technology and behavioral controls (procedures). The company sets the cybersecurity policy and procedures
through its administrative documentation (IMS), and the people and
technical controls implement them.
The three pillars of cybersecurity are presented below in more detail:
4.1. Human factor
The human factor may be the most significant vulnerability to
cybersecurity, and cyber incidents are mainly caused due to lack of
training or awareness. i.e., an employee who inadvertently or not, performed an action that allowed an exploit to occur. The vast majority of
cybersecurity incidents are related to the human element. TrendMicro’s
research showed that 91% of targeted attacks involve phishing emails
because users continue to fall prey to them [28]. Moreover, it is
commonly argued by experts that humans are the weakest link in
cybersecurity. This happens because organizations usually invest resources in cybersecurity unilaterally in technology, but they omit to do
the same for the human element.
Through increased and sophisticated phishing and social engineering
attacks, attackers can bypass most technical controls by simply targeting
Table 3
Frequency description.
Frequency
classes
Quantification
5 Frequent - Possibility of
repeated incidents
More often than once per voyage.
4 Probable - Possibility of
isolated incidents
Once per year - The mishap scenario has
occurred in the past and/or is expected
to occur in the future.
3 Occasional - Possibility
of occurring sometime
Once per 5 years - The mishap scenario
might occur. It would not be too
surprising if it did.
2 Remote - Not likely to
occur
Once per 10 years - The mishap
scenario is considered unlikely. It could
happen, but it would be surprising if it
did.
1 Very unlikely -
Practically impossible
Once per 30 years or more.
Table 4
Risk assessment matrix.
Severtity Consequences Probability
1 2 3 4 5
Cyber Security
Properties
Very unlikely
Practically
impossible
Remote Not likely to occur Occasional Possibility of
occurring sometime
Probable Possibility of isolated
incidents
Frequent
Possibility of
repeated incidents
Once per 30
years or more
Once per 10 years. The scenario is
considered unlikely. It could
happen, but it would be surprising
if it did
Once per 5 years. The
scenario might occur. It
would not be too surprising if
it did
Once per year. The scenario has
occurred in the past and/or is
expected to occur in the future
More often than
once per voyage
1 Non or minor
CIA effect
L(1) L(2) L(3) M(4) M(5)
2 Moderate CIA
effect
L(2) M(4) M(6) M(8) H(10)
3 Major CIA effect L(3) M(6) M(9) H(12) H(15)
4 Critical CIA
effect
M(4) M(8) H(12) H(16) H(20)
Table 5
Risk categories.
Risk
categories
Cyber security
Low Acceptable
(1-3)
A limited adverse effect.The cyber security risk is
negligible and no risk reduction is required.
Medium Tolerable (4-
9)
A substantial adverse effect means.The cyber
security risk must be reduced to a level as is
reasonably practicable
High Intolerable
(>9)
A severe or catastrophic adverse effect. The cyber
security risk cannot be justified and must be
reduced by additional measures.
E.P. Kechagias et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 37 (2022) 100526
8
the human layer. For this reason, any Company should not only set the
cybersecurity requirements and policies but most importantly must find
a way to efficiently communicate them to personnel and make sure they
are applied. To sum up, this pillar concerns both onboard & shore
personnel and has the scope of building Cyber Security awareness, skills,
and competencies to manage the potential cyber risks, communicating
how certain behaviors can be exploited, and training people to respond
to cybersecurity breaches adequately.
The company has various procedures and activities relative to
training and awareness of the human factor:
• Has assigned responsible personnel — both ashore and onboard — to
execute relevant tasks. It has established competence requirements
per responsible position and developed a training program, as per the
competencies required for each position/responsibility. Any identified training needs are reported to the company’s training manager
through personnel efficiency reports by each department director
and by the Master or Chief Engineer. Identified training needs are
considered during the preparation of the annual training plan and
budget of shipboard personnel.
• All ships have been provided with cybersecurity e-learning software
for crew members. The crew must complete the seminars of the
computer-based training (CBT) modules. Each month the training
records of each member and the score of each completed module are
sent to head office. The monthly reports are reviewed by the training
manager, who identifies potential areas of improvement.
• The Master also organizes on-board formal familiarization training
to cover, among all the security issues, also the cyber-security subject. The Master schedules at least once per month training seminars
during which cybersecurity material is presented. A designated form
(“Record of Onboard Seminars”) is used to monitor and record the
onboard training programs such as the seminars and lectures.
• An onboarding process is obligatory to seafarers during which seafarers are instructed to review and acknowledge the organization’s
cybersecurity policy. By acknowledging that they have read the organization’s policies as a new hire, they are then accountable to
adhere to the corporate policy of the organization. Familiarization of
Cyber Security policy is given to all vessel and office personnel and
conducted by IT Dept. A designated form is used to maintain the
training records of ashore seminars, forums, and lectures.
• In-House Seminars: Shore-based seminars are carried out for all Officers. Officers carry out an in-House Seminar at least every two
years. The content of the seminar includes Cyber Security training.
Attendance is monitored to ensure that all Officers attend shorebased seminars as appropriate. For foreign officers and crew (e.g.
Ukrainians, Filipino), an “In House Seminar” is delivered once per
year at their countries by department managers and other experienced members.
• Company-wide regular Cyber Security Training: All personnel within
the Company receive regular cybersecurity training seminars from
certified third parties to improve their awareness and skills. Certain
staff members (IT Staff) receive additional and specialized training
according to their duties.
• Company responsible departments (IT and Health, Safety, Quality
and Environment (HSQE)) frequently provide training material such
as Digital Video Discs (DVDs) or send emails and memorandums
containing awareness emails and updates about cybersecurity incidents and threats.
• A Cyber Security Campaign a constantly active procedure, and
enforced before each audit.
• Software Usage Training Policy. For all company’s software assets
installed in IT systems, usage training is provided by the responsible
department to both shore side employees and seafarers. For OT
systems, training is often provided by official vendors of software/
hardware, or seafarers are familiarized using the manufacturer’s
manual.
• Training by visiting Superintendents. During their onboard attendances, designated office personnel relative to cybersecurity (from IT
Dept, HSQE, or Vetting Dept) conduct cybersecurity surveys and
cybersecurity training to the Crew.
• Cybersecurity Drills. Carrying out a cybersecurity drill is a learning
experience, and its purpose is to familiarize and train office and
vessel personnel with the existing contingency plans, enabling them
to respond to emergencies. Drills are carried out realistically to
develop personnel confidence & competency, and the results of the
drills are recorded and evaluated through a designated form.
4.2. Infrastructure and technical controls
These are the technical system security measures that need to be
scaled to satisfy the specific company cybersecurity requirements
without compromising the efficiency and workability of business functions. They provide solid barriers against attacks arising either from
insiders or from outsiders.
Email technical infrastructure
About the email technical infrastructure and from a high-level
perspective:
• The company’s onshore and vessel email accounts are protected
through anti-spamming, antivirus, and antimalware central systems
implemented in three levels: network perimeter, email server, and
email client.
• E-mail accounts are secured by the application of appropriate passwords and multi-factor authentication.
• The system provides application and Uniform Resource Locator
(URL) filtering, Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTP) proxy
filtering on perimeter configured to allow specific categories or
“whitelisted” sites while blocking others according to the company’s
policy.
Corporatenetwork
The major technical controls that the company has implemented for
the Corporate Network are:
• Physical security
• Network segregation
• Firewalls and Access Control Lists (ACLs)
• Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA)
• Intrusion prevention systems (IPS)
• Endpoint Security Protection (0-day malware, behavior analysis)
• Intrusion detection systems (IDS)
• Secure software design and configuration.
• Providing software updates and patches
• Vulnerability scanning and patching
• Data Loss Prevention (DLP) systems: Detects potential data breaches
and data ex-filtration transmissions and prevents them.
• Data Encryption measures
• Central logging server - Security Information and Event Management
(SIEM)
• Security Operations Center - Managed Detection Service
• Sandblast appliance (intercepting and filtering inbound files and
inspecting URLs linked to files within emails by running them in a
virtual environment) with real-time threat extraction (delivers clean
and reconstructed versions of potentially malicious files that are
received by email or downloaded from the web)
• Backups: All servers, physical and virtual, are supported with regular, continuous incremental backup images. Access to the backup set
is feasible only from the backup server. Additional application-based
backups are performed for email and database Servers. Script file
backups are used for the personal workstation files of each user.
Remote working laptops
E.P. Kechagias et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 37 (2022) 100526
9
The major technical controls that the company has implemented for
the remote working corporate laptops are:
• Virtual Private Network (VPN)
• Sandblast agent
• Hard disk drive Encryption
• Member of domain – Enforcement of domain policy
• Endpoint Protection (0-day malware, behavior analysis)
• Host Intrusion Prevention System (IPS)
• Firewall
• Endpoint Detection and Response
• Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA)
• Umbrella roaming client: protect users from connections to malicious
destinations and command-and-control callbacks at the Domain
Name System (DNS) and Internet Protocol (IP) layers, no matter
where the device connects to the internet.
• Data loss prevention (DLP)
4.3. Procedures and policy
This pillar includes all administrative controls and documentation
related to cyber security implementation. The main elements are the
policies, procedures, and guidelines that describe organizational processes, define personnel responsibilities and business practices following
the organization’s specific operations and security objectives. This pillar
typically includes the management systems, the governance framework,
policies and procedures to reflect cyber security best practices, audit
regimes, etc. The central system that contains every company’s official
documentation regarding the company’s procedures and policies is the
IMS manual (IMSM).
The documentation that the IMS of the company refers to Cyber
Security includes these main sections:
• Cyber Security Policy Statement
• Cyber Security Plan
• Procedure Manuals
4.3.1. Cyber security policy statement
In the Cyber Security Policy Statement, the company declares its
commitment to ensuring Cyber Security, by establishing and maintaining the required office and vessel Cyber Security protection measures,
to:
• Safeguard the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of Information, Information Systems, and IT / OT equipment.
• Promote the Safety and Security of persons and property within the
Organization, both onboard and ashore.
Cyber Security statement also declares the company’s commitment
and the general requirement and responsibilities for the company’s
personnel such as:
• Employees to comply with the requirements as described in the
Cyber Security Plan (CSP) document and be familiar with their
relevant cybersecurity duties and responsibilities.
• Managing director and senior managers to provide all necessary resources onboard and ashore to support the organization’s cybersecurity objectives as described in CSP.
• The Company Security Officer (CSO) and IT Manager are responsible
for obtaining, managing, reviewing, and sharing cybersecurityrelated information for vessels and shore-based locations.
• The Master onboard as the ultimate authority onboard is responsible
for taking decisions regarding Cyber Security incidents or threats to
maintain safety and security onboard.
Cyber Security statement finally present the Company’s cybersecurity objectives and the basic methods that will be achieved, such as:
• Monitoring and implementing regulatory requirements and industry
best practices.
• Assigning responsible personnel — both ashore and on board — to
execute relevant tasks.
• Performing comprehensive continuous training of all company
Personnel.
• Promoting Cyber Security awareness amongst all company
Personnel.
• Conducting regular documented reviews and internal audits of
cybersecurity policies, procedures, and technical Infrastructure.
4.3.2. Cyber security plan
To document the necessary measures for shore staff and seagoing
personnel and deal with cybersecurity, the company has established the
CSP. CSP describes the necessary steps to safeguard the company and the
vessels under administration from current and emerging cyber threats
and vulnerabilities.
More specifically, the cybersecurity plan is a comprehensive document which:
• Define the cybersecurity objectives
• Define required and prohibited actions
• Define duties and responsibilities
• Identify threats and vulnerabilities onboard and ashore
• Describe activity phases of cyber risk exposure assessment
• Present the adopted protection measures for cybersecurity control
• Present the contingency and incident response plan and the cybersecurity incident analysis procedure
4.3.3. Procedure manual “Information Technology and data control”
The scope of this procedure is to describe Information Technology
activities and data controls within the company. This procedure sets
relevant responsibilities for the company users (managing director, IT
manager, IT staff, information system users) and provides instructions
and requirements for various IT procedures such as establishing user
accounts and passwords, hardware and software usage, antivirus systems usage, backup execution, training, and others.
4.3.4. Procedure manual “Software Management”
The purpose of this procedure is to define the actions that need to be
followed to maintain an effective Software Management System to
control and protect the company’s software assets, whether installed at
the office premises or on board the vessels. The procedure covers software installed in Information Technology systems and Operational
Technology systems. It covers relevant responsibilities and procedures
related to the lifecycle of the software and the decisions that need to be
acquired, such as software inventory, updates/upgrades, backup process, usage training, management of Change, software acquisition,
testing, and deployment.
4.3.5. Forms
To perform, support, and monitor the activities described in the
procedure manuals, various mandatory forms are utilized and required
to be maintained up to date. Some important and most indicative procedure forms will be briefly presented in this section. All Information
Technology and Operational Technology shipboard and shore systems
must be recorded. The IT Manager and the Marine Department, in
collaboration with the vessels, must create and maintain a hardware and
software inventory for IT and OT shipboard systems. An update process
must monitor all software and hardware changes.
More specifically:
E.P. Kechagias et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 37 (2022) 100526
10
• “Office IT Infrastructure Inventory” form is used to record installed
hardware in the office.
• “Office IT Software Register” form is used to record installed software in the office.
• “Vessel IT Infrastructure Inventory” form is used to record installed
IT hardware onboard the vessels.
• “Vessel OT Infrastructure Inventory” form is used to record installed
OT systems onboard the vessels.
• “Vessel IT/OT Software Register” form is used to record installed
software onboard the vessels.
• “IT/OT Software Update Form” is used during a software update
where specific test procedures and compatibility checks must be
performed to ensure integration with existing systems. For monitoring and keeping records of procedure, this form has to be recorded, updated, and reviewed. Software updates fix bugs or add
enhancements, and the company ensures that all its software assets
are updated with the latest applicably compatible updates.
• “Software Evaluation” form is used to evaluate and test a software
program before the actual use on corporate systems. All new software should be tested for correct operation and compatibility with
the current infrastructure. It is strictly forbidden to use any software
that the responsible departments have not previously checked and
approved.
• “Cyber Security Incident Investigation” form is utilized when an
assessment/investigation for a cyber security incident is conducted.
• “Antivirus Update / Scan Form” is used onboard to keep records of
computer antivirus updates and execution of antivirus scans.
• “PC Inspection Form” is used to accurately record results of diagnostic programs that run on all PCs by the I.T. Dept.
• “I.T. Training Form” is used to identify the training needs of each
user and maintain training records of conducted software, policy,
and cyber security training for office and crew users.
• “Back up Monitoring Form” is used for backup records monitoring.
• “Password Change Monitoring Form” is used for password change
monitoring.
4.3.6. Policies
Procedure manuals and CSP manual further contain the more specific policies such as the hiring and termination policies, separation of
duties, data classification, account disablement policy, access rights,
business contingency plan or incident response plan, handling of third
parties, etc. Some of these policies are briefly presented and include the:
• Personal computer policy: Defines the proper and expected use of the
personal computer provided by the company. Example: Under no
circumstances should the user change the settings which the I.T.
Manager has made.
• Backup policy: Describes the procedures and policies that are defined
for backup of production systems. Example: According to the inventory, a backup is kept for every software installed onboard or
within the Company.
• Email Policy: Defines the proper and expected usage of the email
exchange activity. Example: Email to be used only for Company’s
business-related purposes. Personal communication is not permitted.
• Third-party access policy: Define the requirements of how the company should interact with third-party service providers and vendors.
Indicative example: If the company’s partners would like to gain
access to the company’s network, IT Manager should be informed
and access should be provided only under supervision and controlled
permissions.
• Software installation policy: Describes the requirements that Company sets regarding software installation on the Company’s systems.
Indicative example: no installation or use of new software is allowed
without the permission and supervision of the IT Manager.
• User accounts Control and User Access Management Policy: Describes the requirements that Company sets regarding how the user
accounts and privileges (i.e, rights and permissions) are established,
managed, and deleted. Indicative example: Each office user is associated with a unique username and is allocated access rights and
permissions based on standard role-based profiles and by the tasks
he/she is expected to perform.
• Password policy: Describe the methods for the secure management of
passwords. Indicative examples of this policy are: password
complexity requirements are enforced to establish secure passwords,
passwords are locked after several failed attempts, The passwords of
the office and vessel users are managed and periodically changed
according to the company procedure.
• Removable media policy: Defines expected usage of removable
media (universal serial bus (USB) sticks, compact disks (CDs)/DVDs)
on the Company’s systems. Indicative contents of this policy are: The
use of unauthorized removable media devices on the company’s
systems is prohibited. Especially for Vessels, all USB ports on IT and
OT equipment should be blocked with protection covers.
• Bring Your Own Device Policy (BYOD): This policy defines the
accepted practices, responsibilities, and procedures for the use of
personally owned mobile devices, including Mobile phones, External
hard disks, USBs, tablets, and laptops. Indicative example: Charging
personal phones in Vessel’s equipment through USB ports is strictly
prohibited.
4.4. Cyber security campaign
Although the Integrated Management System (IMS) documentation
satisfies the requirements for appropriately addressing "Cyber Risks", of
most importance is how it is efficiently communicated. Adding to
everything mentioned above, one of the most effective and immediate
methods of improving cybersecurity awareness on board and ensuring
regulatory compliance is the cybersecurity campaign. By cybersecurity
campaign, we refer to the continuous effort and plan to promote
straightforward instructions and requirements and periodically remind
them through memos and email notifications to all company’s
personnel, especially to onboard crew. Master and his crew are
frequently requested to review and confirm compliance.
The campaign is made up of the following parts:
1 Bring Your Own Device Policy. To be printed and posted inside
every cabin, including those used by visitors or company’s representatives and smoking rooms.
2 Cyber Security Response Plan. To be printed and posted in public
places (Smoking rooms, CCR, ECR, Bridge).
3 Immediate action to be taken after a cybersecurity incident. To be
printed and placed along with the Cyber response plan.
4 Identifying Cyber Security breaches and symptoms. To be printed
and posted and posted in public places.
5 Guidance on the use of personal devices onboard. To be printed
and posted in public places and every cabin, including those used
by visitors or company’s representatives.
6 Required Actions (DOs) and Prohibited Actions (DONTs). A copy
to be given to every crew member and visitor on board. Also, to
be posted in every cabin, including those used by visitors or
company’s representatives. Make a seminar about this to all crew
members.
7 Dedicated USB blockers and USB sticks to use onboard. Master is
requested to ensure that the vessel is equipped with an adequate
number of USB port blockers to lock USB systems, especially on
OT systems on board, and that the vessel is equipped with an
adequate number of USB sticks to be dedicated on specific IT or
OT devices.
8 Enable USB software access control. Restrict unknown USB devices (non-vessel dedicated USB sticks) to have access to critical
computers (Navtor/RadioRoom/Bridge) and allow only
E.P. Kechagias et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 37 (2022) 100526
11
dedicated sticks (e.g., Navstick) as per the "EndPoint Antivirus
USB Control" document.
9 Refer to Fleet Circular "Antivirus Updates" to verify that the
antivirus is updated on all vessel computers.
10 Print Cyber Security Posters and post them within the accommodation at specific indicated places.
11 Review Cyber Security video training material that the company
has sent. It is specifically aimed at a non-technical audience and
focused on best practice behavior. There are videos of various
subjects, e.g., How to Be Cyber Aware At Sea, Passwords, Personal Devices, Phishing, Safe Browsing, Sextortion, Social media,
and others.
12 Review Fleet/Interoffice Circular "Instructions regarding Computer Data Security Onboard Vessels." This circular contains
guidelines and best practices to be followed to protect the vessel’s
computer data from any malicious or accidental interference.
13 Review Fleet Circular with subject "Vessels’ Computer Data
Backup Instructions.".
Backup is the only defense against hardware failures and virus
influences.". Backup Monitoring Form" should be completed
weekly to maintain records for the backup procedure and be
available to be presented to auditors if requested.
14 Review of Fleet Circular with the subject: “Disaster / Recovery
instructions for operation & maintenance of vessel IT systems in
abnormal / emergency conditions.”. This circular deals with the
operation and maintenance of vessel IT systems in abnormal or
emergency conditions. The following instructions for disaster/
recovery of IT systems onboard must be followed in case of IT
equipment damage or malfunction.
5. Performing a cyber security vessel audit survey
5.1. Assessment scope
A cybersecurity audit survey is the systematic, independent, and
documented process for collecting evidence and objectively determining
whether or not cybersecurity measures are appropriately implemented
in an organization.
More specifically, is used:
• to assess conformity with regulatory requirements as well as the
company’s requirements regarding cybersecurity
• to identify gaps and potential opportunities for improvement
• to set the security profile and requirements.
The company wanted to assess the current status of their vessels
regarding Cyber Security preparation (policies, procedures, processes)
and the cyber awareness of the crew. The company performed an onboard assessment covering the company’s cybersecurity policies, procedures, and related processes, the ISM documentation, and the crew’s
behavior, focusing on the IT and OT systems in use against regulatory
and company requirements. A list of findings and recommendations
were identified and documented during the assessment.
5.2. Assessment regime
The company assessed the vessel’s IT/OT environment by visual
inspection of various locations combined with extensive interviews/
questions/discussion with the crew to assess both infrastructures and
crew awareness on-board.
The following locations were included in the scope:
• Bridge
• Master and Crew cabins
• Engine control room
• Cargo control room,
• Recreational areas.
The assessment regime consisted of:
• Interviews with Master, Engineers, Officers, and IT administrators in
charge of onboard IT and OT systems.
• Inspection of network cabinets, computers, USB ports, printers,
network connections, and other equipment.
• Inspection of OT workstations and their ports in the engine control
room and cargo control room.
• Visual inspection of notices posted to check if confidential information is exposed.
• Inspection of PC’s event logs (for any security incidents), installed
software (check for software not expected, e.g., games), virus scanner existence, reports, and update status.
5.3. Review of policies and procedures
The review of policies and procedures is presented in this section.
More specifically, this review presents the general concept that was
reviewed, the particular requirements of ISM, the respective references,
any indicative questions addressed to Captain and crew officers, and
finally, the comments and recommendations for any gaps identified.
Review of remote access policy and procedure.
• Requirement: A list of systems requiring remote access is maintained
and regularly updated.
• References: ISM A 3.5.1
• Questions: Is there a list of systems that may require remote access?
Is there is a list of approved vendors for remote access? Do the 3d
parties connect by themselves, or is access provided by the company?
Is there a list of authorized contacts (names and telephone numbers)
of 3d parties support? How do you verify the authenticity of the
support? Logs must be kept of who, when, and for which purpose
executed the remote access
• Comment: A list of systems requiring remote access was not presented on the vessel.
• Recommendation: Create a list of approved remote accesses to the
vessel. This list should contain systems requiring remote access and
third-party contacts (including names, emails, and phones).
Review of data retention policy
• Requirement: Policy to delete documents, data, and media before
disposal exists and is applied for the vessel.
• References: ISM 11.2.3
• Comment: There is no policy to delete documents, data, and media
before disposal.
• Recommendation: Create and implement Data Retention Policy
where should be defined how long the Company needs to hold on to
specific data, the period to clean this data, and who will do that
action. The company should only retain data for as long as it is
needed.
Review of drills
• Requirement: Cybersecurity drills and exercises must be executed (at
least annually) and recorded to verify the effectiveness of cybersecurity reporting, response, and recovery measures.
• References: ISM 1.4.5, 8.2, 8.3, A 3.5.4
• Questions: Are there records of cybersecurity drills performed?
• Comment: No cybersecurity drills have been executed for this vessel.
• Recommendation: Execute cybersecurity drills between the vessel,
the office, and related third parties.
Review of backup policy and procedure of critical IT systems.
E.P. Kechagias et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 37 (2022) 100526
12
• Requirement: Backups on IT systems (and, where applicable, OT
systems) on board are executed regularly (at least weekly), and information is stored on disconnected storage media.
• References: ISM 10.4, A 3.5.5
• Questions: Which are the systems to follow backup procedures, and
how is backup executed? What is the data retention policy? What is
the procedure to update the Electronic Chart Display and Information System (ECDIS)? Records were requested to prove the execution
of backups.
• Comment: Backups of IT systems are executed as per the company
procedure. ECDIS system backup should be executed every month,
but there was observed that last month’s backup was missed.
• Recommendation: To ensure adequate backup of the operating system of ECDIS emergency computer, add the description of this process into the procedure and create a list of last executed backups.
This list should be updated after every backup and communicated to
the office.
Review of incident reporting scheme.
• Requirement: Cybersecurity event or incident reporting scheme,
including a reporting form and procedure, is utilized and implemented on the vessel.
• References: ISM 8.1, 8.3, 9.1, A 3.5.3
• Comment: Evidence provided. Cyber Security event and incident
reporting scheme exists, is printed and is clearly visible in several
locations onboard.
Review of cyber response plan and disaster recovery plan.
• Requirement: Dedicated cybersecurity response and recovery plan
exist on the vessel and include instructions on how to react in case of
an incident.
• References: ISM 1.4.4, 1.4.5, 8.1, 8.3, 9.2, A 3.5.4
• Questions: Do you have a disaster recovery plan for the vessel IT
systems? Is there a Cyber Response Plan? Who do you inform in case
you suspect something suspicious? In case of an incident, which steps
will be followed? If/ when to conduct an impact assessment, who
needs to be informed during and after the incident? Who should
record what happens during the incident?
• Comment: Evidence provided, but some information is missing.
• Recommendation: Implement response scenarios in case of failure of
specific critical systems, e.g. address procedural steps for the recovery of loss of stability and loading computers or the recovery of
loss of VSAT communication.
Review of crew cybersecurity training
• Requirement: Cybersecurity training is implemented for new crew
members. Records of the crew who attended cybersecurity training
are kept.
• References: ISM 1.2.2.3, 6.3, 6.4, A 3.7
• Questions: Is there a cybersecurity training program? Are there records of cybersecurity familiarization or seminars?
• Comment: Evidence provided
Review of Cybersecurity awareness
• Requirement: Cybersecurity awareness of crew is established. Crew
and officers are aware of potential cybersecurity threats and how to
report any incidents or events. Cybersecurity roles and responsibilities of the crew and onshore staff are well defined and
understood.
• References: ISM 2.2, 6.5, 6.6, 8.1, A 3.5.3, A 3.7
• Questions: In a scenario of a received email message urging to click
provided link or log in somewhere to download a file, what would
your actions be, and what should you be aware of when looking into
an email? What is phishing? Even if you click something suspicious,
what should you do? What is allowed and what not to post on
Facebook and other social media? Is there an official policy on how
to behave on social media?
• Comment: Evidence provided. Crew awareness is good, and crew
staff knows their responsibilities
Review of cybersecurity policy onboard exposition
• Requirement: Cyber Security Policy is available at all locations and
known to all personnel ashore and onboard. Cybersecurity awareness
is included in safety instructions for visitors on board.
• References: ISM 2.2, 11.2.1, A 3.7, 13.2.4
• Comment: CS Policy available on board. Distributed also via internal
circulars and main awareness posters were printed in several locations onboard.
Review of inventory of systems/software
• Requirement: Inventory of installed IT and OT systems and software
exists and is updated following changes to the hardware and
software.
• References: ISM A 3.5.1
• Questions: Is there an inventory of OT systems installed onboard? Is
there an inventory (showing designated IP addresses) of IT systems
and computers installed onboard? What is the process/schedule to
update it? Is the list of software onboard documented?
• Comment: Inventory of main installed software and related computers exists, but updating this inventory is done regularly once a
year and does not follow the change management process to the
hardware and software.
• Recommendation: Improve the process to update installed IT and OT
systems inventory after changes to the hardware and software were
executed. This allows having updated and accurate inventory.
Review of IT/OT systems physical aspects
• Requirement: On-board networks, including wiring, patch panels,
and network elements, are physically protected. On-board critical
IT/OT infrastructure components are installed in racks, or closed
cabinets and cabinets are locked.
• References: ISM A.2.5.1, A 3.5.2, 10.3
• Questions: Where are the critical IT systems located? Is the rack
physically locked? Who has the key for the rack? Who has access to
these systems? Are the cables, systems, and components labeled to be
easily identified when relying on instructions to do something?
• Comment: Evidence provided
Review of IT security software and Antivirus protection
• Requirement: Anti-malware software is installed and active on all
computers onboard and updated regularly. Anti-malware scans are
required before connecting to privileged or safety-critical systems.
Tools for the detection and analysis of cybersecurity events and incidents are utilized.
Questions: Which security software is implemented to protect the IT
systems? What is the procedure to update antimalware/antivirus onboard? How do you update the standalone computers? Records of the
antivirus update form and scan results were requested to present.
• References: ISM 8.1, 8.3, 10.1, A 3.5.2, A 3.5.3
• Comment: Evidence provided.
Review of USB control.
E.P. Kechagias et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 37 (2022) 100526
13
• Requirement: Policies and procedures to securely deal with removable media devices are applied on the vessel. Training for employees
and crew on how to securely handle removable media devices is
performed.
• References: ISM 7, A 2.1.6, A 3.5.2, A 3.7
• Questions: How is USB control managed and USB risk mitigated? Do
you have a “bring your own device policy”?
• Comment: Evidence provided. General cybersecurity training for the
crew is provided every month, but specific training on how to
securely handle mobile devices has not been executed.
• Recommendation: Include specific training on how to securely
handle mobile devices into the training plan for the crew.
Review of Criticality of systems.
• Requirement: There is knowledge of which systems failure may
result in hazardous situations.
• References: ISM 10.3, A 3.5.1
• Questions: Which systems are critical? Is the criticality of systems
documented? Need to be clearly visible which systems may lead to
hazardous situations in case of failure of software or equipment of
the computer.
• Comment: Inventory of main installed softwareand related computers exist, but software has not been ranked by criticality. Therefore, it was not possible to understand which system may cause
hazardous situations.
• Recommendation: Include criticality of software.
Review of software and hardware management.
• Requirement: Obsolescence management procedure, incl. updating/
upgrading of software, hardware and networks components exists
and is applied for the vessel.
• References: ISM 10.1, A 3.5.2
• Questions: Is there a software and hardware management procedure
to cover shipboard systems?
• Comment: Software Management Procedure exists, but how to update/upgrade of hardware and networks components are missing. 2
computers with obsolete OS were found with no plan to be replaced.
• Recommendation: Create and implement a procedure for Obsolescence Management for Hardware and Software as part of the already
created Software Management Procedure. This plan should contain
the replacement of already obsolete systems which are difficult to
patch and also systems that will be obsolete in near future.
Review of Management of Change (MOC).
• References: ISM 7, 10.1, A 3.5.2
• Requirement: The Management of Change procedure exists and is
applied for the vessel.
• Comment: Evidence provided
Requirement: Process to manage security patches for all onboard IT
and OT ensuring that security-relevant updates are installed in a timely
manner is implemented.
• References: ISM 10.1, A 2.5.1, A 3.5.2
• Comment: Evidence provided
Requirement: Cyber risk assessment process exists and is executed
regularly (at least annually) or in case of changes to IT and OT systems
and networks.
• References: ISM 1.2.2.2, A 3.4, A 3.5.2
• Comment: A cyber risk assessment process exist but was executed on
a generic fleet perspective.
• Recommendation: Check that the generic threats, systems, and vulnerabilities are relevant for this particular vessel. Issue an updated
risk assessment for the specific vessel and update it on a scheduled
regular basis.
Review of IT and OT systems connectivity
• How are OT systems onboard protected? Is there any interconnection
between IT and OT networks? Does segregation of networks exist?
Can these systems be reached from networks? Provide the diagram of
the vessel network topology.
5.4. Major positive findings
Positive findings during the assessment include:
• The vessel Cyber Security preparedness levels are very good and well
above average for tanker operators.
• There are solid and practical measures to mitigate risks from external
USB devices, e.g., all ports were locked for all systems with access to
the network.
• IT systems in cabins were labeled, and the crew knows which system
belongs to which cable and equipment.
• Overall, cybersecurity awareness of master, officers, and crew was
very good and demonstrated competence in handling daily risks and
threats.
• The Cyber Security company policy was evident in multiple locations, and the crew was aware.
• No confidential information was publicly available or undisclosed
5.5. Major gaps and recommendations
Very few gaps were identified through the assessment.
• There was no list of remote accesses to the vessel. Therefore, the crew
was not able to say which systems require remote access, for which
purpose, and if this remote access was approved or not. A list should
be created containing the systems requiring remote access and the
respective third-party contacts (including names, emails, and
phones).
• No cybersecurity drills have been executed for this vessel. Therefore,
the crew has not been able to prove their cyber resilience in practice.
Drills help test cybersecurity resilience and crew awareness across IT
and OT environments by simulated cybersecurity exercises. These
drills should occur regularly following a reasonable time plan.
6. Conclusions
Ships are part of cyberspace, and shipboard IT and OT systems
convergence is an ongoing process. The complexity of ships is constantly
increasing, with more software and automation, more internet connectivity, and more interconnection between systems onboard. It will
extend entirely to reach a level of fully autonomous ships. Consequently,
the attack surface of the vessel has increased, meaning that each of the
shipboard cyber-systems may hinder cyber vulnerabilities either due to
inadequate design or inadequate configuration. Additionally, malicious
actors have various motives to target maritime, while advancements in
attack capabilities and sophistication techniques increase risk. Malicious
actors usually target the human factor. Hence it is a priority to raise the
maritime sector’s cybersecurity awareness. This study reveals that cyber
threats are real and that maritime companies need to get over outdated
misconceptions and practices. Executive-level support for cybersecurity
is required to give enough resources to implement cybersecurity. The
level of risk is innately very high because when these systems are
impacted, the ship’s safety is at risk, and consequently, the risk is life,
property, environment, and all of the above. Since the level of risk is so
E.P. Kechagias et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 37 (2022) 100526
14
high, it is essential to identify and manage it accordingly, as well as
restrain and minimize its negative impacts.
Nevertheless, maritime stakeholders need to see the digitalization
and automation of the industry as an opportunity. Cybersecurity resiliency is the key for safely realizing the benefits of digital shipping and
doing operations better. Most companies are looking to remote operation, reduce costs of their operations, optimize performance, take
advantage of a better logistics chain, reduce maintenance and provide
better and more efficient services. The companies that will resist digital
evolution will lag behind the competition. Those who will embrace it
may gain a competitive advantage. Since the 1st of January 2021,
Cybersecurity is also a regulatory requirement for the industry and part
of safety administration activities. Management companies and their
vessels will be subjected to audits by class society inspectors and port
state controls to prove that they successfully address cyber risks. The
company should follow a cybersecurity framework/management system
to effectively deal with people, procedures, and technology. The risk
management approach should be resilient and evolve as a natural
extension of existing management system practices. There is no ‘one size
fits all solution. Although common traits do exist, since no two organizations are the same, a custom fit-for-purpose delivery model should be
used based on an individual company‘s performance, needs, procedures,
and systems.
Companies should establish continual improvement programs
through the Integrated Management System. The two major critical elements of any effective cyber risk assessment system are the risk
assessment and the audit survey. The risk assessment process allows the
company to identify possible hazards in its operations/activities, estimate and evaluate risks posed by each risk, and establish appropriate
controls to minimize the risk levels. The cybersecurity audit survey
process allows the company to assess the current status, collect evidence
and objectively determine whether or not cybersecurity measures are
appropriately implemented or not. Both processes are vital to monitor
the gaps identified and to mitigate cyber risks. Eventually, they allow
the company to continuously improve its systems and move to a more
predictive and proactive maturity level. Maritime industry bodies, associations, regulators, and stakeholders should agree on a continuous
collective effort to improve cybersecurity by discussing open gaps and
taking appropriate measures. Pressure should be put on shipboard systems vendors to provide cybersecurity certified systems, and cybersecurity by design requirements must be enforced to ship new buildings to
reduce cybersecurity risks.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Evripidis P. Kechagias: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing –
original draft, Writing – review & editing. Georgios Chatzistelios:
Methodology, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation. Georgios
A. Papadopoulos: Project administration, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization. Panagiotis Apostolou: Conceptualization,
Writing – original draft.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
References
[1] ICS, Shipping and World Trade: Driving Prosperity, International Chamber of
Shipping. (2021). https://www.ics-shipping.org/shipping-fact/sh
ipping-and-world-trade-driving-prosperity/(accessed September 15, 2021).
[2] UNCTAD, Review of Maritime Transport 2020, United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development. (2020). https://unctad.org/webflyer/review-maritime-tr
ansport-2020 (accessed September 15, 2021).
[3] Allianz, Safety and Shipping Review, Munich, Germany, 2020. https://www.agcs.
allianz.com/content/dam/onemarketing/agcs/agcs/reports/AGCS-Safety-Shipp
ing-Review-2020.pdf (accessed September 15, 2021).
[4] BIMCO, The Guidelines on Cyber Security Onboard Ships, Bagsværd, Denmark,
2020. https://www.bimco.org/about-us-and-our-members/publications/the-gui
delines-on-cyber-security-onboard-ships (accessed September 15, 2021).
[5] D. Cimpean, J. Meire, V. Bouckaert, S. vande Casteele, A. Pelle, L. Hellebooge,
Cyber Security Aspects in the Maritime Sector, Hraklion, Greece, 2011. http
s://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/cyber-security-aspects-in-the-maritime-se
ctor-1 (accessed September 15, 2021).
[6] J.I. Alcaide, R.G. Llave, Critical infrastructures cybersecurity and the maritime
sector, Transp. Res. Procedia 45 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
trpro.2020.03.058.
[7] A. Androjna, T. Brcko, I. Pavic, H. Greidanus, Assessing cyber challenges of
maritime navigation, J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 8 (2020) 1–21, https://doi.org/10.3390/
jmse8100776.
[8] L. Ayala, Cybersecurity Lexicon, 1st ed., Apress, New York, USA, 2016.
[9] Futurenautics, Crew Connectivity Survey Report 2015, Futurenautics Ltd. (2015).
https://www.futurenautics.
com/product/2015-crew-connectivity-survey-report/(accessed September 15,
2021).
[10] Futurenautics, Crew Connectivity Survey Report 2018, Futurenautics Ltd. (2018).
http://www.navarino.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Crew_Connectiv
ity_2018_Survey_Report.pdf (accessed September 15, 2021).
[11] IMO, Maritime Cyber Risk, International Maritime Organization. (2019). https://
www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Security/Pages/Cyber-security.aspx (accessed
September 15, 2021).
[12] MARSH, Global Marine Practice The Risk of Cyber-Attack To the Maritime Sector,
Marsh & McLennan Companies. (2014). https://www.ahcusa.org/uploads/2/1/
9/8/21985670/the_risk_of_cyber-attack_to_the_maritime_sector-07-2014.pdf
(accessed September 15, 2021).
[13] K. Tam, K.D. Jones, M. Papadaki, Threats and Impacts in Maritime Cyber Security,
Engineering & Technology Reference. 1 (2012). 10.1049/etr.2015.0123.
[14] WEF, The Global Risks Report 2021, Geneva, Switzerland, 2021. https://www.we
forum.org/reports/the-global-risks-report-2021 (accessed September 15, 2021).
[15] Allianz, Allianz Risk Barometer Identifying Hte Major Business Risks for 2021,
Munich, Germany, 2021. https://www.assiteca.it/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/
Allianz-Risk-Barometer-2021.pdf (accessed September 15, 2021).
[16] J. Daffron, Shen Attack Cyber Risk Scenario: up to $110 billion at risk from
maritime malware attack, Cambridge Centre for Risk Studies. (2019).
https://risk-studies-viewpoint.blog.jbs.cam.ac.uk/2019/10/30/sh
en-attack-cyber-risk-scenario-up-to-110-billion-at-risk-from-maritim
e-malware-attack/(accessed September 15, 2021).
[17] J.-E. Vinnem, I.B. Utne, Safe Societies in a Changing World : Proceedings of ESREL
2018, June 17-21, 2018, Trondheim, Norway., Taylor & Francis Group, London
UK, 2018. https://ntnuopen.ntnu.no/ntnu-xmlui/bitstream/handle/11250/
2586644/10.1201_9781351174664-188.pdf?sequence=2&isAllowed=y (accessed
September 15, 2021).
[18] C. Cimpanu, All four of the world’s largest shipping companies have now been hit
by cyber-attacks, ZDNet. (2020). https://www.zdnet.com/article/all-four-of-th
e-worlds-largest-shipping-companies-have-now-been-h
it-by-cyber-attacks/(accessed September 15, 2021).
[19] A. Sheperd, What is NotPetya?, ITPro. (2021). https://www.itpro.co.uk/m
alware/34381/what-is-notpetya (accessed September 15, 2021).
[20] C. Pownall, The Context and Impact of Maerk’s NotPetya cyber attack, London, UK,
2019. https://charliepownall.
com/maersk-notpetya-cyberattack-timeline/(accessed September 15, 2021).
[21] P. Kapalidis, Cybersecurity at Sea, in: 2020. 10.1007/978-3-030-34630-0_8.
[22] IMO, Guidelines on Cyber Risk Mangement, London, UK, 2017. https://wwwcdn.
imo.org/localresources/en/OurWork/Security/Documents/MSC-FAL.1-Circ.3%
20-%20Guidelines%20On%20Maritime%20Cyber%20Risk%20Management%20
(Secretariat).pdf. (accessed September 15, 2021).
[23] M. Barrett, Framework for improving critical infrastructure cybersecurity, in:
Proceedings of the Annual ISA Analysis Division Symposium, 2018.
[24] IPA, Cybersecurity Management Guidelines Ver 1.1., Tokyo, Japan, 2016.
https://www.yumpu.com/en/document/view/56523440/cybersecurity-man
agement-guidelines-ver-11 (accessed September 15, 2021).
[25] DNV, Cyber security resilience management for ships and mobile offshore units in
operation, Høvik, Norway, 2016. https://www.gard.no/Content/2186553
6/DNVGL-RP-0496.pdf (accessed September 15, 2021).
[26] ABS, Guidance notes on Risk Assessment Applications for the Marine and Offshore
Industries, Spring, USA, 2020. Guidance notes on Risk Assessment Applications for
the Marine and Offshore Industries (accessed September 15, 2021).
[27] INSB, International Naval Surveys Bureau Class, INSB Class. (2010). https://insb.gr
(accessed September 15, 2021).
[28] Trend Micro, Spear-phishing email : most favored APT attack bait, Trend Micro
Incorporated. (2012). https://documents.trendmicro.com/assets/wp/wp-spear-ph
ishing-email-most-favored-apt-attack-bait.pdf (accessed September 15, 2021).
E.P. Kechagias et al. 