international journal of critical infrastructure protection 39 (2022) 100556
Available online 18 August 2022
1874-5482/© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Exploring the concept of public-private partnership in building critical
infrastructure resilience against unexpected events: A systematic review
Godslove Ampratwum *
, Robert Osei-Kyei, Vivian W.Y. Tam
School of Engineering, Design and Built Environment, Western Sydney University, Australia
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
PPP
CIR
Critical infrastructure resilience
Robustness
Public private partnership
Reliability
ABSTRACT
This study explores the concept of public private partnership (PPP) in building critical infrastructure resilience
(CIR) by looking at the attributes and objectives of the key stakeholders in PPP; government and private critical
infrastructure (CI) operators. Although extant studies have been conducted on critical infrastructure resilience,
the concept of PPP in CIR has not received much attention. This study conducted a systematic review on the
objectives of the government and private CI operators in PPP to build CIR. A systematic methodology was used to
retrieve 22 relevant publications that were subjected to content analysis to identify the objectives of PPP in CIR.
20 set of objectives were derived from the selected publications. In addition, social capital theory was used to
explore the attributes of PPP in CIR. A conceptual framework was developed with the objectives and attributes of
PPP in CIR. Some of the objectives included, conducting national risks assessment and vulnerability assessments,
national critical infrastructure resilience plan and identifying what constitutes CI. In addition, social capital
theory was used to explore the attributes of PPP in CIR. The findings outline the responsibilities of the government and private CI operators in partnership to build the resilience of critical infrastructure.
1. Introduction
Infrastructure systems are large scale man-made systems that operate
interdependently to produce and distribute goods and services [1]. An
infrastructure is termed as critical if its incapacity or destruction have
significant impact on the societal functioning [2]. Critical infrastructure
are in the form of energy transmission and distribution networks, the
telephone communication networks, the transportation systems, the
water and gas distribution systems etc. [1]. Countries may have slight
differences in what they deem as critical infrastructure, but mostly, they
are made up of: electric power systems, natural gas and oil, telecommunications, banking and finance, transportation, water supply systems,
government services and emergency services [3]. The concept of
building the resilience of critical infrastructure over the last decade has
been focused on the technical measures in creating robust critical
infrastructure (CI) with the ability to withstand significant threats [4].
Critical infrastructure resilience is the ability of the critical infrastructure to provide its functional and operational service delivery when its
normal functional capabilities are challenged [5,6]. Focusing on only
the technical aspects of critical infrastructure resilience is not conclusive. The socio-technical aspects which comprises of the social
dimension and technical dimensions needs to be considered to make CIs
fully resilient. Public-private partnership (PPP) emerges as a function of
the socio-technical aspects of critical infrastructure resilience that needs
to be examined thoroughly. In fact, studies nowadays recognize PPP as a
mechanism in building critical infrastructure resilience (CIR). However,
the objectives of PPP in CIR are missing in literature. The objectives of
PPP in CIR are the responsibilities of government and private CI operators. Effective accountability is ensured in public-private partnership
when the roles and responsibilities are outlined [7]. It has been advocated by Field and Look [8] that building the resilience of critical
infrastructure requires breaking down the traditional silos to work
together around a common goal. Resilience of critical infrastructure is
directly influenced by the participation and involvement of key stakeholders such as the public sector i.e. government and its associated
agencies and the private sector i.e. infrastructure owners and operators
[9]. The collaboration of both government and private CI operators in
critical infrastructure systems [10] where resources are co-invested is a
useful tool to achieve critical infrastructure resilience (CIR). Even
though the government is responsible for protecting critical infrastructure and citizens from disasters, they involve the private infrastructure
owners in its implementation [11] (European Commission, 2014). The
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: 19618845@student.westernsydney.edu.au (G. Ampratwum).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijcip
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcip.2022.100556
Received 3 March 2022; Received in revised form 1 August 2022; Accepted 12 August 2022 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 39 (2022) 100556
2
services and products provided by the private CI operators are key to the
welfare of the society which makes them also responsible for ensuring
the resilience of critical infrastructure [12]. Critical Infrastructure
resilience is a national agenda usually led by the government with the
support of private infrastructure operators. Hence, the need to have
assigned responsibilities for the stakeholders involved in CIR.
Inasmuch as there are some studies that have highlighted public
private partnership in resilience building [13–23], there is still a paucity
of research on the objectives of the government and private CI operators
and attributes of PPP in building CIR.
To address the current gaps in knowledge and practice, this study
aims to explore into detail the concept of PPP in CIR by looking at the
objectives of key stakeholders in PPP; government and private critical
infrastructure (CI) operators and the attributes that underpins PPP in
CIR. Considering this, the following objectives were derived with the
following derived objectives:
1 To assess the annual publication trend on PPP in CIR.
2 To identify the countries with the most publications on the objectives
of PPP in CIR.
3 To identify the objectives of the government and private CI operators
in CIR and develop a conceptual framework based on the identified
list of objectives.
4 To use social capital theory to identify the attributes that underpins
PPP in CIR.
This study distinguishes itself from previous studies by conducting a
systematic review to derive the objectives of both the government and
private CI operators in building the resilience of critical infrastructure.
2. The concept of PPP in CIR
Resilience of critical infrastructure is directly influenced by the
participation and involvement of key stakeholders such as public sector
i.e. government and its associated agencies and the private sector i.e.
infrastructure operators [9]. The government is legally responsible for
protecting citizens and critical infrastructures from disruptive events
even though majority of the CIs are owned by the private sector [11,24].
The services provided by private infrastructure owners are the lifelines
of the society and thus their contribution to the technical and operational expertise in required in CIR [12]. The private infrastructure operators are the right personnel to manage the risks that threaten the
functional performance of CIs and propose the appropriate mitigation
measures [25]. However, critical infrastructures are extremely delicate
and interconnected systems that the private CI operators cannot be
solely responsible for building its resilience even if they have the technical and financial capabilities. PPP in CIR is a comprehensive way of
proactively managing the risks that impacts CI through an all-hazard
approach which increases the responsiveness and the timely recovery
of CIs [18]. For the government, PPP is an instrument that can be used to
engage the private sector in public affairs in providing standards and
guidelines without the need to enforce strict regulations.
The PPP aspect in CIR is distinct from the traditional PPP in the
engineering, architectural and construction industry. PPP in critical
infrastructure resilience is more program-oriented which is not
restrained by time periods but rather, it is aimed at increasing the
functional performance of critical infrastructure [26]. This study argues
that the objectives of PPP in CIR will be different from the objectives of
traditional PPP. The structure and governance of PPP in CIR also requires different approaches from the traditional PPP because of difference in the goal of forming the public-private partnership. PPP in CIR
requires an approach that maximizes the collaboration between the
government and private CI operators and does not reduce their
co-operation to direct partnership as it occurs in traditional PPP [26].
The government and private infrastructure owners form a network of
institutions that mutually and collectively contribute resources for the
building of critical infrastructure resilience [27]. The government
agencies and institutions from the public sector provide a form of
oversight responsibility to ensure the compliance of resilience regulations by private CI owners. A study conducted by Provan and Kenis [27]
distinguished network governance under three categories namely;
participant governance, governance by lead organization and network
administration organization. In participant governance, the government
agencies and institutions and the private CI operators govern themselves
without a separate and unique governance entity. Every member of the
participant governance network is involved in the process of decision
making. This is a decentralized governance where the government’s
oversight responsibility is diminished. The disadvantage is the lack of
accountability on the part of the private CI owners. The network governance by lead organization is where major activities of the government
agencies and institutions and private CI owners are coordinated by a
single participating member. The advantage of network governance led
organization is having an oversight responsibility over the operations
and activities of network monitored. In the network administration organization, a distinct organization is set up to explicitly govern the CI
network formed and its activities. The difference with network administration organization and network governance led organization is, the former
is not another network participant organization providing its own services but rather the network is governed externally. Amongst the three
distinct form of network governance, the most efficient to adapt to build
the resilience of critical infrastructure is the network governance by lead
organization.
The concept of PPP in CIR has received some research attention in
varying areas but still, little attention has been drawn to the objectives of
PPP in CIR. For instance, Pursiainen [11] conducted a research on the
resilience approaches in Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden. Pursiainen [11] study identified that the resilience of critical infrastructure
in these Nordic countries were more oriented towards community
resilience. It further identified that PPP or corporate social responsibility, state support and regulation remains a weak link in
achieving critical infrastructure resilience in these Nordic countries
[11]. Gimenez, Labaka [28] developed a maturity model as a guide for
local government on how to include city stakeholders in the process of
resilience building in the city. Their research acknowledges the need for
partnership and coordination with representatives that operate critical
infrastructures. However, their study focuses more on the role of the
local government and how the collaboration between the government
and private infrastructure owners can be fostered in building CIR.
Woodruff, Bowman [29] quantified and compared policies and programs that affect resilience in 101 largest cities in the United States.
Diehl and Hare [30] expanded the public-private-personal (P3) partnership by including the needs of the end-users of critical infrastructure.
Stewart, Kolluru [31] developed a framework for community resilience
which integrates the interdependencies amongst public and private
sector organizations, critical infrastructure and key resources, supply
chains and local communities. In their study, they considered public
private partnership as an enabler in the post-disaster response and recovery. Marana ˜ et al. [32] developed a framework for the development
of an effective public private people partnership (4P) to enhance the
collaboration among city stakeholders in city resilience building process. Their framework consisted of 16 characteristics needed to be
implemented to develop 4Ps. Their study was devoid of the objectives of
each party connected to the 4P collaboration.
Trucco and Petrenj [18] studied the different approaches to PPP in
critical infrastructure protection and resilience in seven countries. Their
study identified the challenges those seven countries face and how they
overcome those challenges. McCarthy [16] interrogated the separation
of the political and economic intricacies of public/private and state/market in cyber-security. Givens and Busch [33] analyzed the difficulties in using public private partnership as a mechanism to build
critical infrastructure protection. In their study, public-private coordination, gaps in information sharing, shortfalls in private sector
G. Ampratwum et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 39 (2022) 100556
3
engagement in critical infrastructure protection and cyber-security were
the challenges in cyber-security protection. Gabriela and Mircea [23]
conducted a risk assessment in public private partnership for infrastructure recovery after global crisis. In their study, they identified
public private partnership as a suitable vehicle for providing financial
support in critical infrastructure recovery after turbulent periods [23].
Gim et al. [14] demonstrated the responsibilities of the water-energy
nexus in Arizona. In their study they grouped the responsibilities
under operational, regulatory, and constitutional.
Auzzir et al. [34] explored whether PPP can be used strategically to
minimize the effects of disasters in developing countries. Their study
outlined shared risk and benefits, mutual coordination and organizational arrangement as the characteristics that can enhance the collaboration between the government and private CI operators. Auzzir et al.
[34] study did not show how the partnership can be formed and their
respective objectives Haraguchi et al. [35] developed a Business Continuity Management based on Public-Private Partnership to address
SMEs and supply chain resilience. Kruhlov et al. [36] analyzed the
possibility of providing cybersecurity through the use of public-private
partnership mechanisms. Kozine et al. [17] developed an approach to
assessing critical infrastructure resilience which informs the allocation
of resources and operation in emergency management.
Carr [37] conducted research on how private CI operators and policy
makers conceptualize their respective roles in national cyber security.
The study analyzed public-private partnership from the perspective of
both the government and private CI operators in cyber security. A study
conducted by Newlove-Eriksson et al. [38] on critical information infrastructures, used the 2017 Swedish ICT scandal to demonstrate the
accountability gaps that can occur in public-private governance of
critical information infrastructure. Trucco et al. [39] tested and
validated the Resilience Capacities Assessment for Critical Infrastructure
Disruptions (READ). The READ framework was primarily designed to
integrate the resilience capabilities of emergency services when emergency services develop a plan to cope with CI disruption. The research
conducted by Trucco et al. [39] were capabilities-based and does not
explicitly outline the objectives of the government and the private
infrastructure operators in building CIR.
3. Review methodology
For a comprehensive review Scopus database were searched to
retrieve publications relevant to PPP research in critical infrastructure
resilience with the aim of identifying the objectives of PPP in CIR.
Scopus online database was used to search for relevant literature
because it covers wide-ranging coverage of academic journals from
different disciplines [40]. The indexing process for publications are fast
which increases the likelihood of retrieving ore current publications
[41]. Fig. 1 outlines the workflow of the study.
3.1. Identification
The first step was to use a set of keywords to search for relevant
publications in Scopus. Finally, the abstract and full-text screening was
conducted to retain relevant papers that were on PPP in CIR. The keywords used in the search string in Scopus database included "public
private partnership", "PPP", "critical infrastructure resilience", "resilience
of critical infrastructu*", "critical infrastructu*", "PPP in CIR", "resilience". These keywords were used in the ‘title, abstract and keywords’
search for Scopus. The search was also limited to only journals and the
language selected was English. There was no year limitation.
Fig. 1. An overview of research process.
G. Ampratwum et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 39 (2022) 100556
4
The full search code used on 10th August 2021 is stated below;
(TITLE-ABS-KEY ("public private partnership") OR TITLE-ABS-KEY
("public private collaboration") OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ("PPP") AND
TITLE-ABS-KEY ("critical infrastructure resilience") OR TITLE-ABS-KEY
("resilience of critical infrastructu*") OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ("critical
infrastructu*")) AND (LIMIT-TO (DOCTYPE, "ar") OR LIMIT-TO (DOCTYPE, "re")) AND (LIMIT-TO (LANGUAGE, "English")) AND (LIMIT-TO
(SRCTYPE, "j"))
The search code generated 33 publications.
3.2. Screening stage
The abstract of the 33 publications were screened to retain publications that were related to PPP in CIR. After the screening of the title
and abstracts 2 articles were eliminated. This is due to the adoption and
application of the term ‘resilience’ by research disciplines including
psychology, organizational, ecology, and management studies [42].
3.3. Literature selection
Another round of screening was conducted where a full text reading
of the remaining 31 publications was done. Publications whose full text
were not related to PPP in critical infrastructure resilience were eliminated. This exercise rounded up to the number of articles selected to
only 12 publications. It must be noted that none of the 12 selected
publication critically examined the objectives of public private partnership in building the critical infrastructure resilience. These selected
publications rather gave few insights on the objectives of government
and private critical infrastructure (CI) operators in building the resilience of critical infrastructure. This confirms the limited knowledge on
PPP in CIR research domain.
3.4. Analyzing target papers
The 12 papers were laid open to a thorough content analysis with the
intent of deriving the objectives of the government and private CI operators in building critical infrastructure resilience. 10 governmental
and institutional reports from worldwide recognized organizations and
countries advanced in critical infrastructure resilience were included;
Organization for Economic Cooperation and development (2019), UN
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (2020), United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe (2020), The World Bank Group (2019), United
Nations (2018), European Union Circle (2018), Inte-American Development Bank and OECD (2020), National Infrastructure Commission
Office (2020), Australian Government (2020), United States Homeland
Security (2012). The significance of including gray literature such as
research and committee reports and government and institutional reports is the source of evidence they provide in systematic and metaanalysis [43]. gray literature is produced on all levels of government,
business and industry and government [44–46]. The content analysis
was conducted through full text reading of the journal articles and
institutional and governmental literature to retrieve the relevant information needed in this study. Table 1 below details the list of selected
publication including journal articles and the governmental and institutional literature used for the systematic review in this research.
4. Results and discussion
4.1. Annual publication trend
Analyzing the publication trend allows the researcher to gage the
number of research attention dedicated to a research domain on a yearly
basis. Fig. 2 represents the annual publication trend on PPP in critical
infrastructure resilience. It can be seen in Fig. 2 below that the research
attention on PPP in CIR began in 2003 with 2 publications. These 2
publications were from Michel-Kerjan [47,48]. These authors examined
Table 1
List of selected publications.
S/
N
Authors Title Year Journal/Publisher
1 Marana ˜ P.,
Labaka L.,
Sarriegi J.M.
We need them all:
development of a
public private people
partnership to support
a city resilience
building process
2020 Technological
Forecasting and
Social Change
2 Egli D.S.,
Donohue B.H.,
Waddell R.L.,
Contestabile J.M.,
Cosgrove J.B.
Operationalizing
critical infrastructure
resilience
2019 Johns Hopkins APL
Technical Digest
(Applied Physics
Laboratory)
3 Trucco P., Petrenj
B., Mauro C.D.
Resilience capacities
assessment for critical
infrastructures
disruption: READ pilot
applications (part 2)
2018 International
Journal of Critical
Infrastructures
4 Strandh V. Exploring
vulnerabilities in
preparedness – rail
bound traffic and
terrorist attacks
2017 Journal of
Transportation
Security
5 Wrede D., Will A.,
Linderkamp T.,
Von Der
Schulenburg J.-M.
G.
An Urban Crisis
Management System
for Critical
Infrastructures:
Participation
Possibilities for
Insurance Companies
2017 Geneva Papers on
Risk and Insurance:
Issues and Practice
6 van Erp J. New governance of
corporate
cybersecurity: a case
study of the
petrochemical industry
in the Port of
Rotterdam
2017 Crime, Law and
Social Change
7 Cutts M., Wang
Y., Yu Q.
New Perspectives on
Building Resilience
into Infrastructure
Systems
2017 Natural Hazards
Review
8 Dunn-Cavelty M.,
Suter M.
Public-Private
Partnerships are no
silver bullet: An
expanded governance
model for Critical
Infrastructure
Protection
2009 International
Journal of Critical
Infrastructure
Protection
9 Stewart G.T.,
Kolluru R., Smith
M.
Leveraging publicprivate partnerships to
improve community
resilience in times of
disaster
2009 International
Journal of Physical
Distribution &
Logistics
Management
10 Parks R.C., Rogers
E.
Vulnerability
assessment for critical
infrastructure control
systems
2008 IEEE Security and
Privacy
11 Michel-Kerjan E. New challenges in
critical infrastructures:
A US perspective
2003 Journal of
Contingencies and
Crisis Management
12 Carr M. Public-private
partnerships in
national cyber-security
strategies
2016 International
Affairs
A Australian
Government
Critical Infrastructure
Resilience Strategy
2010 Commonwealth of
Australia
B EU Circle Impacts of Climate
Change and Extreme
Weather Events on
Critical Infrastructure
State of the Art Review
and Taxonomy of
Existing Knowledge
EU-CIRCLE
consortium
C Teresa Deubelli Towards resilient and
sustainable
2019
(continued on next page)
G. Ampratwum et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 39 (2022) 100556
5
the energy delivery system in the United States. Since then, the
publication trend has been undulating. The highest number of publications recorded was in 2017 with 4 publications. The number of publications records that public-private partnership has not received the
needed research attention even though PPP has been recognized as a
mechanism to build critical infrastructure resilience in literature.
4.2. Key contributing countries
Fig. 3 indicates the most productive countries in PPP in CIR research
domain. United States leads the chart with 9 publications. This is not
quite surprising because since the terrorist attacks in September 2011,
the U.S has made great efforts in fostering public-private partnership in
critical infrastructure protection [49]. Sweden was ranked 2nd with 5
publications. The Sweden government has a large initiative of establishing the states potential in improving community preparation and
resilience [50]. In 2013, the Swedish government imposed a comprehensive foreign policy to identify the requirements for a strategy for
their critical infrastructure protection [50]. Australia and United
Kingdom were ranked 3rd and 4th with 4 publications each. There is the
Critical Infrastructure Program for Modeling and Analysis in Australia
and the Critical Infrastructure Resilience Program in the UK. In
Australia, there is the Australian Attorney General’s Office and the
Australian Government’s Resilience Expert Advisory Group in partnership with Resilient Organizations who developed a model and an instrument for the assessment of resilience of critical infrastructure sectors
[51].
4.3. Objectives of the government and private critical infrastructure
operators in building critical infrastructure resilience through PPP
The “public sector” refers to the government agencies and institutions at the levels of government which is generally; local, state and
federal [52]. The various government departments and agencies have
varying roles and oversight responsibilities over infrastructure sectors.
The private sector in this study refers to private critical infrastructure
owners. The groups under the private sector are responsible for the daily
functional performance of critical infrastructure. Table 2 presents a list
of the objectives of government and private infrastructure owners in PPP
Table 1 (continued )
S/
N
Authors Title Year Journal/Publisher
infrastructure: A case
study of
Governance of Critical
Infrastructure
Resilience in Costa Rica
Inter-American
Development Bank
and OECD
d organization for
economic cooperation and
development
Good Governance for
Critical Infrastructure
Resilience, OECD
Reviews of Risk
Management Policies
2019 organization for
economic cooperation and
development
E National
Infrastructure
Commission, UK
ANTICIPATE, REACT,
RECOVER
2020 National
Infrastructure
Commission, UK
F Abhilash Panda,
Nicholas J. Ramos
and
Aleksandrina
Mavrodieva
Making Critical
Infrastructure
Resilient: Ensuring
Continuity of Service
Policy and Regulations
In Europe And Central
Asia
2020 United Nations
Office for Disaster
Risk Reduction
G UNITED
NATIONS
ECONOMIC
COMMISSION
FOR EUROPE
Climate Change
Impacts and
Adaptation
for Transport Networks
and Nodes
2020 United Nations
H United Nations Report of the openended
intergovernmental
expert working group
on indicators and
terminology relating to
disaster risk reduction
2016 United Nations
I St´ephane
Hallegatte Jun
Rentschler Julie
Rozenberg
The Resilient
Infrastructure
Opportunity
2019 World Bank
J Office of
Infrastructure
Protection
Office of Infrastructure
Protection Strategic
Plan
2012 Homeland Security,
United States
Fig. 2. Annual publication trend.
G. Ampratwum et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 39 (2022) 100556
6
in CIR. In this research, the objectives are the responsibilities of the
government and private CI owners in building critical infrastructure
resilience. According to Marana ˜ et al. [32], the effectiveness of partnership is examined through the responsibilities of both the government
and private CI operators. Undefined responsibilities impede the functioning of the network of government and private CI operators created
for critical infrastructure resilience [53]. Effective accountability is
ensured in public-private partnership when responsibilities are outlined
at the onset of setting up the PPP in CIR networks with goals clearly
articulated [7]. The success or failure of PPP in CIR is to a great extent
dependent on the performance of both the government and private CI
operators.
The list of objectives was subsequently grouped under three categories; operational, regulatory and constitutional which were adapted
from Gim et al. [54] study. Table 3 outlines the objectives of the government and private critical infrastructure operators grouped under the
three categories.
4.3.1. Operational objectives
The list of objectives under this category are twelve. The private CI
operators must identify and evaluate the vulnerabilities within the CI as
part of their daily operational activities. Sensitizing infrastructure operators on conducting frequent vulnerability and risks assessments helps
improve the robustness of CIs against disruptive events [55]. Private CI
operators must also develop functional resilience plan for their CIs to
reduce and manage the aftermath effects of disasters and keep critical
infrastructure functioning during the recovery period [56]. Under the
operational objectives is the investment in emergency preparedness and
disaster management capacities. Investing in robust and resilience
enhancement features for critical infrastructures are in the best interest
of the society and the critical infrastructure owners. However, when the
likelihood of any disruptive event is considered low, the infrastructure
operators may be defiant in investing in resilience enhancement measures for critical infrastructure. It is also expected of the government to
increase the awareness of private CI operators on the dangers and
threats against their critical infrastructure. Constant communication
between the government and private CI operators will ensure the exchange of information from both parties. Relevant information
regarding the interdependencies between the government and infrastructure operators can be shared to improve their performance [28].
Van Eeten et al. [57] asserts that sharing information about the vulnerabilities of critical infrastructure is important in safeguarding CIs
against disasters. A collaboration amongst private infrastructure operators is necessary, where they share information beneficial to the
resilience of their CIs especially since CIs are interconnected. The information shared on vulnerabilities within the CI must be timely and
relevant. Voluntary information sharing impedes the process of building
the resilience of critical infrastructure [58]. Hence, private CI operators
can be mandated to share timely information on the vulnerabilities to
implement strategies to reduce the impact of the vulnerabilities on CI. It
has also been acknowledged that the government must lead the plan of
building the resilience of critical infrastructure. It is expected of the
government and private infrastructure operators to form collaborative
engagement with private infrastructure operators by forming a network
of PPP for CIR. A network for building CIR may be created for different
infrastructure sectors where private infrastructure operators will be
invited to join either mandatorily or voluntarily. Government can be
represented by their respective infrastructure agencies in these networks. Members of the resilience network can share experiences, lessons
and exchange information in a secured way that will provide assistance
on CI resistance and absorption of disruptive events [59]. Formation of
networks with infrastructure operators from different critical infrastructure sectors add additional opportunities for building resilience
[53]. The cross-sector collaboration must be initiated by the government
authorities who have the highest level of authority and influence to
ensure its success [53].
4.3.2. Regulatory objectives
The list of objectives under this category are five. It is expected of the
government to develop a building code to guide private CI owners in the
design and construction of resilient critical infrastructure. It is recommended that the expertise of the private CI owners is included in
developing the building code. The government must establish an oversight accountability through sectorial ministries and governmental
agencies to ensure the compliance of national resilience plans. According to Hallegatte, Rentschler [60] sectoral ministries and agencies are
typically responsible for the oversight accountability of the delivery of
infrastructure services and its regulation. These government agencies
have the responsibility coordinating the management of disaster risks
and resilience issues concerning the critical infrastructure [60]. In
France, the General Secretariat for Defense and National Security under
the prime minister manages the resilience policy for CI across eight-line
ministries, using a multi-hazard approach. In Australia, there is the
Australian Attorney General’s Office and the Australian Government’s
Resilience Expert Advisory Group in collaboration with Resilient Organizations who developed a model of Sector Resilience and an instrument
which is used for the assessment of resilience of critical infrastructure
sectors [51]. The National Critical Infrastructure Resilience Committee
Fig. 3. Key contributing countries.
G. Ampratwum et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 39 (2022) 100556
7
comprising of relevant Australian Government and State and Territory
(TISN) officials has been established to provide coordination of the national approach to critical infrastructure resilience [25].
4.3.3. Constitutional objectives
The list of objectives under this category are three. The foundation
for building resilience of critical infrastructure is to define what infrastructure systems are the lifeline of the society and what must be protected [61]. In Switzerland, their national infrastructure has been
divided into critical sectors and has subsequently been divided into
critical subsectors [62]. The Australian Security of Critical Infrastructure
Act mandates the creation of a registry of critical infrastructure asset.
The Act mandates the Department of Home Affairs the right to request
for information on critical infrastructure assets to determine whether
Table 2
Expectations of PPP in CIR.
S/
N
Expectations References Sector
1 Conducting national risks
assessment /hazard
identification/risk and
vulnerability assessments
2,3,5,7,
9,10,11, B, C,
F
Government and
private infrastructure
owners
2 National Critical Infrastructure
Resilience Plan
B, D, C F, G Government and
private infrastructure
owners
3 Identifying what constitutes
critical infrastructure
3, 7, C, D, I Government
4 Developing disaster loss database
(creating repositories of
knowledge)
6, A, B, H Government
5 Investments in emergency
preparedness and disaster
management capacities
2, C, F, I Government
6 Ensure effective incentives for
investing in ex ante resilience
measures
B, C, I Government
7 Conducting training for different
infrastructure operators
1,4,3 Government
8 Developing Resilience building
code (resilience standards)
E, G, J Government and
private infrastructure
owners
9 Develop business continuity plans 9, I Private infrastructure
owners
10 Increasing awareness among the
private infrastructure operators
2 Government
11 Develop a functional critical
infrastructure resilience plan
2 private infrastructure
owners
12 Constant communication between
government and private
infrastructure operators
7 Government and
private infrastructure
owners
13 Inter-operability between
emergency services and private CI
owners
7 Government and
private infrastructure
owners
14 Collaborative engagement with
private infrastructure operators
9 Government and
private CI operators
15 Provision of timely intelligence on
critical infrastructure
vulnerabilities
12 Government and
private infrastructure
owners
16 Establish accountability
framework
C Government
17 Establish provisions, including
fees or corrective measures
applicable in cases of noncompliance with the resilience
requirements outlined in the
relevant policies
C Government
18 Collaboration amongst Private
infrastructure operators
12 Private infrastructure
owners
19 Ability to identify and evaluate
vulnerabilities
9 Private infrastructure
owners
20 Coordinating partnership formed
between government and private
infrastructure owners
8 Government
Table 3
Categorized list of expectations of PPP in CIR.
Code
(s)
Resilience Work Sector References
Operational
(C1)
C11 Ability to
identify and
evaluate
vulnerabilities
Private
infrastructure
owners
9
C12 Develop a
functional
critical
infrastructure
resilience plan
private
infrastructure
owners
2
C13 Investments in
emergency
preparedness
and disaster
management
capacities
Government 2, C, F, I
C14 Increasing
awareness
among the
private
infrastructure
operators
Government 2
C15 Constant
communication
between
government and
private
infrastructure
operators
Government 7
C16 Develop
business
continuity plans
Private
infrastructure
owners
9, I
C17 Collaborative
engagement
with private
infrastructure
operators
Government
and private CI
operators
9
C18 Collaboration
amongst Private
infrastructure
operators
Private
infrastructure
owners
12
C19 Ensure effective
incentives for
investing in ex
ante resilience
measures
Government B, C, I
C110 Inter-operability
between
emergency
services and
private CI
owners
Government
and private
infrastructure
owners
7
C111 Provision of
timely
intelligence on
critical
infrastructure
vulnerabilities
Government
and private
infrastructure
owners
12
C112 Conducting
training for
different
infrastructure
operators
Government 1,4,3
Regulatory
(C2)
C21 Developing
Resilience
building code
(resilience
standards)
Government
and private
infrastructure
owners
E, G, J
C22 Establish
accountability
framework
Government C
C23 Establish
provisions,
Government C
(continued on next page)
G. Ampratwum et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 39 (2022) 100556
8
any risk to national security is associated with any critical infrastructure.
Understanding the significance of infrastructure interdependency enables the maximum allocation of resources [63]. The private infrastructure operators may not have adequate resources to identify other
critical infrastructure whose functioning is connected to the critical infrastructures that they operate. Hence, the government’s involvement is
significant in identifying all these interdependencies that exist amongst
critical infrastructure.
Sun et al. [63] asserts that the information on the effects of critical
infrastructure interdependency can be quantified by measuring the loss
of functionalities in critical infrastructure during disasters or disruptive
events. Resilience standards will help private infrastructure operators to
equip their critical infrastructure to be robust against stresses and shocks
(National Infrastructure Commission, 2020). These standards enable
infrastructure operators to understand what actions needs to be undertaken to ensure their critical infrastructure are resilient. A national
resilience plan is also needed to reduce manage the aftermath effects of
disasters and keep critical infrastructure functioning during the recovery
period [56]. The governments of many countries have initiated plans for
building the resilience of their critical infrastructure [64]. In developing
a national critical infrastructure resilience plan, resilience must be
defined and the parameters for assessing the resilience of critical infrastructure must be outlined [55]. The government cannot define the
boundaries of resilience without involving the private infrastructure
owners who are knowledgeable about the operations of the critical infrastructures that they own or manage. This national critical infrastructure resilience plan must detail the interdependencies that exit
between critical infrastructures and their associated risks. A national
critical infrastructure resilience plan offers a comprehensive guidance to
the government agencies and private infrastructure owners and operators. The plan provides the critical infrastructures that require maximum
attention in addition to estimated restoration timelines for critical infrastructures Cutts et al. [53]. It is also expected that the government
makes a law where national risks assessment of CI is mandatory. Defaulters of this constitutional provisional must be punished for
non-compliance.
4.4. Attributes of PPP in building CIR
Attributes are the characteristics of a public-private partnership.
Attributes are needed for an efficient working collaboration between the
government and private infrastructure operators in building CIR [32]. A
successful collaboration between government and private infrastructure
operators positively affects the progress of critical infrastructure resilience [65]. PPP in building CIR is an on-going process [66] that should
be well orchestrated to ensure a win-win partnership [65]. The collaboration between the government and private CI operators will enhance
knowledge sharing [67] which will influence the resilience building of
critical infrastructure. Countries will achieve satisfying performance
from resources invested in critical infrastructure resilience when their
government and private infrastructure operators collaborate and interactive effectively [68].
Social Capital Theory is conceptualized in this study to define the
attributes that underpins the collaboration between the government and
private critical infrastructure operators in building CIR. These attributes
have strong influence on the goals, activities and achievement of resilient critical infrastructure [31]. Social capital gives a theoretical lens
into the advantages gained by firms or institutions that use social networks [69]. It contributes to the resilience capability of an organization
[70] by acting as a conduit for information accessibility, access to resources, and efficient diffusion of information [71].
4.4.1. Conceptualizing social capital theory
Social capital exist in every relationship that exchange information
and provide access to resources [72]. A key element in the collaboration
between the government and private infrastructure owners is to nurture
the relationship between them before any disruptive event [73]. Social
capital theory offers illustrative possibilities for the collaboration between the government and private CI operators to reduce critical
infrastructure vulnerabilities collectively [74]. Any form of collaboration with high levels of social capital relations achieve their goals better
[74]. The social capital theory is used expound the attributes that underpins the government and private CI operators’ collaboration in
building the resilience of critical infrastructure. The three combined
dimensions of social capital theory encourages the parties to the partnership in building CIR to act collectively in with a common goal [75].
Often, public-private partnership is seen as a transactional approach
rather than relational approach [76]. The transactional approach has
high levels of monitoring and tight contracts only [77], whereas the
relational approach relies on mechanisms such as trust and reciprocity
[78]. Social capital theory is more relational which makes it useful for
public-private partnership in critical infrastructure resilience.
The three dimensions of social capital theory include the following.
• structural,
• cognitive and
• relational capital [72]
a. Structural Capital
The goal of structural capital is to establish PPP in CIR networks
supplemented with defined roles and responsibilities. Collaborations
must be guided with rules and procedures. The constituents of the
structural social capital include the following.
Table 3 (continued )
Code
(s)
Resilience Work Sector References
including fees or
corrective
measures
applicable in
cases of noncompliance with
the resilience
requirements
outlined in the
relevant policies
C24 Coordinating
partnership
formed between
government and
private
infrastructure
owners
Government 8
C25 Disaster loss
database
(Develop
minimum
standards and
metadata for
disaster-related
data)
Government 6, A, B, H
Constitutional
(C3)
C31 National Critical
Infrastructure
Resilience Plan
Government
and private
infrastructure
owners
B, D, C F,
G
C32 Identifying what
constitutes
critical
infrastructure
Public 3, 7, C, D, I
C33 Conducting
national risks
assessment
/hazard
identification/
risk and
vulnerability
assessments
Government
and private
infrastructure
owners
2,3,5,7,
9,10,11, B,
C, F
G. Ampratwum et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 39 (2022) 100556
9
• Defined roles and responsibilities
• Procedural fairness
• Frequent Interactions or communication
• Accountability
Each actor in the partnership must be aware of their contribution and
role to the resilience of critical infrastructure. The public private partnership thrives on both formal and informal communication [31].
Appropriate information channels must be established for safe information sharing, information accessibility and information transparency
[32]. Developing guidelines for the communication between the government and private CI operators ensure proper oversight and transparency where accountability is ensured [31]. The rules and regulations
guiding the relationship between the government and private critical
infrastructure owners must be known to all parties to the partnership.
This is what we call procedural fairness [52]. These rules must be
developed in consultations with the private critical infrastructure operators. Accountability will ensure that the parties to the contract are
accountable to both the success and failure of the strategies implemented ensure the robustness of critical infrastructure [52]. According
to Medda [79], when there is a breach on the responsibilities, the consequences must be enforced by each party in the public private
partnership.
b. Cognitive Capital
The cognitive social capital represents the shared norms, goals, and
interests. The constituents of cognitive social capital include the
following.
• Common Goal and Shared Understanding
• Constant learning and monitoring
• Exchange of information
Conflicting objectives and divergent agendas between the public and
private institutions make the relationship unstable for the resilience of
critical infrastructure [80]. The collaboration between the government
and private CI operators require a shared understanding on critical
infrastructure resilience [52]. In the instance where there are divergent
interests and goals, an agreement must be reached where each party to
the public-private partnership must need the other to achieve its own
goals or there must be a financial arrangement to make the partnership
attractive for both parties [81]. The size and geographic location of
private sector organizations may influence their decision to collaborate
with the government. They may also have financial limitation to
collaborate with the government to build the resilience of critical
infrastructure. Cognitive capital encourages partners to the partnership
to work toward taking actions that reduces the occurrence of any
disruptive event or the impact of any disruptive event on critical infrastructure. Cognitive Capital also encourages the merging of interest
among public and private institutions. It reflects the coordination and
integration of adequate procedures and practices that facilitate the
building of CIR [75]. Differing approaches to critical infrastructure
resilience creates discord between the parties in the public private
partnership [82]. While the government and private CI operators agree
on the importance of infrastructure resilience, the agreement between
them can be weak which can even threaten their partnership [83]. The
public and private institutions exchange more diversified resources and
reliable information [84]. The cognitive social capital ensures the flow
and exchange of information between the government and private CI
operators in partnership [75]. The effort and resources invested in
building the resilience of critical infrastructure will yield positive results
when the government and private CI owners exchange relevant information on infrastructure vulnerabilities [18]. The Australian government has established the Trusted Information Sharing Network for
Critical Infrastructure Resilience as its primary mechanism to build
partnership between infrastructure operators and government for
building CIR. Members of the TISN raise the awareness of risks to critical
infrastructure, share information and techniques necessary in assessing
and mitigating risks and build resilience capacity within organizations
[25]. Information sharing between the public and private institutions
help build the resilience of critical infrastructure. However, there is the
risk of government sharing private infrastructure owners’ vulnerabilities
to their competitors. This can limit the information shared by the private
infrastructure owners [81]. The structure of the partnership between the
government and private infrastructure operators determines how the
information can be shared.
c. Relational Capital
Relational capital thrives on the strength of the relationship between
the government and private infrastructure operators. The constituents of
relational capital are as follows.
• Trust
• Respect
• Reciprocity
• Effective Communication
The strength of the relationship between the government and private
CI operators also depends on trust, friendships, respect, and reciprocity.
A pre-existing relationship prior to the occurrence of any disruptive
event facilitates the building of critical infrastructure resilience. Longterm relationship between the government and private CI operators
affect the longevity of their partnership [85]. Trust is an element of
relational capital. In PPP in CIR, where exchange of information is
inevitable, trust is very fundamental. A lack of trust can mar the relationship that exist within the public and private institutions in the
resilience of critical infrastructure. The collaboration between the government and private infrastructure owners require the exchange of some
extremely sensitive information [86]. The exchange of sensitive information which is inevitable in between the government and private CI
operators depend on mutual trust between the two parties to the PPP.
Trust can only be formed when a collaboration is formed between the
PPP participants [26]. Trust between the government and private CI
operators can lead to more informal relationships whereas, low levels of
trust would make these two sectors migrate towards more formal or
contractual interaction. Trust among parties to the partnership enable a
cohesive effort in implementing resilience strategies to reduce the vulnerabilities within critical infrastructure [32]. In the instance where the
PPP in CIR networks consist of competitors from the same sector, trust
should be a dominant theme running in this collaborative network.
Where private infrastructure operators have to share the vulnerabilities
within their critical infrastructure to the government, such information
must be classified [81]. Classified contextual information may not be
shared among the public and private agencies or institutions in the PPP
in CIR network. Information may be shared amongst institutions with
strong personal or professional bond.
5. Conceptual framework
Fig. 4 shows the interactive linkages between the attributes of Attributes of PPP in CIR and the objectives of Public and private sectors in
building CIR. Attributes are the characteristics of a public-private partnership which makes the PPP in CIR distinct. The relationship between
the three categories of the objectives; thus, operational work, regulatory
and constitutional is depicted in the Fig. 4 below. The constitutional
objectives outline the legal framework that supports both the regulatory
and operational objectives. The absence of the constitutional objectives
makes the regulatory and operational objectives almost impossible
Constitutional objectives entails establishing the legal framework that
will guide the operational and regulatory objectives of the parties to the
PPP in building critical infrastructure resilience [54]. The regulatory
objectives underpin the operational objectives in critical infrastructure.
The operational objectives include ensuring the daily functional performance of critical infrastructure, implementing routines to monitor,
G. Ampratwum et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 39 (2022) 100556
10
main and repair any identified faults in the critical infrastructure [54].
Critical infrastructure operators are responsible for maintaining the
functional and operational performance of critical infrastructure under
varied conditions. The private critical infrastructure operators collaborate among themselves to share information on the relevant standards
and protocols [54]. The regulatory objectives set resilience standards for
the operational performance of critical infrastructure. The critical
infrastructure operators are monitored and evaluated regularly to
ensure their compliance to the resilience standard [54]. The operational
objectives of the private critical infrastructure operators are also subjected to external regulations and oversight responsibility by governmental agencies or sectorial ministries.
6. Knowledge gaps and future directions
Critical infrastructure resilience requires the collaboration between
stakeholders such as the government and private infrastructure operators. Critical infrastructure resilience is not a silo work where organizations and institutions implement their own resilience measures
independent of each other. In conducting this study some gaps were
identified. It is not enough to establish the general concept of PPP in CIR,
which in this study, it has been demonstrated that some studies have
already done that. Research must orient towards the objectives of the
parties to the PPP and the attributes of PPP that can make the partnership successful. Some of the gaps identified in this study are as follows.
1. The research area on PPP in critical infrastructure resilience has not
received extensive research coverage even though studies have
stated that it is useful in enhancing resilience of lifeline infrastructure. A more detailed studies needs to be undertaken in the future to
ascertain the structure and governance of PPP in CIR.
2. Only few countries have utilized the PPP mechanism in building
critical infrastructure resilience. It is recommended that more
detailed studies be undertaken contextually in different countries by
using mixed approach to examine how they can utilize PPP to build
the resilience of their critical infrastructure.
3. The objectives of PPP in CIR are a gray area in resilience research
domain. Further studies can be conducted to empirically test the
identified objectives in this study.
4. There are no known studies that have categorized objectives of PPP
in CIR. Researchers can formulate hypothesis from the three categories of objectives for further empirical investigations.
5. Because the concept of PPP is normally context specific in every
country, PPP attributes may have some slight difference. Qualitative
studies can be conducted to ascertain the PPP in CIR attributes in
different regions and countries.
7. Conclusions and implications
The traditional concept of PPP has been in existence for decades.
However, the concept of PPP in CIR is an emerging concept that has not
Fig. 4. Conceptual framework.
G. Ampratwum et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 39 (2022) 100556
11
received much research attention. The parties to the PPP in this study
were the government and the private critical infrastructure operators.
The government of every country have the legal mandate to ensure the
safety of their critical infrastructure and its citizens. However, the
government mostly function as the supervisory body over the critical
infrastructure because they are mostly owned and operated by the private infrastructure operators. The collaboration between the government and private infrastructure owners will ensure that both parties to
the PPP contribute resources to build the resilience of critical infrastructure. This study presented a systematic review of 22 articles
including institutional literature to extract the relevant information on
the objectives of PPP in CIR. The results showed that 2017 recorded the
highest number of publications. The country with the highest publications was the United States of America and Sweden. The selected publications were subjected to content analysis to retrieve a list of 20
objectives, thus, the responsibilities of PPP in CIR. The topmost objectives identified in the review were National risks assessment /hazard
identification/risk and vulnerability assessments/Risks Map, Critical
infrastructure system identification, setting up resilience network,
creating a platform for exchange of knowledge, Policies and guidelines
and Financial Incentives. A conceptual framework was developed by
grouping the set of objectives under three categories namely, operational, regulatory, and constitutional. The second stage of the conceptual framework was to establish the relationship that exist between the
three categories of objectives. This comprehensive literature review
contributes to knowledge by establishing the objectives of PPP in CIR
which was otherwise missing in literature. The findings on the objectives
of PPP in CIR are significant because they outline the responsibilities of
the government and private CI operators in partnership to build the
resilience of critical infrastructure. It also informs both parties in partnership the objectives of each other in the pursuit of building the
resilience of critical infrastructure. Social Capital theory was also
conceptualized in this study to outline the attributes that underpins the
government and private CI operators’ collaboration in building the
resilience of critical infrastructure. These attributes inform decision
makers and policy makers on building a successful relationship between
the government and private CI owners. The outcome of this study has
practical implications by clearly outlining the objectives of government
and private CI operators in building critical infrastructure resilience.
The two major limitation in this study were the use of only Scopus
database as a search engine. Secondly, the list of objectives identified in
this study were based on systematic review methodology only and has
not been empirically tested. Nevertheless, the findings of this study can
be considered as reliable and useful for further empirical validation and
future practice.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
This paper constitutes a part of a PhD research project being conducted at the School of Engineering, Design and Built Environment at
Western Sydney University, Australia. The authors acknowledge Western Sydney University for full funding of research.
References
[1] E. Zio, Challenges in the vulnerability and risk analysis of critical infrastructures,
Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 152 (2016) 137–150.
[2] S. Bouchon, The Vulnerability of Interdependent Critical Infrastructures Systems:
Epistemological and Conceptual State of The Art, Institute for the Protection and
Security of the Citizen, Joint Research Centre, European Commission, 2006, p. 99.
[3] M. Ouyang, Review on modeling and simulation of interdependent critical
infrastructure systems, Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 121 (2014) 43–60.
[4] Moteff, J.D., Critical infrastructure resilience: the evolution of policy and programs
and issues for congress. 2012, Congressional Research Service Washington, DC.
[5] Dalziell, E.P. and McManus S.T., Resilience, vulnerability, and adaptive capacity:
implications for system performance. 2004.
[6] S. Wang, D. Xuan, W. Zhao, On resilience of structured peer-to-peer systems,
GLOBECOM’03, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Global Telecommunications
Conference, IEEE, 2003 (IEEE Cat. No. 03CH37489).
[7] J.E. Stiglitz, S.J. Wallsten, Public-private technology partnerships: promises and
pitfalls, Am. Behave. Sci. 43 (1) (1999) 52–73.
[8] C. Field, R. Look, A value-based approach to infrastructure resilience, Environ.
Syst. Decis. 38 (3) (2018) 292–305.
[9] B.D. Trump, et al., Social Resilience and Critical Infrastructure systems, in
Resilience and Risk, Springer, 2017, pp. 289–299.
[10] L.E. Brand˜
ao, et al., Government supports in public–private partnership contracts:
metro Line 4 of the Sao ˜ Paulo subway system, J. Infrastruct. Syst. 18 (3) (2012)
218–225.
[11] C. Pursiainen, Critical infrastructure resilience: a Nordic model in the making? Int.
J. Disaster Risk Reduct. 27 (2018) 632–641.
[12] B. McKnight, M.K. Linnenluecke, How firm responses to natural disasters
strengthen community resilience: a stakeholder-based perspective, Organ. Environ.
29 (3) (2016) 290–307.
[13] V. Kruhlov, et al., Public-private partnership in cybersecurity, in: Proceedings of
the CEUR Workshop, CEUR-WS, 2020.
[14] Gim, C., et al., The resilience work of institutions. 2019. 97: p. 36–43.
[15] L. Newlove-Eriksson, G. Giacomello, J. Eriksson, The invisible hand? Critical
information infrastructures, Commer. Natl. Secur. 53 (2) (2018) 124–140.
[16] D.R. McCarthy, Privatizing political authority: cybersecurity, public-private
partnerships, and the reproduction of liberal political order, J. Politics Gov. 6 (2)
(2018) 5–12.
[17] I. Kozine, B. Petrenj, P. Trucco, Resilience capacities assessment for critical
infrastructures disruption: the READ framework (part 1), Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. 14
(3) (2018) 199–220.
[18] P. Trucco, B. Petrenj, Resilience of critical infrastructures: benefits and challenges
from emerging practices and programmes at local level. Resilience and Risk,
Springer, 2017, pp. 225–286.
[19] M. Haraguchi, U. Lall, K. Watanabe, Building private sector resilience: directions
after the 2015 Sendai framework, J. Disaster Res. 11 (3) (2016) 535–543.
[20] M. Carr, Public-private partnerships in national cyber-security strategies, Int. Aff.
92 (1) (2016) 43–62.
[21] Z.A. Auzzir, R.P. Haigh, D. Amaratunga, Public-private partnerships (PPP) in
disaster management in developing countries: a conceptual framework, in:
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Building Resilience,
Incorporating the 3rd Annual Conference of the Android Disaster Resilience
Network, Amsterdam, Elsevier Science Bv, 2014, pp. 807–814. D. Amaratunga and
R. Haigh, Eds.
[22] A.D. Givens, N.E. Busch, Realizing the promise of public-private partnerships in U.
S. critical infrastructure protection, Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. Prot. 6 (1) (2013)
39–50.
[23] P. Gabriela, B. Mircea, Risk assessment in Public Private Partnerships (PPP) for
infrastructure in the recovery after the global crisis, in: Proceedings of the
International Conference on Risk Management, Assessment and Mitigation, RIMA,
2010.
[24] D.W. Lee, An exploratory assessment of infrastructure resilience to disasters, Int. J.
Disaster Resil. Built Environ. 11 (4) (2020) 519–533.
[25] Australian Government, Critical infrastructure resilience strategy. 2010.
[26] M. Dunn-Cavelty, M. Suter, Public–private partnerships are no silver bullet: an
expanded governance model for critical infrastructure protection, Int. J. Crit.
Infrastruct. Prot. 2 (4) (2009) 179–187.
[27] K.G. Provan, P. Kenis, Modes of network governance: structure, management, and
effectiveness, J. Public Admin. Res. Theory 18 (2) (2008) 229–252.
[28] Gimenez, R., et al., A maturity model for the involvement of stakeholders in the
city resilience building process. 2017. 121: p. 7–16.
[29] Woodruff, S., et al., Urban resilience: analyzing the policies of US cities. 2021. 115:
p. 103239.
[30] W. Diehl, F. Hare, Achieving security in the internet of things through expansion of
the partnership model, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on
Technology and Society (ISTAS), IEEE, 2018.
[31] Stewart, G.T., et al., Leveraging public-private partnerships to improve community
resilience in times of disaster. 2009.
[32] P. Marana, ˜ L. Labaka, J.M. Sarriegi, We need them all: development of a public
private people partnership to support a city resilience building process, J. Int.
Disaster Resil. Built Environ. 154 (2020), 119954.
[33] A.D. Givens, N.E. Busch, Realizing the promise of public-private partnerships in US
critical infrastructure protection, Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. Prot. 6 (1) (2013) 39–50.
[34] Auzzir, Z.A., et al., Public-private partnerships (PPP) in disaster management in
developing countries: a conceptual framework. 2014. 18: p. 807–814.
[35] M. Haraguchi, U. Lall, K. Watanabe, Building private sector resilience: directions
after the 2015 Sendai framework, J. Disaster Res. 11 (3) (2016) 535–543.
[36] V. Kruhlov, et al., Public-private partnership in cybersecurity, in: Proceedings of
the CEUR Workshop, 2020.
[37] M. Carr, Public–private partnerships in national cyber-security strategies, Int. J. 92
(1) (2016) 43–62.
G. Ampratwum et al. 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 39 (2022) 100556
12
[38] L. Newlove-Eriksson, G. Giacomello, J. Eriksson, The invisible hand? Critical
information infrastructures, commercialisation and national security, Int. Spect. 53
(2) (2018) 124–140.
[39] P. Trucco, B. Petrenj, C.D. Mauro, Resilience capacities assessment for critical
infrastructures disruption: READ pilot applications (part 2), Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct.
14 (3) (2018) 221–247.
[40] M.E. Falagas, et al., Comparison of PubMed, Scopus, web of science, and Google
scholar: strengths and weaknesses, FASEB J. 22 (2) (2008) 338–342.
[41] L.I. Meho, Y. Rogers, Citation counting, citation ranking, and h-index of humancomputer interaction researchers: a comparison of Scopus and Web of Science,
J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 59 (11) (2008) 1711–1726.
[42] D.E. Alexander, Resilience and disaster risk reduction: an etymological journey,
Nat. Hazard. Earth Syst. Sci. 13 (11) (2013) 2707–2716.
[43] A. Paez, Gray literature: an important resource in systematic reviews, J. Evid.
Based Med. 10 (3) (2017) 233–240.
[44] Q. Mahood, D. Van Eerd, E. Irvin, Searching for grey literature for systematic
reviews: challenges and benefits, Res. Synth. Methods 5 (3) (2014) 221–234.
[45] S.P. Bellefontaine, C.M. Lee, Between black and white: examining grey literature in
meta-analyses of psychological research, J. Child Fam. Stud. 23 (8) (2014)
1378–1388.
[46] C. Pappas, I. Williams, Grey literature: its emerging importance, J. Hosp.
Librariansh. 11 (3) (2011) 228–234.
[47] E. Michel-Kerjan, New challenges in critical infrastructures: a US perspective,
J. Conting. Crisis Manag. 11 (3) (2003) 132–141.
[48] C.W. Gellings, The power delivery system of the future: a vital part of US energy
policy, Strateg. Plan. Energy Environ. 23 (3) (2003) 58–76.
[49] N.E. Busch, A.D. Givens, Achieving resilience in disaster management: the role of
public-private partnerships, J. Strateg. Secur. 6 (2) (2013) 1–19.
[50] M.S. Jensen, Cyberresiliens, sektorprincip og ansvarsplacering - nordiske
erfaringer, Int. Politikk 77 (3) (2019) 266–277.
[51] Hatton, T., et al., Developing a model and instrument to measure the resilience of
critical infrastructure sector organisations. 2018. 14(1): p. 59–79.
[52] J. Egan, T. Anderson, Considerations for a model of public-private sector
collaboration in the provision of disaster relief: incentives and limits. Emergency
Management and Disaster Response Utilizing Public-Private Partnerships, IGI
Global, 2015, pp. 1–15.
[53] M. Cutts, Y. Wang, Q. Yu, New perspectives on building resilience into
infrastructure systems, Nat. Hazard. Rev. 18 (1) (2017) B4015004-1–B4015004-7.
[54] C. Gim, C.A. Miller, P.W. Hirt, The resilience work of institutions, Environ. Sci.
Policy 97 (2019) 36–43.
[55] S.V. Croope, S. McNeil, Improving resilience of critical infrastructure systems
postdisaster: recovery and mitigation, Transp. Res. Record J. Transp. Res. Board
2234 (1) (2011) 3–13.
[56] Berkeley, A.R., et al., A framework for establishing critical infrastructure resilience
goals. 2010: p. 18–21.
[57] Van Eeten, M., et al., The state and the threat of cascading failure across critical
infrastructures: the implications of empirical evidence from media incident reports.
2011. 89(2): p. 381–400.
[58] J. van Erp, New governance of corporate cybersecurity: a case study of the
petrochemical industry in the Port of Rotterdam, J. Crime Law Soc. Change 68 (1)
(2017) 75–93.
[59] Labaka, L., et al., A holistic framework for building critical infrastructure
resilience. 2016. 103: p. 21–33.
[60] S. Hallegatte, J. Rentschler, J. Rozenberg, Lifelines: The Resilient Infrastructure
Opportunity, World Bank Publications, 2019.
[61] Palma-Oliveira, J.M., et al., “Modern resilience: Moving without movement”, An
edited collection of authored pieces comparing, contrasting, and integrating risk
and resilience with an emphasis on ways to measure resilience. 173 (2016) 173-
179.
[62] S. Brem, Critical infrastructure protection from a national perspective, Eur. J. Risk
Regul. 6 (2) (2015) 191–199.
[63] J. Sun, Z. Zhang, A post-disaster resource allocation framework for improving
resilience of interdependent infrastructure networks, Transp. Res. Part D Transp.
Environ. 85 (2020), 102455.
[64] Y.P. Fang, E. Zio, An adaptive robust framework for the optimization of the
resilience of interdependent infrastructures under natural hazards, Eur. J. Oper.
Res. 276 (3) (2019) 1119–1136.
[65] C. Cui, et al., Relationships among value-for-money drivers of public–private
partnership infrastructure projects, J. Infrastruct. Syst. 25 (2) (2019), 04019007.
[66] C. Field, R. Look, A value-based approach to infrastructure resilience, Environ.
Syst. Decis. 38 (3) (2018) 292–305.
[67] H.A. Nissen, M.R. Evald, A.H. Clarke, Knowledge sharing in heterogeneous teams
through collaboration and cooperation: exemplified through public–privateinnovation partnerships, Ind. Mark. Manag. 43 (3) (2014) 473–482.
[68] S. Verweij, Producing satisfactory outcomes in the implementation phase of PPP
infrastructure projects: a fuzzy set qualitative comparative analysis of 27 road
constructions in the Netherlands, Int. J. Project Manag. 33 (8) (2015) 1877–1887.
[69] S. Carey, B. Lawson, D.R. Krause, Social capital configuration, legal bonds and
performance in buyer–supplier relationships, J. Oper. Manag. 29 (4) (2011)
277–288.
[70] S. Prasad, et al., Building disaster-resilient micro enterprises in the developing
world, Disasters 39 (3) (2015) 447–466.
[71] R.S. Burt, Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition, Harvard
University Press, 2009.
[72] J. Nahapiet, S. Ghoshal, Social capital, intellectual capital, and the organizational
advantage, Acad. Manage. Rev. 23 (2) (1998) 242–266.
[73] X. Jia, et al., The role of social capital on proactive and reactive resilience of
organizations post-disaster, Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduct. 48 (2020), 101614.
[74] A. Bahadur, T. Tanner, Transformational resilience thinking: putting people, power
and politics at the heart of urban climate resilience, Environ. Urban. 26 (1) (2014)
200–214.
[75] T. Moon, S. Ko, Compassion organizing for public-private collaboration in disaster
management. Emergency Management and Disaster Response Utilizing PublicPrivate Partnerships, IGI Global, 2015, pp. 99–120.
[76] E. Solheim-Kile, A. Wald, Extending the transactional view on public–private
partnership projects: role of relational and motivational aspects in goal alignment,
J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 145 (5) (2019), 04019030.
[77] O. Heino, T.S. Katko, P.E. Pietil¨
a, Tighter contracts or more trust? Outsourcing in
finnish water utilities, Public Works Manag. Policy 20 (4) (2015) 360–378.
[78] G. Weihe, Public-private partnerships and public-private value trade-offs, Public
Money Manag. 28 (3) (2008) 153–158.
[79] F. Medda, A game theory approach for the allocation of risks in transport public
private partnerships, Int. J. Proj. Manag. 25 (3) (2007) 213–218.
[80] M. Kumaraswamy, W. Zou, J. Zhang, Reinforcing relationships for resilience–by
embedding end-user ‘people’in public–private partnerships, Civil Eng. Environ.
Syst. 32 (1–2) (2015) 119–129.
[81] M. Carr, Public–private partnerships in national cyber-security strategies,
International Affairs (2016) 43–62.
[82] N.E. Busch, A.D. Givens, Public-private partnerships in homeland security:
opportunities and challenges, Homeland Secur. Aff. 8 (1) (2012) 1–24, 18.
[83] M. De Bruijne, M. Van Eeten, Systems that should have failed: critical
infrastructure protection in an institutionally fragmented environment, J. Conting.
Crisis Manag. 15 (1) (2007) 18–29.
[84] A. Capaldo, Network structure and innovation: the leveraging of a dual network as
a distinctive relational capability, Strateg. Manag. J. 28 (6) (2007) 585–608.
[85] R. Osei-Kyei, A.P. Chan, Developing transport infrastructure in Sub-Saharan Africa
through public–private partnerships: policy practice and implications, Transp. Rev.
36 (2) (2016) 170–186.
[86] E. Frye, Information-sharing hangups: is antitrust just a cover, CIP Rep. 1 (2003)
6–7.
G. Ampratwum et al. 