Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hoce20
Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic
Commerce
ISSN: 1091-9392 (Print) 1532-7744 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/hoce20
Exploring SME cybersecurity practices in
developing countries
Salah Kabanda, Maureen Tanner & Cameron Kent
To cite this article: Salah Kabanda, Maureen Tanner & Cameron Kent (2018) Exploring SME
cybersecurity practices in developing countries, Journal of Organizational Computing and
Electronic Commerce, 28:3, 269-282, DOI: 10.1080/10919392.2018.1484598
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/10919392.2018.1484598
Published online: 13 Jul 2018.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 2949
View related articles
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 
Exploring SME cybersecurity practices in developing countries
Salah Kabanda, Maureen Tanner, and Cameron Kent
Department of Information Systems, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa
ABSTRACT
The continued use of information technology systems by small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in developing countries has the potential to bring
significant benefits but, at the same time, expose them to online cybersecurity threats. Addressing these threats is, therefore, of paramount importance for developing countries, not only because SMEs are seen as the
vehicle for employment and job creation, but because research on SMEs
and cybersecurity in this context is limited. This study is a contribution
toward addressing this gap.
The purpose of this study is, therefore, to explore SME cybersecurity
practices and the challenges they face in developing countries. The goal is
to sensitize practitioners and government institutions about the challenges
and practices faced by SMEs, so that the various parties can work collaboratively in providing context-specific solutions to address these challenges
and improve current cybersecurity practices. The study follows a qualitative
enquiry approach to solicit information from three South African SMEs that
had implemented cybersecurity practices. The findings show that an SME’s
perception of cybersecurity is constrained by internal factors of budget,
management support, and attitudes. Further findings show that SMEs’
cybersecurity practices are affected by the landscape of cybersecurity, as
well as institutional pressures.
KEYWORDS
Small and medium
enterprises (SMEs);
cybersecurity; developing
countries; institutional
pressure; South Africa
Introduction
Developing countries, specifically those in Africa, have traditionally lagged developed countries in
adoption and use of the Internet. However, recent reports from the International
Telecommunication Union (ITU) (2016) show that “developing countries now account for the
vast majority of Internet users, with 2.5 billion users compared with one billion in developed
countries.” These developments, though, should be put in context of the Internet penetration
rates, which is 81% in developed countries, compared with 40% in developing countries and 15%
in the least-developed countries (ITU 2016). Thus, despite poor Internet penetration, developing
countries are changing the Internet usage landscape by becoming one of the key players. They are
taking advantage of the multitude of benefits that the Internet provides. For example, organizations
can now forge international relationships with new vendors (to lower costs) and new customers (to
increase sales), thereby decreasing communication costs, and resulting in higher efficiency and
quicker transaction processing.
Despite these benefits, organizations also face many challenges when using the Internet––for
example, the threat from attackers, spammers, and criminal corporations. This danger is more real
for developing countries and more so for the SMEs who tend to have limited resources to acquire
and implement cybersecurity mechanisms in their organizations (Sulayman et al. 2012) and do not
CONTACT Salah Kabanda salah.kabanda@uct.ac.za Department of Information Systems, University of Cape Town, Tel:
+27216504253.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in the article can be found online at www.tandfonline.com/hoce.
© 2018 Taylor & Francis
JOURNAL OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPUTING AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
2018, VOL. 28, NO. 3, 269–282
https://doi.org/10.1080/10919392.2018.1484598
have a dedicated IT management department that can shoulder the responsibilities even though they
hold sensitive data about their staff, customer, and business partners and proprietary (Leung 2012).
A consistent theme in literature has been how SMEs do not take cybersecurity concerns seriously
(Nycz, Martin, and Polkowski 2015). This is partly because of the misconception that cybersecurity is
associated with large organizations who have sophisticated and vulnerable information systems
(Abbott et al. 2015); and partly because there are limited studies on the phenomenon from these
contextual setting. The need for SMEs to be aware of and understand the consequences of cybersecurity and how it can be addressed cannot be understated because this awareness and the understanding can potentially “influence the adoption of secure behaviours” (Bada and Sasse 2014).
Against this background, the purpose of this study is to explore SME cybersecurity practices and
the challenges they face in developing countries. The goal is to sensitize practitioners and government institutions of the challenges and practices faced by SMEs, so that the various parties can work
collaboratively to arrive at context-specific solutions to address these challenges and improve current
cybersecurity practices. SMEs in South Africa have been used to study this phenomenon because
there have been “several negative comments about Africa’s lack of preparedness to combat cybercrime” (Von Solms and Kritzinger 2011); and “South Africa remains one of top three countries that
are targeted by phishing attacks” (Dlamini and Modise 2013).
Related work
Cybersecurity in developing countries
Security issues related to information technology (IT) continue to be a concern in both large and
small organizations. This is because “cybercrime has led to the loss of billions of dollars, the
malfunctioning of computer systems, the destruction of critical information, the compromising of
network integrity and confidentiality, etc.” (Abubakar et al. 2015). Despite these negatives, there
remains little academic literature on the issue of cybersecurity, specifically for developing countries.
According to Ben-David et al. (2011), developing countries have five core forces that shape their
security landscape: (1) poor “security hygiene,” i.e., the degree to which it runs with up-to-date
software patches and recent malware protection; (2) unique usage patterns not commonly seen in
the developed economies such as reliance on mobile technology for conducting financial transactions
even in places where credit cards and the web have not penetrated; (3) novice users who have joined
the Internet and do not have exposure to the risks posed online and disseminating security
educational material and tools is extremely challenging; (4) the use of pirated software which may
not necessarily pose as a security risk, but challenging to verify that such software is not malicious;
and (5) limited understanding on the adversaries’ of cybersecurity. These contextual factors can
potentially explain why SME adopt information technologies but are ignorant of cybersecurity
concerns. For example, Abubakar, Bass, and Allison (2014) found Nigerian SMEs to be less
concerned with challenges like security, privacy and data loss, although they continued to show
optimism in using the potential opportunities that cloud computing presents. In another study,
Alawiye-Adams and Awoyemi (2014) report how the lack of cybersecurity framework poses as one
of the main barriers toward automated teller machine (ATM) transaction charges on the new key
cash-less policy in Nigeria.
In South Africa, Grobler and Van Vuuren (2010) identify the following as main concerns:
continuous phishing attacks, Sim-swap fraud and ID theft. According to the authors, these concerns
are enabled and fueled by bandwidth availability, shortage of IT education, absence of African
languages, lack of standardized procedures, and operating system distribution (Grobler and Van
Vuuren 2010). Other studies such as Von Solms and Kritzinger (2011) have identified increasing
bandwidth, increasing use of wireless technologies and infrastructure, lack of cybersecurity awareness, ineffective legislation and policies, and weak technical cybersecurity measures factors which
introduce a higher level of cybersecurity risks and expose the critical infrastructures in many African
270 S. KABANDA ET AL.
countries to higher levels of risk. As a consequence, researchers such as Irons and Ophoff (2016)
have called for the need to develop digital forensics skills in South Africa through university
programs, have associated training courses, and evaluate the extent to which the current cybersecurity awareness initiatives address cybersecurity threats and risks (Dlamini and Modise 2013).
Figure 1 summarizes the cybersecurity landscape of developing countries, and more specifically
that of Africa. Other related work on cybersecurity (Ahmad, Maynard, and Shanks 2015) have
shown that miscommunication and organizational barriers, such as financial resources (Srinidhi,
Yan., and Tayi 2015), management support (Soomro, Shah, and Ahmed 2016), availability of
expertise and awareness of cybersecurity threats (Champion et al. 2014; Cowley and
Greitzer 2015), are significant factors that affect cybersecurity implementation.
Cybersecurity approaches
There have been several approaches for tackling cybersecurity and these include intrusion, anomaly,
signature, hybrid, honeypot, web server logging (web servers, contents of log files, and log data
analysis) and Intrusion using web server logs. Table 1 documents these approaches.
The intrusion detection (ID) system is used in systems to detect attempted or successful
unauthorized access to a network or computer system (Patcha and Park 2007). ID can be used to
prevent intrusions as well as provide information in the case of a successful intrusion, which may
help to implement an appropriate counter-measure (Abraham, Grosan, and Chen 2005).
Data sources for analyzed information may vary with host or network activity, with application
and command logs being common sources for information analysis (Patcha and Park 2007). To
avoid the large amount of data that have to be analyzed, most ID systems store data for a particular
period of time in order to be able to reference it at a later point. The ID system is usually managed
Figure 1. Factors influencing cybersecurity implementation in developing countries.
Table 1. Approaches to tackling cybersecurity (Garcia-Teodoro et al. 2009; Mirza et al. 2016).
Intrusion Detection Security tools that, like other measures such as antivirus software, firewalls and
access control schemes, are intended to strengthen the security of information
and communication systems.
Anomaly Intrusion detection A type of intrusion detection which attempt to estimate the “normal” behavior of
the system to be protected, and generate an anomaly alarm whenever the
deviation between a given observation at an instant and the normal behavior
exceeds a predefined threshold
Signature patterns A type of intrusion detection which seek defined patterns, or signatures, within
the analyzed data.
Hybrid approach (anomaly and signature
intrusion detection methods)
Generalized use of a principal signature-based detection module, combined with
a complementary anomaly-based scheme
Honeypot Computer connected to the Internet that offers services and data that appear to
be of value to an attacker but in fact is a deception traps used to monitor and
log the activities of attackers
Web server logging Gain knowledge of the state of a web server, given suitable web server log
information
JOURNAL OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPUTING AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 271
by the Network Intrusion Detection Sensor Products (NIDS)—a device linked to the network and
assesses incoming data to the server. Another product, among others that can manage the ID, is the
Host Intrusion Detection Sensor (HIDS) which is a piece of software installed on a host compute for
the purpose of identifying threats via behavior or signature analysis, then proceeding to attempt the
prevention of an attack. HIDS are considered active defense mechanism because they combine
identification and attack response (Peterson 2004).
The use of anomalies is another means of addressing cybersecurity. Anomaly ID systems require normal
usage patterns to identify the intrusions which are generated by aggregating data usage (Abraham, Grosan,
and Chen 2005). The behavior of all users is monitored and any deviation from normal usage is deemed as
an intrusion. Anomaly ID is deemed to be an essential part of protecting against malicious attacks (Lee and
Xiang 2001). Signature detection is another means of identifying attacks that attempt to exploit application
software or a system (Abraham, Grosan, and Chen 2005). Signature patterns are pre-encoded and updated
using known vulnerabilities to general systems, then compared to incoming input in order to detect
intrusion attempts (Abraham, Grosan, and Chen 2005; Kruegel and Vigna 2003). By watching out for
certain patterns, the signature ID systems compare and match incoming packets, commands or other input
to known attack signatures (Patcha and Park 2007). Unfortunately, it is extremely challenging to stay
current to the near daily disclosure of vulnerabilities, even when concentrating on a specific aspect such as
web-server related vulnerabilities (Kruegel and Vigna 2003). Vulnerabilities can also be very specific to
certain technologies or their combinations, making signature ID systems better when complemented with
anomaly ID systems (Kruegel and Vigna 2003). A good signature needs to be concentrated enough to be
able to identify that certain attack, but elastic enough to be able to identify if a variation of a certain attack is
being used (Kreibich and Crowcroft 2003). If the signature is either too concentrated or elastic, a large
number of false positives and negatives will be recorded (Kreibich and Crowcroft 2003).
The hybrid detection approach involves a combination of anomaly and signature detection
methodologies (Patcha and Park 2007). At the core of the hybrid system is a signature ID system
that operates by using information on what the attacker’s suspicious and normal actions have been
(Patcha and Park 2007). Other researchers have proposed the use of honeypots as a means of
gathering information about attackers; Web Server Logging which can be used to detect security
breaches or misbehavior are very useful when performing a postdisaster inspection of a security
incident (Oliner, Ganapathi, and Xu 2012). In addition, the ID using Web Server Logs can be
implemented. The main goal of a log-based ID system should be to gain knowledge of the state of a
web server, given suitable web server log information (Barse and Jonsson 2004).
Soomro, Shah, and Ahmed (2016) posits that the concept of security needs to be examined
holistically, because numerous activities of management, particularly development and execution
of security policy, awareness, compliance training, development of effective enterprise information architecture, IT infrastructure management, business and IT alignment and human resources
management, had a significant impact on the quality of management of information security. De
Barros and Lazarek (2018) conquers stating that handling cyber threats requires a cooperative
action to secure nations cyberspace and one key factor is the existence of well-defined organizational structure. While there are several studies that have examined the adoption of different
Table 2. Respondent profile.
SME Position Experience in information security (years)
A Respondent A1 Co-founder and CSO
(chief strategic officer)
15
Respondent A2 Senior security analyst: threat analysis 6
Respondent A3 Senior security analyst: research and development 8
Respondent A4 Security analyst and developer 3
Respondent A5 Network specialist 10
B Respondent Owner, entrepreneur and technical specialist 15
C Respondent C1 Developer 10
Respondent C2 Chief technical officer 10
272 S. KABANDA ET AL.
approaches to cybersecurity, there are limited studies in the context of developing countries
which explore the factors that influence how SMEs implement cybersecurity and the challenges
they face. With this literature review in mind, we seek to examine (1) the factors that influence
South African SME cybersecurity implementations, and (2) the various approaches adopted and
challenged faced from the adoption of these approaches. Figure 1 will act as a sensitizing lens for
exploring the objectives.
Methodology
Research approach
A qualitative enquiry was adopted for the study with the purpose of allowing the researcher to be
grounded in the SME contextual setting and be able to make sense of the results from the SME
perspective. Studies that follow such an inquiry have been advocated for in developing countries
(Avgerou 2001). Given the unique contextual landscape of developing countries, that is different
from developed economies which sets the pace on how best to address cybersecurity, it is important
to understand how cybersecurity is perceived by organizations from these environments. It is
through such an enquiry that cybersecurity solutions can be designed that are context specific to
developing countries.
Purposive sampling was adopted to identify and select SMEs that were engaged with cybersecurity
implementation. Three SMEs (A–C) were selected to participate in this study. These were selected on
the basis that they had previously, and some were still currently, engaged in cybersecurity. These
SMEs, therefore, have experienced cybersecurity and can share that knowledge with the researcher.
SME_A was an Information Security consulting firm of 90–150 employees. SME_B was relatively
smaller than SME_A with less than 10 employees. The organization was involved in the development
of software which customer use by paying a subscription fee. SME_C was a software development
company with clients primarily in the United States of America. The organization had 150–200
employees and had its internal networks and application security to consider as well as the security
of applications which they wrote for customers.
Data collection and analysis
Data from SMEs were collected via semi-structured qualitative interviews. The factors influencing
implementation of cybersecurity in developing countries, as depicted in Figure 1 guided the interview process. The study had in total eight respondents from the three participating SMEs
(see Table 2). Five members of SME_A participated in the study. In addition to the interviews,
multiple months of web server logs were given to the researcher by Interviewee 5. The respondent
from SME_B was the owner and the person responsible for the management and technical operations. The respondent also provided the researcher with a 2000-line snippet of Apache Web Server
logs. Two participants from organization C responded to the study request. Although the SME
sample size is small, qualitative studies are more concerned with in-depth understanding of the
phenomenon from its natural setting as perceived by participants.
Data analysis commenced with the transcription of the recorded interviews which were complimented with the researcher’s notes that were made during the process of the interviews. Then, the
interview documents were repeatedly read to identify patterns across the entire data corpus.
Thematic analysis was used identify, analyze and report patterns (themes) emerging from the data
(Braun & Clarke, 2006). Inductive coding followed whereby a list of concepts were created and then
assembled into categories describing a significant theme from the data. Then, deductive coding
followed: the data was repeatedly read to identify patterns that were consolidated into significant
themes. NVIVO Version 10 was used to assist with analysis.
JOURNAL OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPUTING AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 273
Discussion of findings
Internal factor: SMES perception of cybersecurity
The findings show that five factors influenced how SMEs perceived cybersecurity. These are as
follows: budget, lack of management support, IT complexity and legacy systems, attitude toward
security, and compliance to regulations.
Low budget priority
Budget was consistently noted as a constraint to having efficient cybersecurity mechanisms in place
by most participants. For example, SME_A1 indicated that
. . .there is less money available for information security activities such as independent testing. Smaller
companies won’t spend money on independent security testing because it is too expensive. . .and so when
doing external testing on smaller companies, we often deal with the company’s CEO or CTO instead of
anyone that specializes in security––simply because they do not have the budget for such a course.
As a consequence, “. . .most small budget places have a bad security posture” (SME_A4).
All respondents indicated that much still needs to be done to protect their systems and processes, but
agreed that this is a challenge because “there is no immediate return on investment and so generally we
don’t have third parties testing for our systems. We ensure we put the necessary security checks and
perform our own internal audits of the software” (SME_C1). According to this respondent, external
testing by third parties was not a priority due to its cost, although they acknowledge the importance of
engaging specialist third-party service to continuously test the robustness of the security defenses. The
smaller budget available to SMEs makes it unlikely that they will get external consulting firms to
perform security assessments which then leave these organizations more vulnerable to attackers. There
was consensus that an organization’s attention to security and budget were proportional.
Minimal management support
Respondents also indicated that top management’s support and their ability to prioritize security by
assigning the appropriate budget to it were crucial in having a successful cybersecurity measures in
place. They acknowledge that management support is mainly hindered by the financial resources and
other competing projects. For example, respondent SME_A4 explains:
Often you’ll see that the less budget given to security the more vulnerabilities there are - but this is
not always the case but it has happened here before because resources are not there to address the
issue [security]. . . there’s definitely a correlation between the amount of money spent and the
company’s security as it equates to the amount of attention given toward it [security].
The implication of this empirical findings is that according to organization A, management’s
commitment of cybersecurity is influenced by financial availability (budget). Additional findings
show that management supported new technologies that brought cost savings. For example, one of
the respondents explained that “we usually do not have as many servers on site, especially with the
recent rise (and reduction in cost) of cloud computing” (SME_B). Similar remarks were made by
SME_C1 “Smaller companies are looking to leverage IaaS far more, especially if they’re at their
infancy. It’s not uncommon for companies not have a massive server room and host their stuff
locally unlike we have here to host our applications” Hosting web applications in this manner allows
SMEs to not have their own servers on site, reducing cost and increasing scalability.
Less technologically complex
It was perceived that, because SMEs often do not have complex legacy systems in place, they do not
face as much security threats as larger organizations. Legacy systems was seen as a source of security
274 S. KABANDA ET AL.
issues as they often need custom security code to be written to maintain their security level, but were
often no longer supported by their manufacturers. Respondent A1 explained: “Smaller companies
have fewer assets (servers etc.) that are easier to maintain. Bigger companies have more legacy
systems that need a lot of work to maintain to be secure” (A1).
Size less vulnerable
SME_B had the perception that the organization will not become a target for cybercrime because of
its size:
Well I can only talk about myself being a small business; I try to do as much as I can in writing
the code. Because it’s a small business I do everything. I write the code and definitely have to think
about security, but because I’m a small business I feel like I’m not going to be targeted easily. I don’t
have proper precautions I guess, I have no precautions. I just hope I’ve written the code OK enough.
Similar perceptions were reported by SME_A2 that “Smaller companies don’t have determined
attackers” and therefore they were at a lesser risk of attack than large organization. This attitude,
specifically by respondent SME_A2, is concerning given that the respondent works in an information security consulting firm as a senior security analysts responsible for detecting potential threats.
Priority on compliance to regulations and policies
All SMEs indicated the need to comply with institutional policies and this was seen as the first
preference prior to engaging with stringent cybersecurity measures. This was because compliance to
regulations such as Payment Card Industry (PCI) standards was not seen as challenging and costly
and organizations were assured of bare minimum amount of security because according to SME_C1,
we avoid areas that are risky. For example, we’ve recently implemented a ticketing system for one
of our client, and we’ve had to adhere to PCI compliance. What’s very important is that we try not to
store any credit card information; we try to limit our risk. . . bigger companies are more aware of it,
because there’s potentially more risk.
All SMEs acknowledged that management was able to provide sufficient funding to ensure
compliance and attain some security in their organization. However, this bare minimum security
derived from compliance overshadowed the consequences of not having sound cybersecurity
measures.
Difficulty in using cyber tools
Although most SMEs confirm that cost was one of the barrier toward cybersecurity; some organizations had adopted and were currently using cyber tools and techniques in their organizations. The
main challenge they faced with these tools was in how to operate them effectively, given their
complexity. There was a perception that the tools were complex to implement and maintain
(SME_A1); and for some tools, the value was not realized (SME_A4).
Cybersecurity approaches and their challenges
Cybersecurity approaches
The common cybersecurity approach used by SMEs was web server logging. The majority of
respondent agreed that there were multiple ways web server logging could be performed in SMEs
although not all are viable and valuable for organizations with limited resources. The most suggested
methods included the use of Apache or IIS logging as respondent C2 indicated: “Web server logging
is done through the standard Windows IIS logging facility.” Some of the respondents suggested that
logging attributes that were perceived as useful should be stored. These include IP, visiting path, path
traversed, time stamp, success rate (of loading page), user agent and URL. Respondent SME_A1 gave
JOURNAL OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPUTING AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 275
an example of logged items: “Useful things that are usually logged include the browser used, time of
day and geographical location. These provide a much better chance of responding to an anomaly.”
Apache and IIS logging is accepted as a viable cost-effective manner of performing web server
logging as there is limited setup, no additional software cost and easily compressible output given
through this method. SME_A2 explained:
I think logging is actually easier for a smaller company because you have a smaller focus and
footprint to make those logs into something useful. . . If you’re logging 170 web servers with 30
applications as opposed to 3 web servers on 3 servers it is easier to figure out something that
happening as opposed to on a big scale.
Although SME_A used mostly Apache web server logs as their form logging, it planned to
implement the ELK stack elastic search method of logging in the future as SME_A5 indicates: “...
mostly Apache. We are working on rolling out the ELK stack, the elastic search log stack, and
shipping logs to a central log server.” In addition, there was strong suggestion that SMEs should opt
for open source as demonstrated by SME_A5: “we’re running snort [a free, open source solution] at
the moment on our firewall.” Other options highlighted as cost-effective means of performing ID
and IP (Intrusion Protection) along with core router, firewall, and general network functionality ID
include the use of Unified Threat Management (UTM) devices, log analysis tools such as “Fail to
Ban,” and Cloud Front. SME_A5 explained that “The easiest and most cost-effective way to
implement ID on a small network. . .is to use fail to ban, it’s a very simple utility, that does not
need a special firewall; you can have an ADSL router with a port open.” SME_B preferred the use of
external services such as “Cloud Front” which was deemed cost-effective as it shows only cached
pages to the user if they are deemed to be suspicious, reducing the likelihood that they will gain
access to sensitive information that a general user should not see. SME_B explains: “I have a hosted
proxy service called Cloud Front which does a basic kind of intrusion detection, if there’s very
strange traffic they only serve you the cache, they don’t let you go further.” SME_C focused on the
prevention of intrusions rather than their detection, with a strong emphasis on ensuring that their
authentication methods are secure. All organization identified this type of security measure as critical
when exposed to a limited budget and named this type of technique as a must have for all
organizations “because it limits the attacking surface” (SME_A4); and allows the organization to
“focus on ensuring that only users with valid credentials are allowed in and that other methods of
gaining access to the network are reduced to an absolute minimum” (SME_C2).
Challenges with intrusion detection
Most respondents argued that ID for an SME is possible using open source software. They strongly
identified IDS or IPS (Intrusion Protection System) as inadequate and not useful to smaller
companies such as start-ups, due to the amount of time and money it may take to implement
such technologies. The intrusion detection using ID technique was highlighted as costly as it was
hardware and software intensive. As such, SMEs opted for free open source software. Several
challenges relating to the ID technique were identified. One of the challenges, especially signature
based, was that the malicious content in an attack needs to be identified before action can be taken
against it. SME_A1 explains: “Generally speaking, signature detection is seen as very weak. Most
companies that have the funds to do intrusion detection want anomaly detection using web
application firewalls.” Although anomaly detection was proposed, it was perceived as more expensive
to acquire, implement and maintain. There was skepticism about the usefulness of the ID technique
as SME_A4 explained:
The bad thing for IDSs is it’s normally only when I’m really, really loud, when I put on a nessus
scanner or do dirbusting, trying to brute force directories. As far as ID goes, only very few apps,
systems and networks I’ve tested have ever noticed me even though I’ve not tried to be quiet at all. . .
(SME_A4)
The majority of the respondents failed to perceive the ID technique as useful. SME_A5
elaborated:
276 S. KABANDA ET AL.
I’m trying to still figure out what the benefits are. We might get a lot of false positives, especially
in our business where the guys are hacking [the consulting firm hacks clients to perform security
assessments]; they’re actually sending malicious packets across the network. How is that going to
work in our IDS? If I’m running one in the office here and want to protect some nodes, are we going
to get false positives?
Due to the costs and the uncertainty attached to the ID technique, other organization opted for
open source software solutions. For example, the network administrator of organization A was in the
processes of implementing an open source IDS Snort, on their network. Respondents voiced their
observation that IDSs are rarely seen during security assessments as SME_A1 indicated: “People say
that intrusion detection is on the rise, but we don’t actually ever see it implemented well in practice.”
Another challenge was in using web server logs to perform ID. Most SMEs used web server
loggings for two main reasons: post disaster analysis and big data analytics. Most had yet to fully
utilize the functionality. For example, SME_A2 was “yet to see locally [in South Africa], someone to
do logging well. . .” while SME_A3 shared his experience: “What I’ve seen in most assessments is that
web server logs are ignored.” The concern highlighted by respondents regarding web server logs was
what to do once you have the web server logs that are generated via general Apache or IIS web server
logging because “Logging is only half the problem, logging is very easy, and it’s what we do with the
logs afterwards that is hard” (SME_A2). The findings show that there was a problem in getting value
out of web server logs because of the vast amounts of data being stored - “The volume of logs is just
so huge, even for a low traffic website” (SME_A3). As a result, “we don’t actually do much with those
[Apache logs], we don’t do any parsing” (SME_A5). SME_B indicated that they had never analyzed
their logs but only looked at errors to determine what code they need to fix in their application:
I’ve got little modules on that if there is an error I get it sent to an error site, and that compiles all
my errors. In those errors I’ve seen a few little SQLi attempts. I don’t know if it was a person or a
script, but someone was trying out some very strange URLs. But I just looked at it and said “ok well
whatever, it didn’t work, they failed because it caused an error.
SME_B admitted that once they had noticed signs of SQLi and other cybersecurity attacks in their
error reporting, no further actions was taken as they perceived these to be unsuccessful events which
produced errors. The findings also show that SMEs were not familiar with software such as Splunk to
organize their logs in a central location so that they can be better analyzed graphically as SME_A3
reports: “. . .technology like Splunk is quite popular that lets you get all your logs from multiple
sources and push them to a central logging server to look at some basic visualizations, but I haven’t
seen anything exciting in customers I’ve looked at.”
Finally, respondents noted that it was not viable to perform ID based on web server logs alone as
web server logs do not contain enough information to perform proper ID. If web server logs are used
as means of performing ID, they need to be (1) complimented with other methods of monitoring the
web server and simultaneously “making sure that there is value for money. i.e. that you are not
taking up too much hard drive space or processing power” (SME_A1); and (2) done in real time in
order to be useful instead of “looking at logs after the fact or if some huge alarm goes off in a big
organization” (SME_A4). An analysis of the web server logs of organization A and B, using Deep
Web Analyzer, shows that security and ID received minimal attention.
Summary of findings
Internal factors
Cybersecurity has been documented as one of the main threats for SMEs and SMEs are encouraged
to not only become aware of the consequences of not having protective measures in place to address
this challenge but to also engage in ongoing measures of protecting their organization systems from
potential threats. However, SMEs in this study indicate that cybersecurity comes with its own
implementation challenges. The main organizational challenges were budget constraints, management, and employee support and commitment toward security concerns of IT systems. Respondents
JOURNAL OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPUTING AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 277
opinioned the lack of financial resources, specifically the budget to access cybersecurity and other ITrelated resources. In the absence of this resource, management became involved in IT decisions and
implementation although they do not have the expertise required. While respondents perceived this
as a disadvantage, Talke, Salomo, and Rost (2010) sees management involvement as a means of
providing strong impact on the strategic choice of firms, making the organization focus on innovation fields which can then drive new product innovativeness and firm performance. Souitaris and
Maestro (2010) also contend that such involvement “has a positive effect on new technology venture
financial performance.”
Management and employee attitude toward cybersecurity was highly influenced by (1) the lack of
immediate return on investment; and (2) the perception that there is a low likely hood of SMEs
being the target of cybercrime and related crimes because of their size and less IT complex systems
and legacy systems. Most respondents perceived the lack of legacy systems and complexity as an
advantage because they are able to easily examine and adopt new potential technologies such as IaaS.
Although such technologies and systems, enabled by increasing bandwidth, wireless technologies
and infrastructure (Von Solms and Kritzinger 2011) bring cost savings, it is important to note that
SMEs themselves are “novice users” (Ben-David et al. 2011) who can be negatively affected if security
measures are not implemented. These challenges highlighted in Figure 2 confirm traditional barriers
SMEs face with cybersecurity and therefore reaffirm the need to redress organizational factors.
Environmental factors
The findings show that three contextual factors of technological issues, consumer related challenges
and Institutional pressure, shaped how SMEs perceived cybersecurity in South Africa.
Technological and consumer related concerns. The findings show that SMEs were aware of cybersecurity concerns and attempted to address these using available techniques that were within their
financial means. The majority of SMEs used web server logging as a means of addressing ID because
it was perceived to be “easier for a smaller company because you have a smaller focus and footprint
to make those logs into something useful” (SME_A2). However, the signature IDS detection method
was perceived as a weak form of protection while anomaly IDS detection methods were perceived
costly to acquire, implement and maintain. Other options highlighted as cost-effective for SMEs
include the use of: core router, firewall and general network functionality, UTM devices, log analysis
tools such as “Fail to Ban,” and Cloud Front. SMEs however identified several challenges with some
of the approaches because the value from its use was not realized and therefore did not see the need
to perform consistent security checks. This confirms the findings of Ben-David et al. (2011) that
organizations in developing countries have poor security hygiene given that they do not regularly
update their security such as updating operating system and anti-virus software.
SMEs noted they find it difficult to have real time analysis of web server logs––an ideal situation.
Instead there was an after the fact analysis and the problem of what to do with the logs so that they
actually give value to the organization: “it’s what we do with the logs afterwards that are hard”
Figure 2. Factors influencing cybersecurity implementation in South African SMEs.
278 S. KABANDA ET AL.
(SME_A2). Despite the use of these techniques, there was acknowledgment that awareness of how to
use them to derive maximum benefits was lacking, like in the case of web server logging; but no
acknowledgement that the lack of IT expert (security experts) was a factor although this can be
inferred from the limited use practice (minimal recurrent use of cybersecurity measures), lack of
assimilation of security culture within the SMEs, and the lack of confidence in security implementation as demonstrated by SME_B “I don’t have proper precautions I guess, I have no precautions. I
just hope I’ve written the code OK enough and . . . I’m hoping that I’m not going to be targeted.” The
lack of IT expert and awareness of how to derive maximum benefits reaffirms the findings in
literature of the need for IT education (Grobler and Van Vuuren 2010). As a consequence of these
challenges, SMEs such as startup had limited use of cybersecurity techniques and the organizational
challenges they continue to face, reinforce the limited use practice.
Institutional pressure. The findings show that external factors further reinforced the limited use
practice. The landscape of developing countries as demonstrated by (Ben-David et al. 2011; Von
Solms and Kritzinger 2011) show to have significantly influenced how cybersecurity was practiced by
SMEs in this study. We see the existence of coercive pressure (external authoritative pressures, such
as governmental policy or regulatory activity, or driven by market forces or competition (Tolbert
and Zucker 1999) from regulatory bodies such as PCI standards, but a lack of normative and
mimetic institutional pressures, which are influential for organizations to gain legitimacy from
external institutions. In this context, legitimacy defines accepted form of actions of an entity within
some socially constructed system of norms, values, beliefs, and definitions and this plays a key role in
how organizations access various resources from potential trading partners (Lui, Ngai., and Lo 2016).
Institutional legitimacy is attained not only when organizations compete for resources and customers, but also when they comply to and address institutional pressures which have the potential to
shape the way an organizations behaves (Lui, Ngai., and Lo 2016), such as how it adopts and
implements cybersecurity. Although coercive pressure is exerted on SMEs, it is important that other
pressure sources be exerted to influence behavior in how they obtain legitimacy and avoid potential
sanctions such as denying them the resources and social support. For example, the findings show
that SMEs did not appear to be aware of and concerned of normative pressure from cybersecurity
community of practice, such as professional standards and practices, for example established by
education and training methods and professional bodies (DiMaggio and Powell 1983). This is a
concern because normative pressure is a source from which SMEs can obtain “professional opinions
or controlling the work conditions and methods in an industry” (Hovav 2017).
Mimetic pressure occurs when organizations emulate the actions of similar organizations in the same
industry (Martínez-Ferrero and García-Sánchez, 2017; Craig, and Rodrigues, 2016). In this study, we
observe how SMEs consciously adopted or in other cases propagated for open source software solutions
(SME_A), and cloud computing solutions (SME_C, SME_B). Mimetic pressure has the potential to
influence other organizations to adopt an innovation in uncertain times, particularly when there is little
understanding of a new process, technology or external conditions (DiMaggio and Powell 1983). Thus,
SMEs that broadly deploy and routinize IT security measures (such as, cybersecurity) into their daytoday work procedures have the potential to act as role models for SMEs that face similar contextual
challenges. The findings therefore show evidence of coercive and mimetic pressure but relatively weak
normative pressure. This is problematic because “any business that wants to have a competitive edge in
today’s global marketplace should adopt a comprehensive security policy in consultation with partners,
suppliers, and distributors that will provide ‘safe environment’ for the conduct of online transactions”
(AlSlamy 2008).The presence of such pressure, can positively influence behavior (Daddi et al. 2016),
such as having proactive cybersecurity measures, although behavior change can also depend on
organizational structure and on their management style.
To reinforce the importance of each of the external forces, we have distinctively categorized them
into technological factors to address concerns related to the use of extant technologies and the
consequence of emerging software and technologies; consumer factors, which address awareness,
JOURNAL OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPUTING AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 279
attitude, and social behavior of consumers; and institutional pressure, which requires organization
adherence in order for it to obtain competitive, social, and political legitimacy. In this manner, each
institutional force is addressed. Our findings, therefore, call for the need to reexamine the role of
institutional pressure, as well as organizational factors in how SMEs address cybersecurity. Our
findings, therefore, extend the current forces that shape the security landscape of developing
countries by noting the importance of institutional forces, as well as organizational forces which
constrain and enable SME activities by providing frameworks for legitimizing actions and behavior.
Conclusion
This study has examined the cybersecurity phenomenon from a developing country perspective.
South African SMEs set the case of investigation and provided a means of understanding how they
perceive cybersecurity and the factors that influence the techniques that they employ. The findings
show that SMEs’ perception of cybersecurity is constrained by internal organizational factors of
budget, management support, and attitudes. These factors are perceived to have a negative influence
toward cybersecurity implementation and constrain how cybersecurity is implemented. SMEs do not
have complex systems which could potentially make it difficult to embrace stringent cybersecurity
measures. The lack of complex business processes and legacy systems is seen as a benefit. The
developing countries’ landscape toward cybersecurity has shown to have a resilient influence on how
cybersecurity is propagated in SMEs.
Coercive pressure as a form of institutional pressure was evident in the study, specifically
complying with the PCI standards. SMEs adopted open source software and cloud computing
solutions––and this as a form of mimetic pressure that had become a widely accepted behavior.
There was minimal evidence of normative pressure. Without such pressures, SMEs are able to
operate without the need of obtaining institutional legitimacy necessary for accessing various
resources from their environment; and in so doing reinforce the understanding that SMEs can
operate without proactive cybersecurity strategies. Once reinforced, and legitimized by SMEs
themselves, it becomes taken for granted, that operating without cybersecurity is an SME social
practice. It is therefore important for mimetic and normative to be enacted and exerted on SMEs as
much as they are exerted on large organizations. Given that SMEs are usually resource constrained, it
is imperative that future studies examine how to ensure such pressures can be created in the
developing countries institutional environment.
Although the paper examines the cybersecurity phenomenon in SMEs and has identified challenges SMEs face in dealing with security threats, the study has several limitations which can be
taken further for future research. One of the limitations is the data sample which consisted of one
SMEs that had fully implemented cybersecurity. Future studies could potentially have more samples
of such SMEs as this could provide a better explanation of the cybersecurity in these contexts. One of
the findings pointed to the fact that CEO or CTO being directly involved or engaged in the
information security implementation process. It Future studies should explore the benefits of having
top management being directly involved or engaged in this process given that in many companies it
is a struggle/deficiency to get senior management to commit to and actively engage in cybersecurity
initiatives. Another finding pointed to the lack of adequate funding as being one of the issue
associated with SMEs lack of having stringent cybersecurity mechanism in place. However, there
is also a need to examine how the existing resources are spent, as this could affect cybersecurity
initiatives. While SMEs understood the need to comply with institutional policies, future studies can
explore the relationship between risk avoidance and compliance.
References
Abbott, R. G., J. McClain, B. Anderson, K. Nauer, A. Silva, and C. Forsythe. 2015. Log analysis of cyber security
training exercises. Procedia Manufacturing 31(3):5088–94. doi:10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.523.
280 S. KABANDA ET AL.
Abraham, A., C. Grosan, and Y. Chen. 2005. Cyber security and the evolution of intrusion detection systems. iManager’s Journal on Future Engineering and Technology 1:74. doi:10.26634/jfet.1.1.968.
Abubakar, A. D., J. M. Bass, and I. Allison. 2014. Cloud computing: Adoption issues for Sub-Saharan African SMEs.
Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries 62:1–17. doi:10.1002/j.1681-4835.2014.tb00439.x.
Abubakar, A. I., H. Chiroma, S. A. Muaz, and L. B. Ila. 2015. A review of the advances in cyber security benchmark
datasets for evaluating data-driven based intrusion detection systems. Procedia Computer Science 62:221–27.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.08.443.
Ahmad, A., S. B. Maynard, and G. Shanks. 2015. A case analysis of information systems and security incident
responses. International Journal of Information Management 35:717–23. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2015.08.001.
Alawiye-Adams, A. A., and B. O. Awoyemi. [November 20, 2014]. Cash-less economy policy and remote-on-US’ATM
transaction fee in Nigeria. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2528608.
AlSlamy, N. M. A. 2008. E-Commerce security. International Journal of Computer Science and Network 8:340–44.
Avgerou, C. 2001. The significance of context in information systems and organizational change. Information Systems
Journal 11:43–63. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2575.2001.00095.x.
Bada, M., and A. Sasse. 2014. Cyber security awareness campaigns: Why do they fail to change behaviour? Accessed
March 14, 2017. http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/1468954/1/Awareness%20CampaignsDraftWorkingPaper.pdf
Barse, E. L., and E. Jonsson.2004. Extracting attack manifestations to determine log data requirements for intrusion
detection. Computer Security Applications Conference, 158–67. IEEE.
Ben-David, Y., S. Hasan, J. Pal, M. Vallentin, S. Panjwani, P. Gutheim, and E. A. Brewer. 2011. Computing security in
the developing world: A case for multidisciplinary research. Proceedings of the 5th ACM workshop on Networked
systems for developing regions (pp. 39–44). ACM. June
Braun, V., & ClarkeV. (2006) Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology 3 :77–101.
Champion, M., S. Jariwala., P. Ward., and N. J. Cooke. 2014. Using cognitive task analysis to investigate the
contribution of informal education to developing cyber security expertise. In Proceedings of the Human Factors
and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting 58 (1):310–14. Sage: Los Angeles. doi:10.1177/1541931214581064.
Cowley, J. A., and F. L. Greitzer. 2015. Organizational impacts to cybersecurity expertise development and maintenance. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting 59 (2015):1187–91. Sage: Los
Angeles. doi:10.1177/1541931215591185.
Craig, R., and L. L. Rodrigues. 2016. Using a Dialectic Approach to Understand Stakeholders’ Conflicts with Corporate
Social Responsibility Activities. In AStakeholder Approach to Corporate Social Responsibility, 339–356. Routledge.
Daddi, T., F. Test, M. Frey., and F. Iraldo. 2016. Exploring the link between institutional pressures and environmental
management systems effectiveness: An empirical study. Journal of Environmental Management 183(2016): 647–656.
De Barros, M. J. Z., and H. Lazarek 2018. Comparative study of cybersecurity policy among South Africa and
Mozambique. International Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security (pp. 521–XI). Academic Conferences
International Limited.
DiMaggio, P. J., and W. W. Powell. 1983. The iron cage revisited: Institutional isomorphism and collective rationality
in organizational fields. American Sociological Review 48(2):147–60. doi:10.2307/2095101.
Dlamini, Z., and M. Modise. 2013. Cyber security awareness initiatives in South Africa: A synergy approach. Case
Study. Information Wharf Security Researcher Teachers Studies 1, ed. M. Warren, 1–22. Academic Conferences
Limited.
Garcia-Teodoro, P., J. Diaz-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and E. Vázquez. 2009. Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques, systems and challenges. Computers & Security 28(1–2):18–28. doi:10.1016/j.
cose.2008.08.003.
Grobler, M., and J. J. Van Vuuren. 2010. Broadband broadens scope for cybercrime in Africa. Information Security for
South Africa (ISSA), (1–8). IEEE
Hovav, A. 2017. How espoused culture influences misuse intention: A micro-institutional theory perspective.
Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.
Irons, A., and J. Ophoff. 2016. Aspects of digital forensics in South Africa. Interdisciplinary Journal of Information,
Knowledge, and Management 11:273–83. doi:10.28945/3576.
ITU. 2016. ICT services getting more affordable––But more than half the world’s population still not using the
Internet. Accessed March 20, 2017. http://www.itu.int/en/mediacentre/Pages/2016-PR30.aspx
Kreibich, C., and J. Crowcroft. 2003. Automated nids signature creation using honeypots. University of Cambridge
Computer Laboratory. https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Jon_Crowcroft/publication/245571098Automated_
NIDS_Signature_Creation_using_Honeypots/links/0c960537b498cddd41000000.pdf
Kruegel, C., and G. Vigna. 2003. Anomaly detection of web-based attacks. Proceedings of the 10th ACM conference on
Computer and Communications Security (251–61). ACM.
Lee, W., and D. Xiang. 2001. Information-theoretic measures for anomaly detection. Security and Privacy, IEEE
Symposium on (pp. 130–143). IEEE.
Leung, S. 2012. Cyber security risks and mitigation for SME. CISSP CISA CBCP 1–50. http://haffa.hk/files/2012-05_
HKTDC_SME.pdf
JOURNAL OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPUTING AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 281
Lui, A. K. H., E. W. T. Ngai., and C. K. Y. Lo. 2016. Disruptive information technology innovations and the cost of
equity capital: The moderating effect of CEO incentives and institutional pressures. Information & Management
53:345–54. doi:10.1016/j.im.2015.09.009.
Mirza, M., M. Usman, R. P. Biuk-Aghai, and S. Fong. 2016. A modular approach for implementation of honeypots in
cyber security. International Journal of Applied Engineering Research 11(8):5446–51.
Martínez-Ferrero, J., and Isabel-María, G-S. Coercive, normative and mimetic isomorphism as determinants of the
voluntary assurance of sustainability reports. International Business Review. 26, no. 1:102–118.
Nycz, M., M. J. Martin, and Z. Polkowski. 2015. The cyber security in SMEs in Poland and Tanzania. International
Conference on Electronics, Computers and Artificial Intelligence (ECAI), AE–27. IEEE. June 25.
Oliner, A., A. Ganapathi, and W. Xu. 2012. Advances and challenges in log analysis. Communications of the ACM
55:55–61. doi:10.1145/2076450.
Patcha, A., and J. M. Park. 2007. An overview of anomaly detection techniques: Existing solutions and latest
technological trends. Computer Networks 51:3448–70. doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2007.02.001.
Peterson, D. 2004. Intrusion detection and cyber security monitoring of SCADA and DCS networks. ISA Automation
West, May.
Soomro, Z. A., M. H. Shah, and J. Ahmed. 2016. Information security management needs more holistic approach: A
literature review. International Journal of Information Management 36:215–25. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2015.11.009.
Souitaris, V., and B. M. Maestro. 2010. Polychronicity in top management teams: The impact on strategic decision
processes and performance of new technology ventures. Strategic Management Journal 31(6):652–78.
Srinidhi, B., J. Yan., and G. K. Tayi. 2015. Allocation of resources to cyber-security: The effect of misalignment of
interest between managers and investors. Decision Support Systems 75:49–62. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2015.04.011.
Sulayman, M., C. Urquhart, E. Mendes, and S. Seidel. 2012. Software process improvement success factors for small
and medium Web companies: A qualitative study. Information and Software Technology 54:479–500. doi:10.1016/j.
infsof.2011.12.007.
Talke, K., S. Salomo, and K. Rost. 2010. How top management team diversity affects innovativeness and performance
via the strategic choice to focus on innovation fields. Research Policy 39(7):907–18. doi:10.1016/j.respol.2010.04.001.
Tolbert, P. S., and L. G. Zucker. 1999. The institutionalization of institutional theory. In Studying organization. theory
& method, edited by S. R. Clegg, S. Clegg and C. Hardy, 169–84. Thousand Oaks, New Delhi: London.
Von Solms, B., and E. Kritzinger. 2011. Critical information infrastructure protection (CIIP) and cyber security in
Africa–Has the CIIP and cyber security Rubicon been crossed? International Conference on e-Infrastructure and
e-Services for Developing Countries 116–24. Springer: Berlin.
Notes on contributors
Salah Kabanda is a senior lecturer at the University of Cape Town, South Africa. Dr. Kabanda’s research interests
focus on the adoption, use, and consequence of ICTs in both private and public organizations in developing countries.
Maureen Tanner is an associate professor at the University of Cape Town, South Africa. Her research interests include
issues related to agile software development (for both collocated and distributed teams), UML, software engineering
and social aspects of software engineering, global software development, virtual teams, team collaboration, and ICT4D.
Cameron Kent is a student in the department of information systems at the University of Cape Town. He has a
research interest in the challenges facing organizations with respect to cybersecurity.
Appendix
(1) What factors influence your understanding of and implementation of cybersecurity in your organization?
(2) What cybersecurity mechanism do you have in place in your organization?
(3) What technical challenges do you face as a result of the implementation of these cybersecurity initiatives in your
organization?
(4) What organizational and institutional challenges have you faced, or you perceive you could face, when
embarking on a cybersecurity initiative in your organization?
282 S. KABANDA ET AL.