Journal of Purchasing & Supply Management 29 (2023) 100820
Available online 8 February 2023
1478-4092/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
The role of buyers justice in achieving socially sustainable global supply
chains: A perspective of apparel suppliers and their workers☆
Mohammad Alghababsheh a,*
, Atif Saleem Butt b
, Syed Mithun Ali c
a Department of Business Management, School of Business, Mutah University, Alkarak 61710, Jordan b Department of Management, School of Business, American University of Ras Al Khaimah, United Arab Emirates c Department of Industrial and Production Engineering, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka, Bangladesh
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Developing countries
Justice
Risk
Social sustainability
CSR
Supply chain
ABSTRACT
The absence of an effective public model (e.g., government regulations and law enforcement) in developing
countries has driven clothing brands and retailers to rely on a private voluntary formal model (e.g., compliance
and collaboration approaches) to manage suppliers’ internal social issues (e.g., poor working conditions).
However, this model has been recently criticised for falling short in addressing these issues as it overlooks their
main root causes. In this study, we suggest that suppliers’ internal social issues can be driven by buyers’ unfair
practices, and therefore, we propose and examine that buyers’ justice can ensure suppliers’ internal social
performance. We further postulate and investigate that addressing these issues would result in advantages for
buyers beyond traditional performance outcomes in the form of reduced supply operational risk. Based on a
census of the 117 suppliers comprising the ready-made garment industry in a Middle Eastern country (Jordan),
we received survey responses from 97 suppliers and their shop floor workers. The analysis revealed that only
buyer’s distributive and procedural justice, but not interactional justice, are positively related to suppliers’ internal social performance. We also found evidence that improving suppliers’ internal social performance can
diminish supply operational risk. This study contributes to the extant research by empirically investigating a new
approach to handle the increase in suppliers’ internal social issues in a developing country context. It also does
by capturing suppliers’ internal social performance from the workers’ perspective and highlighting the role of
improved suppliers’ internal social performance on mitigating supply operational risk.
1. Introduction
To cope with dynamic business environment (e.g., shrinking products lifecycles) and cut down labour costs, clothing brands and retailers,
benefiting from international trade liberalisation and technological
advancement, have turned to suppliers in the developing world to obtain
finished items (Anner et al., 2013; Teng and Jaramillo, 2005). However,
although this efficient supply chain strategy can support firms’ business
strategy, it leaves them susceptible to substantial negative publicity risk
that can potentially result from social sustainability issues in their supply chains, particularly suppliers’ internal social issues. Over the history
of industrial apparel production, media reports have documented
various shocking internal social issues of suppliers contracted by leading
global brands and retailers, ranging from child labour, unfair wages,
management abuses to poor working conditions, among others
(Bellingan et al., 2020; Marshall et al., 2019). Brands and retailers
worldwide are now facing enormous pressure from customers, human
rights activists and non-government organisations (NGOs) to address
these issues by suppliers (Andersen and Skjoett-Larsen, 2009; Mani and
Gunasekaran, 2018).
The absence of an effective public model (e.g., government regulations and law enforcement) in the developing countries has driven
clothing brands and retailers to relay on a private voluntary formal
model (e.g., compliance and collaboration approaches) to manage suppliers’ internal social issues (Alghababsheh and Gallear, 2022; Yawar
and Seuring, 2017). However, this model has been recently criticised for
falling short in addressing these issues (e.g., Alghababsheh and Gallear,
2021; Barrientos and Smith, 2007; Locke et al., 2009; Sancha et al.,
2016). This may be due to the fact that this model was designed based on
a fundamental assumption that suppliers’ internal social issues are
☆ This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: m.alghababsheh@mutah.edu.jo (M. Alghababsheh), atif.butt@aurak.ac.ae (A.S. Butt), mithun@ipe.buet.ac.bd (S.M. Ali).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pursup
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pursup.2023.100820
Received 2 May 2022; Received in revised form 7 January 2023; Accepted 22 January 2023 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 29 (2023) 100820
2
factory technical problems and therefore it overlooks their main root
causes (Alghababsheh et al., 2020; Anner et al., 2013; Reinecke and
Donaghey, 2021). Although suppliers’ weak formal institutional environment (Huq and Stevenson, 2018), their country’s socio-economic
culture (Huq et al., 2014) and management failures (e.g., lack of capacity and knowledge) can create a fertile ground for social issues to
flourish in their facilities, it has become increasingly recognised that
such issues can also emerge due to buyers’ unfair return distribution,
procedures and interactions in the relationship (Alghababsheh et al.,
2020; Anner et al., 2013). Constant unfair prices reduction pressure,
inconsistent relationship procedures (e.g., violate orders volumes,
specifications and payments) and lack of timely and complete information by buyers can lead to an unstable production environment for
suppliers that, in turn, can force them to adopt unethical labour practices such as cutting workers’ wages, forcing excessive overtime and
reducing investment in occupational health and safety requirements
(Anner et al., 2013; Locke and Samel, 2018). Yet, despite the central role
of buyers in generating conditions that encourage labour violations by
suppliers, the examination of whether fairer purchasing practices of
buying firms in terms of return distribution, relationship procedures and
interactions would enhance suppliers’ internal social performance has
been entirely lacking to date.
Buyer justice can have broad implications on supplier social sustainability because its three dimensions – distributive, procedural and
interactional – reflect the management of the economic (returns),
structural (procedures) and social (interactions) aspects of the relationship, respectively. Delivering fair returns in the relationship by
buyers can enhance suppliers’ financial capability to meet minimum
acceptable working conditions and abandon unethical cost-saving
employment practices (e.g., child labour) within their facilities (Alghababsheh et al., 2020; Yawar and Seuring, 2018). Moreover, consistent
sourcing procedures and providing timely information about unexpected changes by buyers can be reflected in a more stable production
environment within the suppliers’ facilities, leading to less violation of
labour rights (e.g., excessive overtime shifts). Despite this, the role that
buyer justice can play in enhancing supplier’s social performance has
received limited research attention. However, some studies have more
recently recognised and investigated the importance of buyer justice in
the context of supply chain social sustainability (e.g., Alghababsheh
et al., 2020; Bag et al., 2022; Chen and Chen, 2019; Lim et al., 2022).
However, although these studies have greatly contributed to our understanding of the role of justice in achieving sustainable supply chains,
they have predominantly focussed on the role of justice on the implementation of the private voluntary formal model (i.e., compliance and
collaboration approaches) to supply chain social sustainability. As such,
the direct impact of the three justice dimensions on supplier’s internal
social performance has not received empirical attention.
The business case of managing suppliers’ social sustainability issues
has received increasing research attention in recent years (e.g., Mani
et al., 2020). However, the majority of the research has primarily
focussed on the impact of improving supplier’s social performance on
traditional performance outcomes, such as the operational, environmental and/or financial, for both the buyer and the supplier. Although
adverse workplace incidents and possible labour strikes that can occur
due to social issues in suppliers’ facilities can potentially affect suppliers’ manufacturing and operations (Pullman et al., 2009), and hence
disrupt the supply process from suppliers, examining whether improved
suppliers’ internal social performance would mitigate supply operational risk (i.e., the deviation from supply orders from suppliers in terms
of time, quality and quantity) has been, perhaps somewhat surprisingly,
overlooked to date. Moreover, the majority of the research has sought
the buyers’ perspective in the context of developed countries when
exploring supplier’s social sustainability. While a small number of
studies have recently added some balance to and enriched the extant
literature by including developing countries’ suppliers’ perspectives (e.
g., Huq et al., 2016; Yawar and Seuring, 2018), it intended to capture
suppliers’ internal social performance from the top management
perspective, or in other words whilst neglecting the voice of the suppliers’ workers (i.e., own shop floor workers who are directly engaged in
the production in the factory). Managerial perceptions of what constitute acceptable working conditions may not match the views of the
affected workers, and may therefore lead to biased conclusions
(Alghababsheh et al., 2020).
To address these gaps, this study proposes and examines the positive
impact of buyers’ justice (i.e., distributive, procedural and interactional)
on suppliers’ internal social performance and, in turn, on supply operational risk. In doing so, we carried out a census of the 117 suppliers
comprising the ready-made garment industry in a Middle Eastern
country (Jordan), which resulted in receiving survey responses from 97
suppliers and their shop floor workers. Accordingly, this study makes
three important contributions to the supply chain management (SCM)
literature. First, unlike previous research that has predominately
focussed on private voluntary formal approaches (i.e., compliance and
collaboration approaches), this study theoretically proposes and
empirically investigates the positive role of buyer’s distributive, procedural and interactional justice on enhancing suppliers’ internal social
performance. As such, our study extends and complements the existing
approaches to managing supplier social sustainability by highlighting a
relational-oriented approach. Second, this study examines the impact of
suppliers’ internal social performance on mitigating the supply operational risk that stems from the supplier’s side. Finally, rather than
relying on the buyer’s or supplier’s managerial perceptions, the study
captures suppliers’ internal social performance from the suppliers’ shop
floor workers’ perspectives in an emerging market context. This can help
in eliminating the potential bias that may emerge when the buyer’s or
the supplier’s top management reports on this sensitive issue, understanding the characteristics of the suppliers’ shop floor workers and
obtaining valuable input that can reshape government employment
regulations and redesign social sustainability strategies in the supply
chain.
The paper develops as follows. In the next section, a brief theoretical
background on justice in the buyer-supplier relationship, suppliers’ internal social performance and supply operational risk is provided.
Following this, the development of the study hypotheses is presented in
Section 3. Section 4 presents the study method. The results are reported
in Section 5. Section 6 provides the study’s theoretical and practical
implications and highlights its limitations.
2. Theoretical background
2.1. Justice in the buyer-supplier relationship
Justice has long been an important aspect in managing and ensuring
long-term successful buyer-supplier relationships because it is capable of
explaining and predicting a wide range of relevant behaviours, attitudes
and outcomes in such relationships (Alghababsheh et al., 2022; Griffith
et al., 2006). It encompasses three dimensions in the buyer-supplier
relationship, namely distributive, procedural and interactional justice
(Narasimhan et al., 2013; Trada and Goyal, 2017). In recent years,
studies have begun to highlight the vital importance of justice in the
buyer-supplier relationship for achieving sustainable supply chains (see
Table 1). For instance, Boyd et al. (2007) suggested that procedural
justice in corporate social responsibility (CSR) implementation along
with a lower level of supplier monitoring can yield more effective means
of increasing supplier CSR compliance. Similarly, Alghababsheh et al.
(2020) proposed theoretically that buyer justice can advance supplier
social sustainability directly and indirectly through enhancing the
effectiveness of the assessment and collaboration approaches. Empirically, Chen and Chen (2019) uncovered that justice enhances the role of
sustainable supplier management on supplier sustainability performance. Likewise, Bag et al. (2022) revealed that justice improves the
positive impact of collaborative buyer–supplier relationships on supplier
M. Alghababsheh et al. 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 29 (2023) 100820
3
social sustainability. Lim et al. (2022) found that, surprisingly, distributive justice can adversely affect the social collaboration-buyer’s social
performance nexus. However, it can be observed that prior studies have
predominantly focussed on the role of justice in the implementation of
the private voluntary formal model (i.e., compliance and collaboration
approaches) to supply chain social sustainability. As such, none of these
studies have empirically considered the direct impact of the three justice
dimensions on supplier’s internal social performance.
During the relationship, supplier may evaluate the justice of an event
(e.g., joint project) or the whole relationship either in terms of overall
justice (deemphasising dimensional distinctions) or in relation to a
particular justice dimension(s) (emphasising dimensional distinctions)
(Alghababsheh et al., 2022). Our study focuses on the justice of the
whole relationship on the part of the buyer in terms of all justice dimensions (i.e., distributive, procedural and interactional) from the
supplier’s perspective.
Distributive justice is grounded in equity theory (Adams, 1965) and
it is concerned with the allocation of the valued returns created in the
relationship by the buyer and the supplier (Carnovale et al., 2019). It
signals the extent to which a supplier observes that its returns to inputs
in the relationship are equal to those of the buyer. The inputs can be
tangible (e.g., equipment) and/or intangible (e.g., technology) and the
returns can be monetary (e.g., profits) and/or nonmonetary (e.g.,
knowledge acquisition) for the supplier. Following the logic of equity
theory, supplier compares the inputs that have been put into by and the
returns accrued throughout the course of the relationship for each party
based on the available information. This comparison process leads to
two possible outcomes: distributive justice and distributive injustice. A
supplier perceives distributive justice in the relationship when his/her
return-to-input ratio is equal to that of the buyer, whilst he/she perceives distributive injustice when the return-to-input ratio is less
(negative distributive injustice) or greater (positive distributive injustice) than that of the buyer (Alghababsheh et al., 2020).
Procedural justice deals with the structural and instrumental part of
the relationship. It reflects the degree to which a supplier perceives that
the formal rules and procedures that organise and manage the relationship that eventually impact his/her gains are believed to be
consistent over the relationship, bias-free, accurate, correctable, ethical
(Leventhal, 1980) and follow the contracted terms and stipulations (Luo,
2007). For example, a supplier may perceive a consistent relationship
procedure when it is applied in the same way over time and to all peer
suppliers dealing with the buyer. Similarly, the perception of a bias-free
relationship procedure is evident when it is developed in a way that
ensures mutual and joint benefits for both parties (Luo, 2007). However,
the number and importance of assessment criteria (i.e., consistency,
unbiasedness, accuracy, correctability, ethicality and conformity with
Table (1)
Analysis of justice studies in the context of sustainable supply chain management.
Author(s) Justice dimension
(s)
Type of
relationship
Perspective Method Empirical setting Relevant empirical/theoretical findings
Boyd et al. (2007) • Procedural Buyer-supplier N/A Conceptual N/A Procedural justice in CSR implementation with a
lower level of supplier monitoring is a more effective
means of increasing supplier CSR compliance.
Normann et al.
(2017)
• Distributive Buyer-supplier Supplier Case study Textile industry
across countries
Assessment-based governance of supplier
sustainability creates perception of distributive
injustice, which in turn leads to non-compliance by
suppliers with the buyer’s sustainability
requirements.
Soundararajan and
Brammer (2018)
• Procedural Intermediaries
-suppliers
Supplier Multiple case
study
Garment industry in
India
Framings of sustainability requirements and
associated procedures adopted by intermediaries
influence supplier’s perception of procedural
justice, which in turn, influences the types of
reciprocal behaviours by the supplier.
Chen and Chen
(2019)
Deemphasised
dimensional
distinctiona
Buyer-supplier Supplier Survey Multiple industries in
China
Justice enhances the moderating impact of
sustainable supplier management on supplier
sustainable performance.
Alghababsheh et al.
(2020)
• Distributive Buyer-supplier N/A Conceptual N/A Buyer’s distributive, procedural and interactional
justice can improve supplier’s social performance
direct and indirectly through enhancing the
implementation of socially sustainable supply chain
management practices.
• Procedural
• Interactional
Lee and Ha (2021) • Interpersonal Seller-buyer Not
specified
Survey Pharmaceutical
industry in South
Korea
Interpersonal and informational justice have a
positive impact on informational quality, which in
turn, positively influences sustainable supply chain
performance.
• Informational
Oyedijo et al.
(2021)
• Distributive Buyer-supplier Dyadic Qualitative
interviews
Food industry Buyer
(UK) Supplier (India)
Fairness perceptions positively influence
collaborative activities (information sharing, joint
relationship effort and dedicated investment)
between multi-tier supply chain partners for
sustainability.
• Procedural
• Interactional
Bag et al. (2022) Deemphasised
dimensional
distinctiona
Buyer-supplier Dyadic Survey Automotive parts in
South Africa
Justice improves the positive impact of collaborative
buyer–supplier relationships on supplier social
sustainability
Lim et al. (2022) • Distributive Buyer-supplier Buyer Survey Multiple industries in
China
Distributive justice adversely affects the social
collaboration-buyer’s social performance positive
link. Procedural justice has no moderating effect on
the link.
• Procedural
Qiao et al. (2022) Deemphasised
dimensional
distinctiona
Buyer-supplier Supplier Survey Multiple industries in
china
Supplier perceived justice enhances the positive
moderating role of perceived relationship
attractiveness on the impact of environmental
assessment and collaboration on supplier
environmental commitment.
Note: N/A = Not Applicable. a Justice treated as a unidimensional concept.
M. Alghababsheh et al. 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 29 (2023) 100820
4
contractual terms) used by the supplier may vary depending on the
importance of the procedure whose justice is being assessed and relationship characteristics (e.g., dependence structure, transactional vs.
strategic relationship, new vs. old relationship) (Alghababsheh et al.,
2022). Relationship procedures cover a wide range of areas in the
relationship, including outcomes allocation, product return, order payment, lead time, resource sharing, information exchange and dispute
resolution.
Interactional justice is associated with the quality of the social and
relational sides of the buyer-supplier exchange. It indicates the degree to
which a supplier observes that it is being treated impartially at the
interpersonal level by and receives fair relevant information from the
buyer during the enactment of relationship procedures (Alghababsheh
et al., 2020; Narasimhan et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2014). As such, the
supplier assesses the buyer’s interactional justice from both an interpersonal and informational perspective. Specifically, from an interpersonal perspective, the supplier perceives interactional justice when the
buyer treats him/her with respect, sensitivity, politeness and dignity
during their interactions and communications (Liu et al., 2012). From an
informational perspective, the supplier senses interactional justice when
the buyer provides sufficient, timely and truthful explanations for and
information on given decisions, actions, changes or outcomes in the
relationship (Luo et al., 2015).
2.2. Suppliers’ internal social performance
Sustainability has become an integral part of managing global supply
chains. This has primarily been motivated by the increasing pressure
from powerful stakeholders as well as by the possible performance and
competitive advantage that can be realised from implementing sustainable supply chain management (SSCM) (Sajjad et al., 2015; Markley
and Davis, 2007). SSCM revolves around planning, organising, coordinating and controlling the flow of materials/services, information and
capital from suppliers, and within the focal company, to final customers
in an approach that supports the simultaneous achievement of environmental, social and economic goals to satisfy stakeholders and subsequently generates economic value to the focal company and supply
chain partners (Carter and Rogers, 2008; Seuring and Müller, 2008). As
such, the performance aim of SCM has been redefined under the sustainability perspective to involve addressing equally and simultaneously
economic, environmental and social issues to realise advanced performance. This is because neglecting specific SCM issues may undermine
the company’s efforts in managing the other issues. For instance, serious
internal social issues at suppliers may damage the focal company’s
reputation that it has built through environmental protection efforts,
and thus negatively impacting economic performance. However, despite
this fact, managing these three issues of SCM has received imbalance
scholarly attention in the extant literature, with the management of the
social issues receiving the least attention (Quarshie et al., 2016; Yawar
and Seuring, 2017; Zorzini et al., 2015). The imbalanced attention
among the three SCM issues suggests that considerable research on
SSCM has not integrated and examined all these issues simultaneously.
However, although it is necessary to integrate and study them simultaneously (Carter and Rogers, 2008), this would not be possible without a
deeper understanding of the nuances of the social issues.
A wide range of social sustainability issues can occur in the supply
chain, adversely affecting the health, safety and welfare of the focal
company’s employees, supplier’s employees, local community and
customers (Alghababsheh and Gallear, 2022; Maloni and Brown, 2006).
In recent years, clothing brands and retailers have paid more attention to
the internal social issues of the suppliers that can have a detrimental
impact on the suppliers’ workers (i.e., shop floor workers who are
directly engaged in the garment production in the factory) and the local
communities in which they operate (Yawar and Kauppi, 2018; Yawar
and Seuring, 2017). It therefore follows that a supplier’s social performance can be divided into internal and external performance based on
the targeted stakeholders. Emphasising the external stakeholders, supplier’s external social performance represents the extent of the voluntary
support provided by the supplier towards the development and welfare
of the community in which they operate, such as through donations,
inclusion of marginalised people and sourcing from minority-owned
businesses (Gimenez et al., 2012; Huq et al., 2016). By contrast, supplier’s internal social performance focusses on internal stakeholders
(employees) and reflects the level of human and employment rights (e.
g., child labour, freedom of association, fair payment, paid sick leave,
paid over time and employee compensation) (Forsman-Hugg et al.,
2013; Huq et al., 2016; Lund-Thomsen et al., 2012; Maloni and Brown,
2006; Sancha et al., 2015) and working conditions (e.g., forced labour,
corporal punishment, sexual harassment, working hours, health and
safety and occupational welfare) (Awaysheh and Klassen, 2010; Sancha
et al., 2016; Yawar and Seuring, 2017; Yu, 2008) prevalent in the supplier’s workplace.
It is important to note that supplier’s external social performance is
beyond the scope of this study. Our emphasis on supplier’s internal social performance can be explained from three perspectives. First, it can
be argued that, in general, advancing supplier’s internal social performance is relatively more important than enhancing its external social
performance. This is because poor internal social performance can lead
to a more adverse direct impact compared to poor external social performance. For instance, if a supplier does not provide decent and
acceptable working conditions in the facilities, work accidents will most
likely increase. On the other hand, if a supplier does not offer donations
to the external community, no negative direct impact will occur.
Moreover, supplier’s internal social issues can have external social
consequences, but not vice versa. For instance, a work-related injury or
occupational illness will create suffer for the worker and also for his/her
family in the form of deep emotional and financial pain. Second, buyer’s
fair treatment of the supplier in terms of distribution of returns, procedures and interactions can help the supplier invest in better working
conditions for the employees and avoid the use of unethical employment
practices to reduce costs (e.g., child labour). Therefore, fair treatment of
the supplier by the buyer can have a more direct impact on supplier’s
internal social performance than on supplier’s external social performance. Finally, better internal working conditions in the supplier’s facilities are more likely to ensure a stable production environment and
process, which can enable them to consistently meet the buyer’s quality
specifications, delivery times and volume requirements. As such,
reduced supply operational risk can be observed in the case of improving
supplier’s internal social performance than in the case of enhancing
supplier’s external social performance.
2.3. Supply operational risk
The increased reliance on other firms upstream and downstream the
supply chain to obtain better materials and services in terms of quality
and cost and deliver products and services to customers has resulted in
firms that are nowadays more interdependent and interconnected
(Christopher and Peck, 2004; Gunasekaran et al., 2015; Kamalahmadi
and Parast, 2016) with relatively less control over the process of
manufacturing and delivering their own products and services. However, although the increased interdependency and interconnectedness in
supply networks and the implementation of operational excellence
strategies (e.g., lean thinking and just-in-time) have increased overall
efficiency, these conditions have amplified firms’ vulnerability to supply
chain risks (Christopher and Peck, 2004; Craighead et al., 2007; Tukamuhabwa et al., 2015), which can lead to disruptions in the supply chain
in the form of interruption to the forward and reverse flow of material,
products, services, information and money (DuHadway et al., 2019;
Scholten et al., 2014).
Supply chain risk is “the likelihood and impact of unexpected macro
and/or micro level events or conditions that adversely influence any
part of a supply chain leading to operational, tactical, or strategic level
M. Alghababsheh et al. 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 29 (2023) 100820
5
failures or irregularities” (Ho et al., 2015, p. 5). Supply chain risks can be
broadly divided into external supply chain risks and internal supply
chain risks (also known as operational risks) that can result from
man-made or natural events (Christopher and Peck, 2004; Olson and
Wu, 2010; Wu and Chiu, 2018). External supply chain risks that stem
from outside the supply chain are uncontrollable in nature and occur
due to natural, political, health or technological events, such as hurricanes (Kim and Bui, 2019), political unrest and conflicts (Elzarka, 2013),
pandemics (Mollenkopf et al., 2020) and cyber-attacks (Pandey et al.,
2020). In contrast, internal supply chain risks that originate from within
the supply chain are somewhat more controllable: from the supplier’s
side, the focal company’s (manufacturer) side and/or from the customer’s side. As such, internal supply chain risks are perceived to consist
of three main types depending on the source of the risk namely, supply
operational risk, process risk and demand risk (Chen et al., 2013; Kumar
et al., 2010; Manuj and Mentzer, 2008). While process risk represents
potential deviations in the level of production caused by disruptions of
internal processes (e.g., machine breakdown) and demand risk reflects
potential deviations in the forecasted demand from the actual demand,
supply operational risk is the potential deviations in the level of the
supply orders from suppliers in terms of time, quality and quantity that
may result in incomplete orders (Chen et al., 2013; Kumar et al., 2010).
Supply operational risk can cause disruptions that are more critical
(Pereira et al., 2014) since the inability of suppliers to deliver the
required material will negatively affect the firm’s ability to serve its
customers at the right time, quantity and cost (Chen et al., 2013).
3. Hypotheses development
The conceptual model in this study (Fig. 1) establishes a positive
relationship between the three dimensions of buyer’s justice (i.e.,
distributive, procedural and interactional) and supplier’s internal social
performance. The model also proposes that supplier’s internal social
performance is negatively related to supply operational risk. These arguments are developed in the following subsections.
3.1. Buyers’ justice and suppliers’ internal social performance
3.1.1. Distributive justice and suppliers’ internal social performance
The contemporary global apparel supply chains are “buyer-driven”
(Locke and Samel, 2018), which means that brands and retailers are
central to establishing decentralised production networks, mainly in
exporting developing countries (Gereffi, 1994). They do not own the
factories but their dominant bargaining power in the global industrial
apparel market stems from their extensive purchasing power, as attained
from consolidation and the prevailing high marketing and brand position in the consumer market (Locke et al., 2009). In these circumstances,
suppliers’ business survival depends largely on brands and retailers
(Lund-Thomsen and Lindgreen, 2014), leaving them without bargaining
power (Kim et al., 2022). They earn lower profits compared to brands
and retailers (Soundararajan and Brammer, 2018), although they do
own the capital-intensive production process. Brands and retailers usually threaten to switch to a different source to gain a price reduction
from suppliers (Anner, 2019). Suppliers who perceive unfair distribution
of the relationship returns may attempt to address the imbalance by
decreasing inputs or terminating the relationship in question
(Malagueno ˜ et al., 2019). However, the potential consequences of losing
powerful buyers might be more damaging to weaker suppliers without
bargaining power (they might go out of business) than if they accept the
price reductions (Schleper et al., 2017). Suppliers attempt to restore
equity will be made indirectly by turning to the weakest link, its workers
(i.e., own shop floor workers who are directly engaged in the garment
production in the factory). To survive, suppliers seek to transfer the cost
pressure generated from lower unit prices to their workers by cutting
wages (Lund-Thomsen and Lindgreen, 2018), integrating child labour
into their workforce (Awaysheh and Klassen, 2010; Jiang, 2009),
avoiding expensive safety procedures in buildings (Anner et al., 2013)
and/or keeping a smaller workforce to avoid training and fixed-benefit
costs associated with hiring new and large numbers of workers and then
forcing these workers to process excessive workloads during periods of
high demand (Locke and Samel, 2018). Anner et al. (2013) observed that
deteriorating labour rights and work conditions in suppliers globally
typically coincides with a considerable drop in the prices that brands
and retailers pay to suppliers. Conversely, if suppliers obtain a fair return and prices for their efforts produced items from buyers, they will be
in a better financial position to be able to invest in improving workplace
occupational health and safety conditions, provide fair wages to their
workers and avoid unethical employment practices (e.g., child labour)
(Alghababsheh et al., 2020). Buying firms should primarily aim to
improve the economic performance of suppliers if they are to truly
improve suppliers’ social performance (Yawar and Seuring, 2018).
Based on the above, the study proposes the following.
H1. Buyer’s distributive justice is positively related to supplier’s internal social performance.
3.1.2. Procedural justice and supplier’s internal social performance
Today’s apparel industry business environment is characterised by
ever-changing consumer needs, dynamic demand and shorter item shelflives (Barrientos, 2013). Under these circumstances, to stay competitive,
global brands and retailers have redesigned and coordinated supply
chains to maximise flexibility and efficiency and avoid risk (Locke and
Samel, 2018). Instead of stocking extra products in a store inventory,
they usually reorder on a continual basis to avoid the risks associated
with fluctuating consumer demand, creating volatile orders volumes for
suppliers (Anner et al., 2013; Barrientos, 2013). Additionally, brands
and retailers frequently place orders with suppliers requesting shorter
lead times to allow them to respond quickly to the latest fashion trends
and to introduce new products to consumers multiple times within a
single season (Anner et al., 2013; Locke and Samel, 2018). However,
such volatile purchasing practices represent a violation of relationship
procedural justice and can create unstable operations and
manufacturing environment for the suppliers that can adversely affect
working conditions and labour rights. To make the most of a given order
from brands and retailers (due to unstable orders) and to meet their tight
delivery deadlines, suppliers may speed up production and simultaneously process multiple production orders to a scale that is considerably above the normal physical and phycological capacity of the workers
to handle (Awaysheh and Klassen, 2010; Lund-Thomsen and Lindgreen,
2014; Yu, 2008; Soundararajan et al., 2018). Moreover, suppliers may
use the piece-work pay system under which workers are paid only a
fixed piece rate (no other benefits) for each unit produced given the
unstable order volumes (Anner, 2019). Furthermore, to reduce lead
times and handle volatile orders volume, suppliers may force employees
to work overtime and excessive hours and perform assigned tasks faster
during periods of peak demand (Alghababsheh et al., 2020; Anner et al.,
2013; Lund-Thomsen and Lindgreen, 2018). Alternatively, consistent
and stable sourcing practices by dominating brands and retailers would
allow for manageable working hours, less violation and abuse of labour
Fig. 1. Conceptual model.
M. Alghababsheh et al. 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 29 (2023) 100820
6
rights and reduced work-related injuries and illnesses within the suppliers’ facilities. It is then reasonable to argue that procedural justice
within the relationship practices and policies on the part of the buyers
can ensure more acceptable levels of social performance from suppliers,
and therefore the study suggests the following.
H2. Buyer’s procedural justice is positively related to supplier’s internal social performance.
3.1.3. Interactional justice and supplier’s internal social performance
Power imbalance in and consolidations at the retail end of global
apparel value chains have enabled brands and retailers to exert
increasing influence over relatively small suppliers in order to gain
advantage (Locke et al., 2009). To face uncertainties and increase
responsiveness in a highly dynamic market, dominating brands and retailers pursue unfair purchasing practices with suppliers including
changing order volumes and specifications subsequent to suppliers
starting production (Anner, 2019; Locke et al., 2009). Suppliers are
likely to be understanding of the need for changes to order volumes and
specifications by buyers in response to unexpected events; however,
when these changes are repeated and made without timely and adequate
notice and information (interactional injustice), vulnerable suppliers
will have no option but turn to the type of unethical and non-standard
employment practices that can lead to a dramatic deterioration in
wages and working conditions to satisfy lead firms and keep contracts
(Alghababsheh et al., 2020; Anner, 2019). To reduce the impact of the
losses generated from late changes to order specifications by buyers,
suppliers will try to save costs at the expense of weak workers by
lowering their wages and benefits (Anner, 2019) and minimising investment in facilities’ health and safety infrastructures (Jiang, 2009).
Moreover, variations in order volumes can push suppliers to employ
significant numbers of contingent or agency workers and then lay them
off, or to rely on current employees to work long hours to fulfil unanticipated high order volumes (Locke and Samel, 2018). On the contrary,
buyers offering better trading conditions in terms of providing complete
and timely information about unexpected changes in order volumes and
specifications would allow suppliers sufficient time to adjust and
manage current production operations in order to avoid losses and thus
reduce the potential cost pressure being transferred to workers. This
would also enable suppliers to increase production capacity by hiring
new employees rather than relying on the current workforce effectively
being forced into extensive overtime (Alghababsheh et al., 2020). Thus,
it can be expected that increased interactional justice in business relationship with suppliers, as applied by brands and retailers, could
contribute to more stable working hours and reduced costs. Therefore, it
can be argued that:
H3. Buyer’s interactional justice is positively related to supplier’s internal social performance.
3.2. Supplier’s internal social performance and supply operational risk
The negative effect of supplier’s poor internal social performance can
go beyond damaging the buying firm’s reputation and sales to potentially disrupting all sourcing process activities, potentially harming their
operational performance (i.e., quality, delivery and cost) (Sancha et al.,
2015). Supplier’s internal social deterioration in the form of health and
safety violations can not only affect the safety and well-being of the
workers but also affect the supplier’s internal operations and production, resulting, in extreme circumstances, in factory closure (Porteous
et al., 2015; Pullman et al., 2009; Rodríguez et al., 2016). The most
devastating incident in the industrial apparel production history, the
collapse of Rana Plaza building in Bangladesh in 2013, highlights the
danger that the supply process, and most importantly, the workers face
as a result of poor health and safety conditions in the workplace (i.e., the
building did not meet the construction legislation standards) (ILO,
2018a). The collapse of the building killed 1132 people and injured
thousands; the majority of whom were working in the five ready-made
garment factories located in the building that produce clothes for
major western brands (ILO, 2018a).
Conversely, enhancing working conditions and safety procedures in
suppliers’ facilities can result in a reduction of potential work accidents
(e.g., employee work-related injuries) and thus fewer interruptions and
delays in the supply process and product delivery to the buying companies (Freire and Alarcon, ´ 2002; Sancha et al., 2015). Moreover, if the
working conditions and welfare of the supplier’s workers are improved,
the quality of the supplied product can improve due to increased
employee’ satisfaction, motivation and retention (Carter and Jennings
2002; Huq et al., 2014; Pagell et al., 2010). This is because when an
organisation provides favourable working conditions (e.g., fair payment
and high safety) that make employees more satisfied and motivated, the
latter will in return tend to be more dedicated to delivering high product
and service quality as a means of reciprocity to the organisation (Yee
et al., 2008; Zhou et al., 2008). Furthermore, cooperation with suppliers
with regard to social targets through development programmes has been
found to lead to improved supplier performance in terms of product
costs, quality and delivery (Akamp and Müller, 2013) and increase
supply chain resilience capabilities (Silva and Ruel, 2022). Based on the
above discussion, it is hypothesised that.
H4. Supplier’s internal social performance is negatively related to
supply operational risk.
4. Method
4.1. Sample and data collection
In this study, data were collected from garment suppliers and their
workers (i.e., own shop floor workers who are directly engaged in the
garment production in the factory) in the country of Jordan. This setting
was selected for three important reasons. Firstly, the Jordanian garment
industry has seen enormous growth in terms of production and exportation since the country received preferential duty-free and quota-free
access to the United States (US) market following the finalisation of
two trade agreements in 1996 and 2001. The preferential access to the
US market that Jordan enjoys has driven the entry of foreign garment
investors and manufacturers into Jordan from the South Asia region,
particularly China, Hong Kong, Taiwan and India, making Jordan one of
the leading garment exporters to the US in the MENA region (Azmeh and
Nadvi, 2013). In 2019, the value of garment exports exceeded US$ 1.8
billion, accounting for 24 per cent of Jordan’s total exports (International Trade Centre, 2019). With the rapid expansion of Jordan’s
garment production and exports, there has been an increase in the use of
migrant workers, who represent more than three-quarters of its total of
60,000 (ILO, 2018b). However, the flow of cheap migrant workers to the
Jordanian garment industry can potentially create fertile ground for the
rise of labour exploitation. A recent study on South Asia migrant
workers’ experiences in Jordan’s garment industry by the ILO reported
some serious employment issues including forced overtime and passport
confiscation (ILO, 2018b). Secondly, the garment industry was deemed
appropriate because, among the forms of workplace social misconduct
(e.g., product safety and animal welfare) that can develop in the
manufacturing industries, working conditions and employment rights
misconduct (e.g., unfair payment, long working hours, unsafe work
environment and lack of freedom of association) tend to be more prevalent in the garment industry, this is likely to be due to its
labour-intensive nature (Huq et al., 2016; Zorzini et al., 2015). Finally,
Jordan has relatively weak institutional environment (Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development, 2018). Recent data reported
by the World Bank revealed that Jordan scores relatively poorly on three
of the important dimensions that reflect the level of the quality of the
institutional environment. It was placed 79th, 78th, and 73rd out of 193
countries on the index of Government Effectiveness, the index of
M. Alghababsheh et al. 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 29 (2023) 100820
7
Regulatory Quality and Rule of Law index, respectively (The World
Bank, 2019). This could potentially pave the way for the use of unethical
practices by companies to gain additional economic advantages.
The Jordanian garment industry is dominated by relatively large
producers located in industrial estates with “Satellite Units” (i.e., smallscale garment branch factories) based in different locations across Jordan. These “Satellite Units” were established by the garment producers
with support from the Jordanian government to address the logistical
challenge that the Jordanian workers face when travelling from
different locations to the industrial estates and minimise the travel
allowance costs incurred by the producers (ILO, 2019). The garment
industry also has a number of informal and home-based businesses that
cannot be underestimated, the majority of which are owned and led by
women. The informal economy constitutes a significant part of Jordan
economy, which contributes around 25% to the national income and
employs 47 of the country’s workforce (Sobh and Rumman, 2019). The
size of the informal economy in Jordan might be explained by the lack of
high-quality institutional environment (e.g., government effectiveness
and law enforcement).
A count of all the firms operating in the garment sector, excluding
their “Satellite Units”, by September 2018 revealed a population of 117
firms. It was decided to approach the entire population given its
manageable size and that most such firms are clustered within specific
industrial estates in the northern, central and southern regions of Jordan. Access was facilitated by Jordan Chamber of Industry and Jordan
Industrial Estates Corporation. For each of the of the 117 firms identified, we targeted supplier’s manager who directly manages the relationship with the buyer and its shop floor worker. Therefore, two
surveys were designed, one for the manager and the other for the shop
floor worker. Both surveys were originally developed in the English
language and translated into Arabic and then back translated into English to ensure measurement equivalence since both versions were used
in data collection from Jordanian and non-Jordanian managers and
workers. The supplier’s manager’s survey consisted of closed-ended
questions on general information (i.e., firm age, firm size, buyersupplier relationship length and the respondent’s current position)
and on buyer’s justice (distributive, procedural and interactional) and
supply operational risk. The shop floor worker’s survey included closedended questions on demographic information (i.e., gender, marital status, age, educational, work experience and nationality) and on internal
social performance. As such, we have adopted a multi-informant design
in our study: both buyer’s justice and supply operational risk were reported by the manager, while internal social performance was reported
by a shop floor worker. However, the use of a single-informant design for
capturing both buyer’s justice and supply operational risk was due to
two factors. First, in small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), which
is the case of our sample, it is highly unlikely to find more than one
individual sufficiently knowledgeable to deliver a well-informed
response (Kull et al., 2018). Second, such a design allowed us to
spread the data collection effort and time across more suppliers, which
helped in increasing the sample size (Kull et al., 2018).
Due to the relational nature of the Middle Eastern managers and
workers, in-person administered survey (through visiting respondents’
workplaces) was deemed appropriate in order to establish trust, which is
itself necessary to permit open dialogue of a sensitive nature (Hawkins
et al., 2014), such as social issues in the workplace. This approach also
helped to obtain a high response rate and enabled the determination of
whether the participants were sufficiently knowledgeable to understand
the survey questions and did not answer them in a slipshod manner.
Additionally, the on-site administration of the survey ensured that it was
the shop floor workers who filled in their survey. The survey was
delivered by hand and collected in person over the period from October
2018 to July 2019. In total, 97 complete and useable surveys from
suppliers and 97 matched surveys from their workers were received.
Table 2 provides descriptive statistics of the sampled suppliers, while
Table 3 provides demographic information of the shop floor workers.
4.2. Measurement
The measurement items of the study variables were existing measures adopted/adapted from prior research and all were captured on a 5-
point Likert Scale ranging from “1 = strongly disagree” to “5 = strongly
agree”. Distributive justice is a first-order reflective construct was
measured using four items based on the work of Poppo and Zhou (2014)
and Luo et al. (2015). Suppliers were asked to report whether both
parties received a fair share of the revenues from the relationship given
the tasks, responsibilities, efforts and investments that each do and make
in the relationship. Procedural justice is a first-order reflective construct
that was captured using five items adapted from Poppo and Zhou (2014)
and Luo (2007). Suppliers were instructed to indicate whether buyers
conformed to the appropriate rules and procedures when negotiating
and stipulating agreement, implementing decisions and changes and
sharing information, and whether these rules and procedures are fair
when planning and managing purchasing relationship activities.
Table (2)
Characteristics of the suppliers (N = 97).
Characteristics No. %
Position
Manager/CEO 41 42.2
Sales manager 24 24.7
Marketing manager 15 15.4
Production manager 11 11.3
Customer relationship manager 6 6.1
Firm Size (No. of employees)
<100 18 18.6
100–199 37 38.1
200–299 25 25.8
300–399 12 12.4
>399 5 5.2
Firm age (No. of years)
<5 29 29.9
5–9 43 44.3
10–14 17 17.5
>14 8 8.2
Relationship length (No. of years)
<5 46 47.4
5–9 39 40.2
10–14 12 12.4
>14 0 0
Table (3)
Characteristics of the suppliers’ shop floor workers (N = 97).
Characteristics No. %
Gender
Female 68 70.1
Male 29 29.9
Marital status
Single 55 56.7
Married 42 43.3
Age
18–25 23 23.7
26–33 39 40.2
34–41 21 21.6
>41 14 14.4
Education
High School or less 44 45.4
College 31 32
Undergraduate 19 19.6
Postgraduate 3 3.1
Work experience
<3 30 30.9
3–6 46 47.4
7–10 14 14.4
>10 7 7.2
Nationality
Non-Jordanian 61 62.9
Jordanian 36 37.1
M. Alghababsheh et al. 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 29 (2023) 100820
8
Interactional justice is a first-order reflective construct that was measured
using four items adopted from Luo et al. (2015) and Narasimhan et al.
(2013). Respondents were asked to indicate whether both parties
explain to each other the reasons behind relevant policies and decisions,
inform each other of any changes and how quickly they exchange
information.
Supplier’s internal social performance is a first-order reflective
construct was measured using a four-item scale that was developed
based on the work of Closon et al. (2015) and Mory et al. (2016). The
scale items reflect employees’ perception of employment rights, working
conditions, and health and safety and social dialogue, which fit the
study’s conceptualization of supplier’s internal social performance.
Supply operational risk is a first-order reflective construct that was
captured using six items based on the work of Chen et al. (2013). Suppliers were requested to reveal the extent to which they consistently
meet buyers’ quality specifications, delivery times and volume requirements and their capacity to meet their overall requirements.
Control variables. The study controlled for two set of variables,
namely firm-level and individual-level control variables. Consistent with
previous research, the firm-level control variables included were firm
age (the numbers of years in business) and firm size (measured by
number of employees) when examining supplier’s internal social performance (Alghababsheh and Gallear, 2021; Sancha et al., 2015) and
supply operational risk. We also controlled for the potential effect of the
buyer-supplier relationship length (captured by the number of years
both sides had been involved in the relationship) on supply operational
risk. Prior studies revealed that buyers usually assess supply risk more
when sourcing from new suppliers (Zsidisin et al., 2004). Based on this,
we can expect that supply operational risk might be higher in the early
stages of the relationship. Firm age, firm size and the buyer-supplier
relationship length were all reported by the managers.
Since supplier’s internal social performance was captured from the
employees’ perception, the study also controlled for individual-level
effects. This is because individual differences can play in shaping employees’ judgments of internal social responsibility (Abd-Elmotaleb
et al., 2015; Farrukh et al., 2020). Six individual-level variables were
included in the model: gender, age, material status, education level,
work experience and employees’ nationality, all of which were provided
by the employees (see Table 3).
5. Results
Partial least squares structural equation modelling (PLS-SEM) was
adopted to estimate both the measurement and structural models using
SmartPLS 3.0. The main rationale behind using PLS-SEM is that it produces robust estimates with small sample sizes, such as with the current
study (97), compared to other SEM techniques (Hair et al., 2014).
5.1. The measurement model
Common method bias (CMB) is one of the more serious problems
facing behavioural research that may result in misleading conclusions. It
indicates that the estimated relationship between two constructs is
attributable to the measurement method rather than to the constructs
the measures represent (Podsakoff et al., 2003). CMB can potentially
occur due to a single informant rating of both the predictors and criterion variables and to item characteristic effects (Podsakoff et al., 2003).
This study followed measures pre- and during data collection to address
CMB. Firstly, the study obtained information on the predictors and criterion variables from different informants (managers and shop floor
workers), as previously described in the sample and data collection
section (Guide and Ketokivi, 2015; Podsakoff et al., 2003). Secondly,
respondent’s anonymity was ensured, and measurement items were
pre-tested for clarity to reduce their characteristic effects (Podsakoff
et al., 2003; Tourangeau et al., 2000). However, to be assured that these
measures were effective, Harman’s (1967) single-factor test was
employed to examine for potential CMB. The analysis revealed that no
single factor explained more than of 50% of the variance in the model
(the highest variance explained by a single factor was 18.3%), suggesting that CMB was not a problem.
The quality of the measurement model was evaluated from both the
reliability and validity perspectives (see Table 4). To assess reliability,
the composite reliability (Werts et al., 1974) values of the constructs
were obtained, all of which exceeded the recommended value of 0.70,
pointing towards a satisfactory level of internal consistency among the
constructs’ items (Bagozzi and Yi, 2012). To evaluate the validity of the
constructs’ measurement, convergent validity and discriminant validity
analysis were conducted. The values of the standardised factor loading
of the constructs’ items and the average variance extracted (AVE) for the
Table (4)
Measurement items.
Construct Standardised
loadings
tvalue
Distributive justice (C.R. = 0.94 AVE = 0.79)
DJ1: Both parties have received a fair share of the
revenues resulted from this relationship that given
the tasks and responsibilities we do.
0.89 48.51
DJ2: Our returns and rewards relative to our
contribution to this relationship is about the same
as that of our buyer.
0.89 39.48
DJ3: Our returns and rewards relative to our
contribution to this relationship is about the same
as that of other firms in similar supply relationship.
0.88 44.15
DJ4: Each party has received a just share of the
outcomes from this relationship given the amount
of efforts and investments that each make.
0.89 41.55
Procedural justice (C.R. = 0.92 AVE = 0.70)
PJ1: When negotiating and stipulating agreement or
changes, the buyer and supplier consistently apply
the same procedures and policies.
0.77 15.35
PJ2: When implementing decisions, the buyer and
supplier conform to agreed-upon standards and
procedures.
0.85 28.61
PJ3: The procedures for implementing changes to the
contract are consistently used by both parties.
0.91 50.49
PJ4: Both parties share information and resources in
the relationship through specified rules and
procedures.
0.87 37.16
PJ5: The procedures we follow in planning,
organising, and managing our purchasing
relationship activities are fair.
0.76 18.26
Interactional justice (C.R. = 0.93 AVE = 0.76)
IJ1: Both parties often explain the reasons behind
relevant policies and decisions.
0.86 30.02
IJ2: Both parties agree on what is important in this
engagement.
0.89 42.01
IJ3: We exchange information in a timely manner. 0.88 30.21
IJ4: We keep each other informed of any changes may
affect the other party.
0.86 20.01
Suppliers’ internal social performance (C.R. = 0.93 AVE = 0.79)
SP1: Our company implements fair pay policies. 0.88 31.29
SP2: Our company implement policies that allow us
to balance work and private life.
0.87 27.86
SP3: Our company implements health and safety
measures in the workplace.
0.90 44.17
SP4: Our company promotes the social dialogue with
employee representatives.
0.90 45.67
Supply operational risk (C.R. = 0.94 AVE = 0.78)
SR1: We do not meet buyers’ quality specification
requirements on a consistent basis.
0.91 55.19
SR2: We do not meet buyers’ required delivery lead
times on a consistent basis.
0.87 41.07
SR3: We do not meet buyers’ volume requirements on
a consistent basis.
0.87 35.44
SR4: We do not consistently meet buyers’ overall
requirements.
0.88 36.28
SR5: We do not always deliver buyers’ orders as
promised.
0.90 49.93
SR6: We do not have the capacity to meet buyers’
requirements.
0.85 32.58
M. Alghababsheh et al. 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 29 (2023) 100820
9
construct were used as criteria to predict convergent validity (Hair et al.,
2014). All the standardised loadings of the constructs’ items are above
the required threshold value (0.5) (Hulland, 1999). All the AVE values of
the constructs are higher than 0.5 and significant (Fornell and Larker,
1981), providing evidence that convergent validity had been
established.
To estimate discriminant validity, the study applied Fornell and
Larker’s (1981) criterion, which has been noted as an effective procedure for this purpose (Voorhees et al., 2016). According to this criterion, a construct can establish discriminant validity when the square
root of its AVE is greater than its bivariate correlation with any other
construct within the same measurement model (Fornell and Larker,
1981). Table 5 shows that all the square roots of the AVEs (in the diagonal line) of the continuous constructs are greater than their intercorrelations, demonstrating discriminant validity.
The study also examined for potential multicollinearity issues (i.e.,
the existence of extraordinary high correlations among the exogenous
variables) by calculating Variance Inflation Factor (VIF) values (i.e., the
increase in standard error as a result of collinearity between two variables) (Hair et al., 2014). All VIF values for the exogenous variables (i.e.,
distributive justice = 3.55, procedural justice = 2.43, interactional
justice = 2.54) are lower than 5, suggesting that multicollinearity was
not an issue (Tabachnick and Fidell, 2014).
5.2. The structural model
The structural model includes the supplier’s internal social performance as an endogenous variable whose value is predicted by exogenous
variables (distributive, procedural and interactional justice) and as an
exogenous variable predicting the value of supply operational risk. As
such, the results for supplier’s internal social performance and supply
operational risk are presented in the two main columns in Table 6. The
results demonstrate that all the control variables (gender, marital status,
age, work experience, education level, nationality, firm size and firm
age) explain only 0.05 of the variance in the supplier’s internal social
performance, while firm size, firm age and relationship length explain
only 0.01 of the variance in supply operational risk (see Table 6). All of
the control variables are insignificant predictors of both the supplier’s
internal social performance and supply operational risk.
The results also indicate that the addition of the buyer’s justice dimensions (model 2) increases R2 for the supplier’s internal social performance significantly, from 0.05 to 0.57 (ΔR2 = 0.52), whilst all the
control variables remained insignificant. Distributive justice (β = 0.31,
p < 0.05) and procedural justice (β = 0.38, p < 0.01) have a positive
significant effect on supplier’s internal social performance. However,
the proposed positive effect of interactional justice (β = 0.12, p > 0.05)
on supplier’s internal social performance is insignificant. Thus, H1 and
H2 are supported, while H3 is not. The analysis also shows that the
relationship between supplier’s internal social performance and supply
operational risk is negative and significant (β = − 0.80, p < 0.001),
providing support for H4.
It is very important to note that although we did not conceptualise
the mediating role of supplier’s internal social performance in the relationships between justice dimensions (i.e., distributive, procedural
and interactional) and supply operational risk, we empirically tested this
potential mediating role using the bootstrapping method (Preacher and
Hayes, 2008). Our results reveal that the indirect effect of distributive
justice on supply operational risk via supplier’s internal social performance (β = − 0.066, p > 0.05) and the indirect effect of procedural
justice on supply operational risk via supplier’s internal social performance (β = − 0.097, p > 0.05) are insignificant. As the proposed direct
impact of interactional justice on the mediator, supplier’s internal social
performance, was insignificant (β = 0.12, p > 0.05) (see Table 6), a
mediating effect of supplier’s internal social performance in the relationship between interactional justice and supply operational risk could
not be established and tested (Preacher and Hayes, 2008).
6. Discussion
6.1. Theoretical implications
This study makes three contributions to the SCM literature. Firstly,
this study theoretically proposes and empirically examines the positive
role of buyers’ distributive, procedural and interactional justice on
enhancing suppliers’ internal social performance. As such, the study
enriches the current knowledge on socially SSCM by proposing a novel
relational approach that can be truly effective in tackling supplier’s internal social issues. Our proposition of this approach is based on the fact
that one of the main root causes of suppliers’ social issues is buyers’
unfair relationship practices (Anner et al., 2013; Alghababsheh et al.,
2020), and therefore, to achieve improvement in suppliers’ internal
social performance, unfair relationship practices by buyers should be
restored. As such, our study departs from the general assumption on
which the compliance and collaboration practices were designed, that
suppliers’ internal social issues are a factory technical problem. Our
findings demonstrated that distributive and procedural justice are
positively related to supplier’s internal social performance. However,
our data failed to support the proposed positive impact of interactional
justice on supplier’s social internal social performance. It seems that
providing complete and timely information during the relationship is
not as important as the delivery of fair returns and the implementation
of consistent fair procedures to ensure supplier’s internal social performance. Our result is surprising given the fact that information sharing
helps in coordinating the supply process between the buyer and the
supplier. A potential explanation for this result is that, when compared
to implementing consistent procedures, providing complete and timely
information to the supplier might not be essential to ensuring a more
stable production environment and thus less poor working conditions
and practices (e.g., extreme overtime shifts) in its facility on the
long-term. Providing complete and timely information (interactional
justice) to the supplier might be more vital to maintaining a stable
production environment in the supplier’s factory only when there are
unexpected and major changes to the agreed supply and delivery procedures (e.g., order volume and timing). In other words, interactional
justice, through timely information sharing, can serve as a coordination
mechanism between the buyer and the supplier in the case of unforeseen
events in the relationship, while procedural justice, through following
consistent procedures, can function as a coordination mechanism that
guides regular and daily exchanges between the buyer and the supplier.
Secondly, a business case for supplier social sustainability in the
supply chain represents one of the main deciding factors by which
buyers implement such initiatives. Accordingly, the link between
improving supplier’s social performance and different outcomes at both
the individual partner (i.e., buyer and supplier) level and at the relationship level has received growing but limited research attention in the
recent years. However, although the extant research has contributed to
better understanding of the business case of supplier social sustainability
initiatives, the majority has predominantly focussed on investigating the
impact of improving supplier’s social performance on traditional performance outcomes (e.g., operational, environmental or financial performance) with the various studies providing contrasting results. This
study, however, examined the impact of suppliers’ internal social performance on the mitigation of the supply operational risk that stems
from the supplier’s side (i.e., the deviation in the supply orders from
suppliers in terms of time, quality and quantity), which has not been
previously advanced. This extends the knowledge base by highlighting a
new outcome that buyers can realise from their investments and efforts
in tackling current suppliers’ internal social issues. This also contributes
to the exiting literature on supply chain risk management by suggesting
that addressing social issues and promoting improvements in labour
standards in suppliers’ facilities represents a potential proactive strategy
by which to reduce the probability of supply operational risk. Our
findings revealed that improved suppliers’ internal social performance is
M. Alghababsheh et al. 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 29 (2023) 100820
10
Table (5)
Descriptive statistics, intercorrelations and the square root of the AVE (N = 97).
Construct Mean SD 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
1. Gendera 1.70 0.46 –
2. Marital statusb 1.43 0.49 − 0.42k –
3. Agec 2.27 0.98 − 0.37k 0.75k –
4. Education leveld 1.80 0.86 0.45k − 0.48k − 0.49k –
5. Work experiencee 1.98 0.86 − 0.30k 0.57k 0.83k − 0.38k –
6. Nationalityf 1.63 0.48 − 0.50k − 0.06 − 0.18 − 0.22j − 0.19 –
7. Firm sizeg 2.47 1.09 0.05 0.09 0.25i − 0.07 0.40k − 0.19 –
8. Firm ageh 2.04 0.90 − 0.27k 0.56k 0.78k − 0.32k 0.93k − 0.25j 0.44k –
9. Relationship lengthi 1.65 0.69 − 0.26k 0.53k 0.70k − 0.34k 0.78k − 0.23j 0.34k 0.84k –
10. Distributive justice 3.03 0.99 0.10 − 0.03 − 0.04 0.05 − 0.07 0.02 − 0.03 − 0.06 − 0.09 0.89
11. Procedural justice 3.04 0.89 0.19 − 0.08 − 0.07 0.08 − 0.09 − 0.07 − 0.04 − 0.07 − 0.06 0.76k 0.83
12. Interactional justice 3.60 0.90 0.17 − 0.05 − 0.01 0.07 − 0.01 − 0.04 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.76k 0.61k 0.87
13. Supplier’s social perf. 3.57 0.90 0.14 − 0.10 − 0.07 0.09 − 0.11 0.02 − 0.08 − 0.11 − 0.17 0.69k 0.68k 0.59k 0.89
14. Supply operational risk 2.82 1.02 − 0.12 0.11 0.05 − 0.02 0.09 − 0.10 0.06 0.08 0.09 − 0.73k − 0.72k − 0.63k − 0.78k 0.88
Note: Figures in the diagonal line represent the square root of AVE.
a 1 = male; 2 = female.
b 1 = single; 2 = married.
c 1 = 18–25 years; 2 = 26–33 years; 3 = 34–41 years; 4 = > 41 years.
d 1 = high school or less; 2 = college; 3 = undergraduate; 4 = postgraduate.
e 1 = < 3 years; 2 = 3–6 years; 3 = 7–10 years; 4 = > 10 years.
f 1 = Jordanian; 2 = non-Jordanian.
g 1 = < 100 employees; 2 = 100–199 employees; 3 = 200–299 employees; 4 = 300–399 employee; 5 = >399 employees.
h 1 = < 5 years; 2 = 5–9 years; 3 = 10–14 years; 4 = >14 years.
i 1 = < 5 years; 2 = 5–9 years; 3 = 10–14 years; 4 = >14 years.
j P ≤ 0.10.
k p ≤ 0.05.
M. Alghababsheh et al. 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 29 (2023) 100820
11
negatively related to supply operational risk.
Finally, previous studies have primarily focussed on the perceptions
of the traditional supply chain actors (i.e., buyer and supplier companies), concerned civil society organisations and trade unions of what
constitutes decent working conditions in the supply chain, while the
perception of the central actors, the shop floor workers in the suppliers’
facilities, remains, surprisingly, largely unexplored (Reinecke and
Donaghey, 2021; Soundararajan et al., 2021). In our study, we moved
forward and captured suppliers’ internal social performance from the
shop floor workers’ perspective. Understanding what constitutes decent
working conditions from the shop floor workers’ perspective is a
necessary step to advance and promote real social sustainability in
global supply chains. It can not only allow us to understand the characteristics of the shop floor workers and the composition of the workforce in the suppliers’ facilities, but it also allows us to control for
potential social desirability bias that may emerge when supplier’s top
management reports on this sensitive issue and to reveal the actual
status of the working conditions in the light of rampant ‘mock compliance’ by suppliers (Huq et al., 2014) and audit fraud and deception in
the developing world (LeBaron, 2021). Moreover, examining the suppliers’ internal social performance from the shop floor workers’
perspective enables us to obtain valuable input that can help in
reshaping government employment regulations (Knudsen, 2018; Reinecke and Donaghey, 2021) and redesigning the buying companies’
traditional supply chain social sustainability practices (e.g., codes of
conduct and development and training programmes) to ensure that they
are aligned with the current working conditions and labour issues in the
suppliers’ facilities.
6.2. Practical implications
The shift towards a global sourcing strategy has undoubtedly enabled
firms to gain certain advantages. However, managers of global supply
chains often face different challenges when sourcing from suppliers
based in low-cost countries. Of the primary challenges that have been
highlighted as being critical in recent years, and that could have a
dramatic and detrimental effect on the performance of their purchasing
departments (e.g., delayed orders delivery) as well as overall company
performance (e.g., lost sales and damaged reputation), are managing
suppliers’ internal social issues (e.g., unfair wages and substandard
working conditions) and supply operational risk (i.e., the deviation in
the supply orders from suppliers in terms of time, quality and quantity).
This study provides a set of practical implications that can be of help in
handling these critical challenges in today’s global supply chains.
Firstly, distributive justice, as enacted by buyers in the relationship, can
contribute to better social conditions in suppliers’ workplaces. Therefore, buying firms should deliver fair returns and prices to suppliers
commensurate with their efforts in the relationship, which would reduce
suppliers’ transfer of cost pressure onto workers (e.g., cutting wages)
and increase their investment in their facilities’ conditions. Secondly,
procedural justice in the relationship can also sustain an acceptable level
of internal social performance by suppliers. Therefore, managers should
establish procedural justice towards suppliers by ensuring stable and
consistent purchasing routines and practices (consistent order volumes
and manageable lead times), which can help them in the creation of
stable production environments and, ultimately, minimise the likelihood of the use of poor working practices such as forced overtime.
Finally, although promoting and enhancing working conditions and labour rights in suppliers’ facilities by buyers can sometimes be regarded
as a costly and infeasible investment, this study provides evidence that
this approach can actually pay off in the long run. Specifically, this study
found evidence that the resulting benefit of improving supplier’s internal social performance is not limited to reducing reputational risk
(negative publicity) but also to mitigating supply operational risk from
suppliers. Thus, by helping and addressing suppliers’ internal social
problems, supply chain managers can ensure that orders from suppliers
meet quality specification, delivery times and volume requirements on a
consistent basis and thus be able to deliver their products to customers at
the right time and with the right quality.
6.3. Limitations and future research
Despite the contribution made by this work, it has certain limitations
that should be acknowledged, and suggests a number of important directions for future research. Firstly, this study highlighted how establishing justice by buyers in their business relationship with suppliers in
terms of the economic and procedural aspects can help to reduce suppliers’ internal social issues in the garment industry in a single emerging
country context. Although these results may be generalised to other
countries and industries with similar characteristics, attempts to extend
Table (6)
Results of the structural model.
Construct Supplier’s internal social performance (SISP) Supply operational risk
Model 1 Model 2 Model 1 Model 2
β t-value В t-value β t-value β t-value
Control variables
Gender 0.02 1.35 0.02 0.22
Marital status − 0.05 0.34 − 0.06 0.66
Age 0.23 0.87 0.15 0.78
Work experience 0.05 0.43 0.06 0.23
Education level − 0.06 0.17 0.03 0.51
Nationality 0.15 1.00 0.05 0.51
Firm size − 0.07 0.53 − 0.02 0.24 0.01 0.12 0.01 0.02
Firm age − 0.06 0.18 − 0.16 0.63 0.01 0.05 0.08 0.69
Relationship length − 0.10 0.45 − 0.11 0.99
Predictors
Distributive justice 0.31 2.17*
Procedural justice 0.38 3.22**
Interactional justice 0.12 1.14
SISP − 0.80 20.89***
R2 0.05 0.57 0.01 0.63
Δ R2 0.52 0.62
Note: N = 97.
*p ≤ 0.05
**p ≤ 0.01
***p ≤ 0.001
M. Alghababsheh et al. 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 29 (2023) 100820
12
them to other countries and industries with different characteristics may
be misleading. Therefore, future research could retest our hypotheses in
other countries and industries, such as the service industry (e.g.,
construction).
Secondly, the level of justice in the buyer-supplier relationship in this
study was captured from the perspective of 97 suppliers, representing a
one-sided perspective of a dyadic relationship. Although the 97 responses we received from the total 117 suppliers comprising the readymade garment industry in Jordan is an effective response number, from
a statistical point of view, these responses might be considered a small
sample size. Future research is advised to examine our model with larger
samples to verify our results. Additionally, despite the difficulty in
accessing and gathering complete, valid and reliable data from both
sides of the relationship, future research could adopt a dyadic perspective, thereby providing a matched view of the level of justice in the
relationship and therefore addressing the potential single informant
concern.
Thirdly, endogeneity might be of concern in our study due to omitting some explanatory variables. However, while one could argue that
the compliance and collaboration practices can predict supplier’s internal social performance and, therefore, leaving them out from the
model may lead to an endogeneity problem, this predication ability has
been recently theoretically and empirically questioned. From a theoretical perspective, the compliance and collaboration practices were
designed based on the assumption that poor supplier’s internal social
performance is factory technical problem of the supplier, and therefore
they overlook one of its main root causes, buyer’s unfair practices
(Alghababsheh et al., 2020; Anner et al., 2013; Lund-Thomsen and
Lindgreen, 2014). For this reason, the majority of the empirical research
demonstrated that the compliance practices have no effect on supplier’s
internal social performance (e.g., Alghababsheh and Gallear, 2021;
Jiang, 2009; Sancha et al., 2016; Lim and Phillips, 2008; Yu, 2008).
Nevertheless, to mitigate potential endogeneity, we included several
appropriate control variables that can potentially explain the two
endogenous variables (Lu et al., 2018): supplier’s internal social performance and supply operational risk. Firm age and firm size were
controlled for when examining supplier’s internal social performance
and supply operational risk. Additionally, six individual-level variables
(i.e., gender, age, material status, education level, work experience and
employees’ nationality) were included in the model when testing supplier’s internal social performance. However, despite this measure to
minimise the endogeneity concern, caution is warranted in interpreting
our model’s results.
Fourthly, the study provides no evidence that the positive impact of
buyer’s justice on supplier’s internal social performance is universally
applicable. This opens up an interesting avenue for further work to
examine the boundary conditions of the established justice-performance
link to provide insights as to whether it is context specific. In this vein,
valuable insights can be gained by considering macro- and micro-level
conditions and circumstances. At the macro-level, for example, the
quality of the formal institutional environment (i.e., the level of formal
rules and policy) in which suppliers are located could potentially explain
the (in)effectiveness of buyers’ justice to address suppliers’ social
misconduct. Legal effectiveness and enforceability represent the most
salient features of the formal institutional environment, which refers to
the extent to which a country’s legal framework and system is complete
and well defined and laws can be enforced to protect a firm’s or an individual’s property and interests (Zhou and Poppo, 2010). In developing
countries, legal systems are underdeveloped, and law enforcement is
inefficient (Peng, 2003). Under such circumstances, social issues can
arise in the suppliers’ workplace (Kelling et al., 2020) and therefore one
might predict that delivering fair returns to suppliers and establishing
fair procedures will become weaker and insufficient with regard to
ensuring a supplier’s implementation of internal social sustainability
initiatives. At the micro-level, the buyer-supplier relationship characteristics and structures (e.g., power imbalance) could also potentially
highlight when the positive impact of buyers’ justice can be held,
reduced or negated.
Fifthly, the study established only the direct impact of supplier’s
internal social performance on supply operational risk. A promising
research opportunity for future work is therefore to unpack the mechanism by which supplier’s internal social performance can reduce supply
operational risk by exploring potential mediating variables. Employeelevel outcomes such as employees’ work engagement or organisational
identification could potentially serve as mediating variables that could
clarify the relationship between supplier’s social performance and
supply operational risk. The logic of the employees’ work engagement
argument is that improving working conditions (e.g., reasonable working hours and fair pay), providing a safe and healthy workplace environment, and promoting social dialogue can drive more work
engagement by employees, which in turn can ensure supplier’s capacities to meet buyer’s quality specification requirements, delivery lead
times and volume requirements on a consistent basis. On the other hand,
the reasoning behind the organisational identification’s postulation is
that the implementation of the aforementioned internal social sustainability practices could increase employees’ respect for and identification
with the organisation, which in turn can improve employees’ motivation
and task performance because they want to support the company in
order to establish increased internal social sustainability. This increased
motivation and task performance by employees can then translate into
improved capacity of supplier to meet buyer’s order requirements.
Finally, this study added a new approach to the existing private
voluntary formal approaches (i.e., compliance and collaboration) that
buyers can use to address and drive suppliers’ social performance. Thus,
the study highlighted the potential of more relational-oriented approaches in managing suppliers’ internal social issues and therefore calls
for more scholarly efforts and discussion in this direction. A potential
relational mechanism that can be investigated in future research and
that could advance our understanding is the role of buyer power in the
relationship on suppliers’ implementation of internal and external social
sustainability practices. Although Marshall et al.’s (2019) study has
recently provided some initial insights into the role of power in
achieving socially SSCM, it looked at how direct customer power affects
first-tier suppliers’ adoption of socially responsible procurement
process-based (assessment) and market-based practices (collaboration)
by which they drive other supply chain partners to enhance their social
sustainability. As such, we know little about what role buyer power,
whether mediated (coercive, legitimate and reward) or non-mediated
(expert and referent), can play on suppliers’ level of implementation
of internal social sustainability practices that are directed towards employees (e.g., fair pay, health and safety measures, freedom of association, etc.) and external social sustainability practices that are focussed
on external stakeholders (e.g., community, customers and government).
Author statement
Mohammad Alghababsheh: Investigation, Conceptualization,
Formal analysis, Writing-Original Draft. Atif Saleem Butt: Methodology, Resources, Writing-Original draft preparation. Syed Mithun Ali:
Formal analysis, Writing- Reviewing and Editing, Visualization.
Declaration of competing interest
None.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
M. Alghababsheh et al. 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 29 (2023) 100820
13
References
Abd-Elmotaleb, M., Saha, S.K., Hamoudahb, A.E.M., 2015. Rethinking the employees’
perceptions of corporate social responsibility. Int. Bus. Res. 8 (3), 121.
Adams, J.S., 1965. Inequity in social exchange. In: Berkowitz, L. (Ed.), Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 2. Academic Press, New York, pp. 267–299.
Akamp, M., Müller, M., 2013. Supplier management in developing countries. J. Clean.
Prod. 56, 54–62.
Alghababsheh, M., Gallear, D., 2021. Socially sustainable supply chain management and
suppliers’ social performance: the role of social capital. J. Bus. Ethics 173 (4),
855–875.
Alghababsheh, M., Gallear, D., 2022. Social sustainability in the supply chain: a
literature review of the adoption, approaches and (un)intended outcomes. Manag.
Sustain.: An Arab Rev. 1 (1), 84–109.
Alghababsheh, M., Gallear, D., Saikouk, T., 2022. Justice in Supply Chain Relationships:
a comprehensive review and future research directions. Eur. Manag. Rev. press.
https://doi.org/10.1111/emre.12541.
Alghababsheh, M., Gallear, D., Rahman, M., 2020. Balancing the scales of justice: do
perceptions of buyers’ justice drive suppliers’ social performance? J. Bus. Ethics 163
(1), 125–150.
Andersen, M., Skjoett-Larsen, T., 2009. Corporate social responsibility in global supply
chains. Supply Chain Manag.: Int. J. 14 (2), 75–86.
Anner, M., 2019. Predatory purchasing practices in global apparel supply chains and the
employment relations squeeze in the Indian garment export industry. Int. Lab. Rev.
158 (4), 705–727.
Anner, M., Bair, J., Blasi, J., 2013. Toward joint liability in global supply chains:
addressing the root causes of labor violations in international subcontracting
networks. J. Comp. Labor Law and Pol. 35, 1–43.
Awaysheh, A., Klassen, R.D., 2010. The impact of supply chain structure on the use of
supplier socially responsible practices. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 30 (12),
1246–1268.
Azmeh, S., Nadvi, K., 2013. Greater Chinese’ global production networks in the Middle
East: the rise of the Jordanian garment industry. Dev. Change 44 (6), 1317–1340.
Bag, S., Choi, T.M., Rahman, M.S., Srivastava, G., Singh, R.K., 2022. Examining
collaborative buyer–supplier relationships and social sustainability in the “new
normal” era: the moderating effects of justice and big data analytical intelligence.
Ann. Oper. Res. 1–46.
Bagozzi, R.P., Yi, Y., 2012. Specification, evaluation, and interpretation of structural
equation models. J. Acad. Market. Sci. 40 (1), 8–34.
Barrientos, S., 2013. Corporate purchasing practices in global production networks: a
socially contested terrain. Geoforum 44, 44–51.
Barrientos, S., Smith, S., 2007. Do workers benefit from ethical trade? Assessing codes of
labour practice in global production systems. Third World Q. 28 (4), 713–729.
Bellingan, M., Tilley, C., Batista, L., Kumar, M., Evans, S., 2020. Capturing the
psychological well-being of Chinese factory workers. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 40
(7/8), 1269–1289.
Boyd, D.E., Spekman, R.E., Kamauff, J.W., Werhane, P., 2007. Corporate social
responsibility in global supply chains: a procedural justice perspective. Long. Range
Plan. 40 (3), 341–356.
Carnovale, S., Henke Jr., J.W., DuHadway, S., Yeniyurt, S., 2019. Unintended
consequences: how suppliers compensate for price concessions and the role of
organizational justice in buyer-supplier relations. J. Bus. Logist. 40 (3), 187–203.
Carter, C.R., Jennings, M.M., 2002. Logistics social responsibility: an integrative
framework. J. Bus. Logist. 23 (1), 145–180.
Carter, C.R., Rogers, D.S., 2008. A framework of sustainable supply chain management:
moving toward new theory. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 38 (5), 360–387.
Chen, J., Sohal, A.S., Prajogo, D.I., 2013. Supply chain operational risk mitigation: a
collaborative approach. Int. J. Prod. Res. 51 (7), 2186–2199.
Chen, Y., Chen, I.J., 2019. Mediated power and sustainable supplier management (SSM):
linking power use, justice, and supplier performance. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist.
Manag. 49 (8), 861–878.
Christopher, M., Peck, H., 2004. Building the resilient supply chain. Int. J. Logist. Manag.
15 (2), 1–13.
Closon, C., Leys, C., Hellemans, C., 2015. Perceptions of corporate social responsibility,
organizational commitment and job satisfaction. Manag. Res. 13 (1), 31–54.
Craighead, C.W., Blackhurst, J., Rungtusanatham, M.J., Handfield, R.B., 2007. The
severity of supply chain disruptions: design characteristics and mitigation
capabilities. Decis. Sci. J. 38 (1), 131–156.
DuHadway, S., Carnovale, S., Hazen, B., 2019. Understanding risk management for
intentional supply chain disruptions: risk detection, risk mitigation, and risk
recovery. Ann. Oper. Res. 283 (1), 179–198.
Elzarka, S.M., 2013. Supply chain risk management: the lessons learned from the
Egyptian revolution 2011. Int. J. Logist. Res. Appl. 16 (6), 482–492.
Farrukh, M., Sajid, M., Lee, J.W.C., Shahzad, I.A., 2020. The perception of corporate
social responsibility and employee engagement: examining the underlying
mechanism. Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Manag. 27 (2), 760–768.
Fornell, C., Larker, D., 1981. Structural equation modeling and regression: guidelines for
research practice. J. Market. Res. 18 (1), 39–50.
Forsman-Hugg, S., Katajajuuri, J.M., Riipi, I., Makel ¨ ¨
a, J., Jarvel ¨ a, ¨ K., Timonen, P., 2013.
Key CSR dimensions for the food chain. Br. Food J. 115 (1), 30–47.
Freire, J., Alarcon, ´ L.F., 2002. Achieving lean design process: improvement
methodology. J. Construct. Eng. Manag. 128 (3), 248–256.
Gereffi, G., 1994. The organization of buyer-driven global commodity chains: how
United States retailers shape overseas production networks. In: Gereffi, G.,
Korzeniewicz, M. (Eds.), Commodity Chains and Global Capitalism. Praeger,
Westport, CT, pp. 95–122.
Gimenez, C., Sierra, V., Rodon, J., 2012. Sustainable operations: their impact on the
triple bottom line. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 140 (1), 149–159.
Griffith, D.A., Harvey, M.G., Lusch, R.F., 2006. Social exchange in supply chain
relationships: the resulting benefits of procedural and distributive justice. J. Oper.
Manag. 24 (2), 85–98.
Guide, V.D.R., Ketokivi, M., 2015. Notes from the Editors: redefining some
methodological criteria for the journal. J. Oper. Manag. 37, 5–8.
Gunasekaran, A., Subramanian, N., Rahman, S., 2015. Supply chain resilience: role of
complexities and strategies. Int. J. Prod. Res. 53 (22), 6809–6819.
Hair, J.F., Hult, G.T.M., Ringle, C.M., Sarstedt, M., 2014. A Primer on Partial Least
Squares Structural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM). Sage, Thousand Oaks.
Harman, H.H., 1967. Modern Factor Analysis, second ed. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Hawkins, T.G., Randall, W.S., Coyne, A.V., Baitalmal, M.H., 2014. Sustainable integrity:
how reverse auctions can benefit suppliers in emerging markets. Supply Chain
Manag.: Int. J. 19 (2), 126–141.
Ho, W., Zheng, T., Yildiz, H., Talluri, S., 2015. Supply chain risk management: a
literature review. Int. J. Prod. Res. 53 (16), 5031–5069.
Hulland, J., 1999. Use of partial least squares (PLS) in strategic management research: a
review of four recent studies. Strat. Manag. J. 20 (2), 195–204.
Huq, F.A., Stevenson, M., 2018. Implementing socially sustainable practices in
challenging institutional contexts: building theory from seven developing country
supplier cases. J. Bus. Ethic. 161 1–28.
Huq, F.A., Chowdhury, I.N., Klassen, R.D., 2016. Social management capabilities of
multinational buying firms and their emerging market suppliers: an exploratory
study of the clothing industry. J. Oper. Manag. 46, 19–37.
Huq, F.A., Stevenson, M., Zorzini, M., 2014. Social sustainability in developing country
suppliers: an exploratory study in the ready-made garments industry of Bangladesh.
Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 34 (5), 610–638.
International Labour Organization, 2018a. Bangladesh Move towards Employment
Injury Insurance: the Legacy of rana Plaza. International Labour Organization,
Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved October 8, 2022 from. https://www.ilo.org/global/t
opics/geip/publications/WCMS_632364/lang–en/index.htm.
International Labour Organization, 2018b. Recruitment Experiences of South Asian
Migrant Workers in Jordan’s Garment Industry. International Labour Organization,
Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved October 13, 2019 from. https://www.ilo.org/
wcmsp5/groups/public/–-ed_norm/–-ipec/documents/publication/wcms_638703.
pdf.
International Labour Organization, 2019. Advancing Jordan’s Satellite Garment
Factories. International Labour Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved
December 15, 2022 from. https://labordoc.ilo.org/discovery/fulldisplay/alma99
5079393402676/41ILO_INST:41ILO_V2.
International Trade Center, 2019. Trade map – international trade statistics. Geneva,
Switzerland: International Trade Center. Retrieved October 13, 2019 from. http
s://www.trademap.org/tradestat/Product_SelCountry_TS.aspx?nvpm=1%7c400%
7c%7c%7c%7cTOTAL%7c%7c%7c2%7c1%7c1%7c2%7c2%7c1%7c1%7c1%7c1%
7c1.
Jiang, B., 2009. The effects of interorganizational governance on supplier’s compliance
with Scc: an empirical examination of compliant and non-compliant suppliers.
J. Oper. Manag. 27 (4), 267–280.
Kamalahmadi, M., Parast, M.M., 2016. A review of the literature on the principles of
enterprise and supply chain resilience: major findings and directions for future
research. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 171, 116–133.
Kelling, N.K., Sauer, P.C., Gold, S., Seuring, S., 2020. The role of institutional uncertainty
for social sustainability of companies and supply chains. J. Bus. Ethics 173, 813–833.
Kim, K., Bui, L., 2019. Learning from Hurricane Maria: island ports and supply chain
resilience. Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduc. 39, 101244.
Kim, S., Chae, S., Wagner, S.M., Miller, J.W., 2022. Buyer abusive behavior and supplier
welfare: an empirical study of truck owner–operators. J. Supply Chain Manag. 58
(4), 90–111.
Knudsen, J.S., 2018. Government regulation of international corporate social
responsibility in the US and the UK: how domestic institutions shape mandatory and
supportive initiatives. Br. J. Ind. Relat 56 (1), 164–188.
Kull, T.J., Kotlar, J., Spring, M., 2018. Small and medium enterprise research in supply
chain management: the case for single-respondent research designs. J. Supply Chain
Manag. 54 (1), 23–34.
Kumar, S.K., Tiwari, M.K., Babiceanu, R.F., 2010. Minimisation of supply chain cost with
embedded risk using computational intelligence approaches. Int. J. Prod. Res. 48
(13), 3717–3739.
LeBaron, G., 2021. The role of supply chains in the global business of forced labour.
J. Supply Chain Manag. 57 (2), 29–42.
Lee, C., Ha, B.C., 2021. Interactional justice, informational quality, and sustainable
supply chain management: a comparison of domestic and multinational
pharmaceutical companies. Sustainability 13 (2), 998.
Leventhal, G.S., 1980. What should be done with equity theory? New approaches to the
study of fairness in social relationships. In: Gergen, K., Greenberg, M., Willis, R.
(Eds.), Social Exchange: Advances in Theory and Research. Plenum Press, New York,
pp. 27–55.
Lim, J.J., Dai, J., Paulraj, A., 2022. Collaboration as a structural aspect of proactive social
sustainability: the differential moderating role of distributive and procedural justice.
Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-06-2021-0402 ahead-ofprint.
Lim, S.J., Phillips, J., 2008. Embedding CSR values: the global footwear industry’s
evolving governance structure. J. Bus. Ethics 81 (1), 143–156.
Liu, Y., Huang, Y., Luo, Y., Zhao, Y., 2012. How does justice matter in achieving
buyer–supplier relationship performance? J. Oper. Manag. 30 (5), 355–367.
M. Alghababsheh et al. 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 29 (2023) 100820
14
Locke, R.M., Samel, H., 2018. Beyond the workplace: “Upstream” business practices and
labor standards in the global electronics industry. Stud. Comp. Int. Dev. 53 (1), 1–24.
Locke, R., Amengual, M., Mangla, A., 2009. Virtue out of necessity? Compliance,
commitment, and the improvement of labor conditions in global supply chains. Polit.
Soc. 37 (3), 319–351.
Lu, G., Ding, X.D., Peng, D.X., Chuang, H.H.C., 2018. Addressing endogeneity in
operations management research: recent developments, common problems, and
directions for future research. J. Oper. Manag. 64, 53–64.
Lund-Thomsen, P., Lindgreen, A., 2014. Corporate social responsibility in global value
chains: where are we now and where are we going? J. Bus. Ethics 123 (1), 11–22.
Lund-Thomsen, P., Lindgreen, A., 2018. Is there a sweet spot in ethical trade? A critical
appraisal of the potential for aligning buyer, supplier and worker interests in global
production networks. Geoforum 90, 84–90.
Lund-Thomsen, P., Nadvi, K., Chan, A., Khara, N., Xue, H., 2012. Labour in global value
chains: work conditions in football manufacturing in China, India and Pakistan. Dev.
Change 43 (6), 1211–1237.
Luo, Y., 2007. The independent and interactive roles of procedural, distributive, and
interactional justice in strategic alliances. Acad. Manag. J. 50, 644–664.
Luo, Y., Liu, Y., Yang, Q., Maksimov, V., Hou, J., 2015. Improving performance and
reducing cost in buyer–supplier relationships: the role of justice in curtailing
opportunism. J. Bus. Res. 68, 607–615.
Malagueno, ˜ R., Golgeci, ¨ I., Fearne, A., 2019. Customer categorization, relational justice
and SME performance in supermarket supply chains. Supply Chain Manag.: Int. J. 24
(3), 417–429.
Maloni, M.J., Brown, M.E., 2006. Corporate social responsibility in the supply chain: an
application in the food industry. J. Bus. Ethics 68 (1), 35–52.
Mani, V., Gunasekaran, A., 2018. Four forces of supply chain social sustainability
adoption in emerging economies. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 199, 150–161.
Mani, V., Jabbour, C.J.C., Mani, K.T., 2020. Supply chain social sustainability in small
and medium manufacturing enterprises and firms’ performance: empirical evidence
from an emerging Asian economy. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 227, 107656.
Manuj, I., Mentzer, J.T., 2008. Global supply chain risk management strategies. Int. J.
Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 38, 192–223.
Markley, M.J., Davis, L., 2007. Exploring future competitive advantage through
sustainable supply chains. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 37 (9), 763–774.
Marshall, D., McCarthy, L., Claudy, M., McGrath, P., 2019. Piggy in the middle: how
direct customer power affects first-tier suppliers’ adoption of socially responsible
procurement practices and performance. J. Bus. Ethics 154 (4), 1081–1102.
Mollenkopf, D.A., Ozanne, L.K., Stolze, H.J., 2020. A transformative supply chain
response to COVID-19. J. Serv. Manag. 32 (2), 190–202.
Mory, L., Wirtz, B.W., Gottel, ¨ V., 2016. Factors of internal corporate social responsibility
and the effect on organizational commitment. Int. J. Hum. Resour. Manag. 27 (13),
1393–1425.
Narasimhan, R., Narayanan, S., Srinivasan, R., 2013. An investigation of justice in supply
chain relationships and their performance impact. J. Oper. Manag. 31, 236–247.
Normann, U., Ellegaard, C., Møller, M.M., 2017. Supplier perceptions of distributive
justice in sustainable apparel sourcing. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 47 (5),
368–386.
Olson, D.L., Wu, D.D., 2010. A review of enterprise risk management in supply chain,.
Kybernetes 39, 694–706.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2018. Compact for economic
governance stocktaking report. Retrieved November 2, 2019 from. https://www.oec
d.org/mena/competitiveness/Compact-for-Governance-Stocktaking-Report-Jor
dan-2018-EN.pdf.
Oyedijo, A., Yang, Y., Koukpaki, A.S.F., Mishra, N., 2021. The role of fairness in multitier sustainable supply chains. Int. J. Prod. Res. 1–25.
Pagell, M., Wu, Z., Wasserman, M.E., 2010. Thinking differently about purchasing
portfolios: an assessment of sustainable sourcing. J. Supply Chain Manag. 46 (1),
57–73.
Pandey, S., Singh, R.K., Gunasekaran, A., Kaushik, A., 2020. Cyber security risks in
globalized supply chains: conceptual framework. J. Glob. Oper. Strat. Sourc. 13 (1),
103–128.
Peng, M.W., 2003. Institutional transitions and strategic choices. Acad. Manag. Rev. 28
(2), 275–296.
Pereira, C.R., Christopher, M., Da Silva, A.L., 2014. Achieving supply chain resilience:
the role of procurement. Supply Chain Manag.: Int. J. 19 (5/6), 626–642.
Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B., Lee, J.Y., Podsakoff, N.P., 2003. Common method
biases in behavioral research: a critical review of the literature and recommended
remedies. J. Appl. Psychol. 88 (5), 879–903.
Poppo, L., Zhou, K.Z., 2014. Managing contracts for fairness in buyer–supplier
exchanges. Strat. Manag. J. 35, 1508–1527.
Porteous, A.H., Rammohan, S.V., Lee, H.L., 2015. Carrots or sticks? Improving social and
environmental compliance at suppliers through incentives and penalties. Prod. Oper.
Manag. 24 (9), 1402–1413.
Preacher, K.J., Hayes, A.F., 2008. Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and
comparing indirect effects in multiple mediator models. Behav. Res. Methods 40 (3),
879–891.
Pullman, M.E., Maloni, M.J., Carter, C.R., 2009. Food for thought: social versus
environmental sustainability practices and performance outcomes. J. Supply Chain
Manag. 45 (4), 38–54.
Qiao, J., Li, S., Capaldo, A., 2022. Green supply chain management, supplier
environmental commitment, and the roles of supplier perceived relationship
attractiveness and justice. A moderated moderation analysis. Bus. Strat. Environ. 31
(7), 3523–3541.
Quarshie, A.M., Salmi, A., Leuschner, R., 2016. Sustainability and corporate social
responsibility in supply chains: the state of research in supply chain management
and business ethics journals. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 22 (2), 82–97.
Reinecke, J., Donaghey, J., 2021. Towards worker-driven supply chain governance:
developing decent work through democratic worker participation. J. Supply Chain
Manag. 57 (2), 14–28.
Rodríguez, J.A., Gim´enez Thomsen, C., Arenas, D., Pagell, M., 2016. NGOs’ initiatives to
enhance social sustainability in the supply chain: poverty alleviation through
supplier development programs. J. Supply Chain Manag. 52 (3), 83–108.
Sajjad, A., Eweje, G., Tappin, D., 2015. Sustainable supply chain management:
motivators and barriers. Bus. Strat. Environ. 24 (7), 643–655.
Sancha, C., Gimenez, C., Sierra, V., 2016. Achieving a socially responsible supply chain
through assessment and collaboration. J. Clean. Prod. 112, 1934–1947.
Sancha, C., Gimenez, C., Sierra, V., Kazeminia, A., 2015. Does implementing social
supplier development practices pay off? Supply Chain Manag.: Int. J. 20 (4),
389–403.
Schleper, M.C., Blome, C., Wuttke, D.A., 2017. The dark side of buyer power: supplier
exploitation and the role of ethical climates. J. Bus. Ethics 140 (1), 97–114.
Scholten, K., Scott, P., Fynes, B., 2014. Mitigation processes – antecedents for building
supply chain resilience. Supply Chain Manag.: Int. J. 19 (2), 211–228.
Seuring, S., Müller, M., 2008. From a literature review to a conceptual framework for
sustainable supply chain management. J. Clean. Prod. 16 (15), 1699–1710.
Silva, M.E., Ruel, S., 2022. Inclusive purchasing and supply chain resilience capabilities:
lessons for social sustainability. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 28 (5), 100767.
Sobh, Rumman, Abu, 2019. State of the Informal Economy in Jordan: Opportunities for
Integration. AlQuds Center for Political Studies, Amman. Retrieved December 15,
2022 from. https://www.alqudscenter.org/index.php?l=en&pg=UFVCTElDQVRJT
05T&catID=21&id=2391.
Soundararajan, V., Brammer, S., 2018. Developing country sub-supplier responses to
social sustainability requirements of intermediaries: exploring the influence of
framing on fairness perceptions and reciprocity. J. Oper. Manag. 58, 42–58.
Soundararajan, V., Spence, L.J., Rees, C., 2018. Small business and social irresponsibility
in developing countries: working conditions and “evasion” institutional work. Bus.
Soc. 57 (7), 1301–1336.
Soundararajan, V., Wilhelm, M.M., Crane, A., 2021. Humanizing research on working
conditions in Supply chains: building a path to decent work. J. Supply Chain Manag.
57 (2), 3–13.
Tabachnick, B., Fidell, L., 2014. Using Multivariate Statistics: Pearson New International
Edition. Pearson Education Limited, Essex.
Teng, S.G., Jaramillo, H., 2005. A model for evaluation and selection of suppliers in
global textile and apparel supply chains. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 35 (7),
503–523.
The World Bank, 2018. The worldwide governance indictors project. Retrieved August
25, 2019 from. https://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/.
Tourangeau, R., Rips, L.J., Rasinski, K., 2000. The Psychology of Survey Response.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Trada, S., Goyal, V., 2017. The dual effects of perceived unfairness on opportunism in
channel relationships. Ind. Market. Manag. 64, 135–146.
Tukamuhabwa, B.R., Stevenson, M., Busby, J., Zorzini, M., 2015. Supply chain resilience:
definition, review and theoretical foundations for further study. Int. J. Prod. Res. 53
(18), 5592–5623.
Voorhees, C.M., Brady, M.K., Calantone, R., Ramirez, E., 2016. Discriminant validity
testing in marketing: an analysis, causes for concern, and proposed remedies.
J. Acad. Market. Sci. 44 (1), 119–134.
Wang, Q., Craighead, C.W., Li, J.J., 2014. Justice served: mitigating damaged trust
stemming from supply chain disruptions. J. Oper. Manag. 32 (6), 374–386.
Werts, C.E., Linn, R.L., Joreskog, ¨ K.G., 1974. Intraclass reliability estimates: testing
structural assumptions. Educ. Psychol. Meas. 34 (1), 25–33.
Wu, L., Chiu, M.L., 2018. Examining supply chain collaboration with determinants and
performance impact: social capital, justice, and technology use perspectives. Int. J.
Inf. Manag. 39, 5–19.
Yawar, S.A., Kauppi, K., 2018. Understanding the adoption of socially responsible
supplier development practices using institutional theory: dairy supply chains in
India. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 24 (2), 164–176.
Yawar, S.A., Seuring, S., 2017. Management of social issues in supply chains: a literature
review exploring social issues, actions and performance outcomes. J. Bus. Ethics 141
(3), 621–643.
Yawar, S.A., Seuring, S., 2018. The role of supplier development in managing social and
societal issues in supply chains. J. Clean. Prod. 182, 227–237.
Yee, R.W., Yeung, A.C., Cheng, T.E., 2008. The impact of employee satisfaction on
quality and profitability in high-contact service industries. J. Oper. Manag. 26 (5),
651–668.
Yu, X., 2008. Impacts of corporate code of conduct on labor standards: a case study of
reebok’s athletic footwear supplier factory in China. J. Bus. Ethics 81 (3), 513–529.
Zhou, K.Z., Poppo, L., 2010. Exchange hazards, relational reliability, and contracts in
China: the contingent role of legal enforceability. J. Int. Bus. Stud. 41 (5), 861–881.
Zhou, K.Z., Li, J.J., Zhou, N., Su, C., 2008. Market orientation, job satisfaction, product
quality, and firm performance: evidence from China. Strat. Manag. J. 29 (9),
985–1000.
Zorzini, M., Hendry, L.C., Huq, F.A., Stevenson, M., 2015. Socially responsible sourcing:
reviewing the literature and its use of theory. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 35 (1),
60–109.
Zsidisin, G.A., Ellram, L.M., Carter, J.R., Cavinato, J.L., 2004. An analysis of supply risk
assessment techniques. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 34 (5), 397–413.
M. Alghababsheh et al. 