Asia Pacific news
Gabriela Kennedy *
Mayer Brown JSM, Hong Kong
ABSTRACT
This column provides a country-by-country analysis of the latest legal developments, cases
and issues relevant to the IT, media and telecommunications’ industries in key jurisdictions across the Asia Pacific region. The articles appearing in this column are intended to
serve as ‘alerts’ and are not submitted as detailed analyses of cases or legal developments.
© 2017 Gabriela Kennedy. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords:
Asia-Pacific
IT/Information technology
Communications
Internet
Media
Law
1. China
Gabriela Kennedy (Partner), Mayer Brown JSM (gabriela.kennedy
@mayerbrownjsm.com);
Karen H.F. Lee (Senior Associate), Mayer Brown JSM (karen.hf.lee
@mayerbrownjsm.com).
1.1. Navigating the latest developments in China’s
Cybersecurity Law
On 1 June 2017, China’s new Cybersecurity Law (“CSL”) came
into operation.The PRC government has issued a series of draft
measures, guidelines and regulations in an attempt to provide
further clarity on the application of the CSL, but many ambiguities and uncertainties remain.To help navigate them, a brief
summary of several of these measures, guidelines and regulations issued over the last few months is set out below.
1.1.1. Background
The CSL imposes restrictions on operators of critical information infrastructures (“CIIs”) and network operators, and has been
seen as a barrier to the free-flow of data and contrary to current
business practices. The most controversial provisions concern
data localisation requirements, cross-border data transfer restrictions, the implementation of cybersecurity measures, and
compliance and certification measures for security products
and equipment.The broad definition of network operators (with
limited clarification from the government) has meant that any
entity that operates a Chinese website, conducts business activities through networks in China, or provides online services
to customers in China may be caught by the CSL restrictions.
In addition to the above requirements, which have received the most media attention, the CSL places a large burden
on network operators to screen and “police” users of their services, including messaging platforms, blogs and social media
platforms. Network operators are not only required to ensure
that users provide information concerning their true identity
(thereby eliminating the possibility of users posting information anonymously), they are also required to stop the illegal
public dissemination of any information transmitted by their
users (e.g. online posts that are seen as a criticism or threat
to national security or the socialist system).
The Cyberspace Administration of China (“CAC”) has already
started taking steps to crackdown on network operators. In
August 2017, the CAC commenced investigations against three
popular social media platforms. Users had allegedly been using
the social media platforms to disseminate information that was
For further information see: www.mayerbrown.com.
* Mayer Brown JSM, 16th–19th Floors, Prince’s Building, 10 Chater Road Central, Hong Kong.
E-mail address: gabriela.kennedy@mayerbrownjsm.com.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2017.09.006
0267-3649/© 2017 Gabriela Kennedy. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
computer law & security review 33 (2017) 896–904
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
www.compseconline.com/publications/prodclaw.htm
ScienceDirect
seen as challenging national and public security, as well as
public order, and the operators of the platforms were accused
of failing to takedown such information in breach of the CSL.
The platform operators have indicated that they will cooperate with the CAC to rectify the issue. This is likely to just be
one of many investigations initiated by the CAC as part of the
government’s cybersecurity initiative, which has included a
crackdown on virtual private networks and online news.
1.1.2. Cross-border transfers and data localisation
The revised draft of the Security Assessment Measures for the
Cross-Border Transfer of Personal Information and Important
Data (“Cross-Border Measures”) was issued on 19 May 2017.
Even though the Cross-Border Measures came into effect on
1 June 2017, a final version still needs to be issued by the CAC.
Due to a backlash of concern raised by foreign entities on their
ability to comply with the Cross-Border Measures, an 18-
month grace period was granted, giving network operators until
31 December 2018 to comply with the newly introduced crossborder data transfer rules.
Unlike the earlier drafts, express reference to the data localization requirements in respect of network operators has
been removed from the current version of the Cross-Border
Measures. It would be naive to draw the conclusion that the
data localization requirements do not apply to network operators (only CII operators as per the CSL), as network operators
are still subject to restrictions under the Cross-Border Measures on the overseas transfer of personal information and
“important data” collected or generated during business operations in China. Important data is broadly defined to include
information that relates to national security, economic development, or social or public interest.
A CII operator or network operator may provide no personal information or important data to anyone outside of China
unless:
• they have completed the required security assessment set
out under the Cross-Border Measures;
• the data subject has been notified of the purpose and scope
of the transfer, and the country in which the recipient is
located; and
• the data subject’s consent has been obtained (which can
be inferred based on the data subject’s actions), save when
there is an emergency that may jeopardise the life or property of the relevant data subject.
Notwithstanding the above, no transfer of personal information or important data may occur if it will violate any laws
or regulations; the transfer may result in risks to national security and public interest, or cause harm to the government
system, economic security, scientific or technological security, information security, national defense, etc; or if any relevant
regulator deems the transfer to be inappropriate.
Both a self-assessment and an official security assessment from the local authorities must be carried out and
obtained before a CII operator or network operator can transfer personal information and important data outside of China.
The self-assessment no longer needs to be carried out on an
annual basis thereafter (as was originally required under previous versions of the Cross-Border Measures), but it must be
conducted upon any significant amendment in relation to a
cross-border transfer (e.g. change in scope or type of data). An
official security assessment from the relevant local authorities must also be obtained in certain situations, such as where
more than 500,000 individuals’ personal information are being
transferred, or the data concerns public health or national security sectors, and so on.
In order to complement the Cross-Border Measures, on 27
May 2017 the draft Guidelines for Cross-Border Data Transfer
Security Assessment was issued for public consultation (“Draft
Cross-Border Security Guidelines”). The Draft Cross-Border Security Guidelines sets out how a security assessment should
be carried out prior to the cross-border transfer of any personal information or important data by network operators.This
includes a requirement to have in place a data export plan and
to assess the legality and appropriateness of the crossborder transfer, and the level of risk involved. The consultation
period expired on 27 June 2017, and a final draft is pending.
1.1.3. Security review of network equipment and
cybersecurity products
CII operators that procure network products and services that
might affect national security must undergo a national security review organized by the relevant local authorities. On 2 May
2017, the Cyberspace Administration of China issued the Security Review Measures for Network Products and Services (Trial)
(“Security Review Measures”). Article 10 of the Security Review
Measures clarifies that products and services purchased for
public communication and information services, energy, transport, water conservancy, finance, public services and electronic
government affairs or other operators of CIIs are all significant network products and services that may affect national
security, and are therefore subject to the national security review
under the CSL. Whether these products or services affect national security is to be determined by government departments
responsible for the safety of the CII. The government will set
up a cybersecurity review committee and cybersecurity review
office.
In addition, the CSL requires dedicated cybersecurity products and critical network equipment to obtain a certification
issued by qualified institutions before they can be sold or distributed in China (“Certification Requirement”). Such products
and equipment must also comply with national standards.The
CAC has the obligation to establish a catalogue of critical
network equipment and cybersecurity products that will be
subject to the Certification Requirement.
On 9 June 2017, the CAC, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (“MIIT”), Ministry of Public Security and
Certification and Accreditation Administration, released an
Announcement of the Issuance of the Catalogue of Critical
Network Equipment and Dedicated Cybersecurity Products (First
Batch) (“First Catalogue”). Despite being issued on 9 June 2017,
the First Catalogue took effect as of 1 June 2017. So far, 15 items
have been identified in the First Catalogue as critical network
equipment or dedicated cybersecurity products, which are
subject to the Certification Requirement.These include firewalls,
security audit software, routers, switches, servers, intrusion detection systems, etc.The scope of the Certification Requirement
therefore remains quite broad, and the CAC has the flexibility to issue further catalogues of equipment and products.
computer law & security review 33 (2017) 896–904 897
Uncertainty remains as to what steps need to be taken in
order to obtain relevant certification and the “qualified institutions” that will be responsible for reviewing the equipment
and products. In particular, concerns have been expressed in
relation to the nature of proprietary information (such as source
codes) that needs to be disclosed.
1.1.4. Draft regulations on critical information
infrastructures
The Cyberspace Administration of China published the Draft
Security Protection Measures for Critical Information Infrastructures (“Draft CII Measures”) on 10 July 2017, in order to
provide further guidance in relation to CIIs. The Draft CII Measures were open for public consultation until 10 August 2017.
Under the Draft CII Measures, the CIIs are further defined to
include government departments or any entities in the energy,
finance, transportation, water, health, medical, education, social
insurance, environmental protection or public affairs sectors;
scientific research and manufacturing entities, radio stations, television stations and news agencies; information
networks, including telecommunication, broadcasting, Internet cloud computing, big data and other large-scale public
information network services; and other important entities, if
they have the potential to damage national security, national
economy and people’s livelihoods and public interests. In addition, the Draft CII Measures state that the government will
establish further guidelines to help identify CIIs and, in accordance with such guidelines, the government authorities for
each relevant sector will identify the CIIs in their industry. This
provides the government with a broad discretion to determine who will fall within the scope of a CII and be subject to
the CSL.
The Draft CII Measures prescribe further responsibilities on
CII operators, including implementing technical measures to
prevent cyber attacks and monitor cybersecurity incidents;
keeping relevant network logs for at least 6 months; appointing qualified cybersecurity staff; arranging regular training and
testing of its staff; establishing cyber incident response plans;
carrying out regular back-ups of important data; carrying out
regular comprehensive security and risk assessments, rectifying any identified vulnerabilities and reporting such results
to relevant industry authorities, etc. The maintenance of the
CII itself must also be carried out within China. Such maintenance can only be conducted overseas if necessary due to
business needs, and subject to providing advance notice to the
relevant government authorities.
Further, under the Draft CII Measures the government is required to organise regular security assessments on CIIs, which
may include reviewing security related documents and records,
and interviewing staff of CII operators. However, much of the
CSL requirements and other obligations under the Draft CII Measures relating to CII operators remain unclear. For example, the
Draft CII Measures require operators of IT and cloud-computing
services to comply with requirements laid down by the CAC
– what these requirements are remains uncertain.
1.1.5. Takeaway
After wading through the various measures, guidelines and interpretations, a reader is likely to feel more confused than
enlightened, especially given the constant cross-referencing
amongst these documents that is needed in order to understand extent of the obligations imposed on CIIs and network
operators. Additional or revised interpretations, measures and
guidelines will be issued by the government over the next year,
which may scatter the clouds of uncertainty and ambiguity surrounding the CSL.
For now, companies that have a link to China (e.g. business operations in China, networks in China, Chinese-hosted
website, etc) should as a minimum conduct privacy and security audits to map out how they could comply with the CSL
and the related measures; implement a cross-border transfer
of data plan; and start conducting self-assessments pursuant to the Cross-Border Measures.
2. Hong Kong
Gabriela Kennedy (Partner), Mayer Brown JSM (gabriela.kennedy
@mayerbrownjsm.com);
Karen H.F. Lee (Senior Associate), Mayer Brown JSM (karen.hf.lee
@mayerbrownjsm.com).
2.1. The XXX files: privacy implications in Hong Kong
A recent case in Hong Kong has highlighted the courts’ willingness to impose harsher sentences for the unsanctioned
disclosure of private recordings of intimate acts. Sadly, the uploading of videos or photos of former partners in explicit and
compromising situations, otherwise known as revenge porn,
has become a more and more common way for jilted lovers
to take revenge after the break-up of a relationship. This is not
only a breach of privacy, but in many jurisdictions, it may also
be a criminal offence. On 23 June 2017, the defendant in the
Hong Kong case HKSAR v. Wong Ngai Sang1 was sentenced to
20 months imprisonment for covertly recording and uploading on the Internet a video of himself and his former lover
having sex (“WNS Case”).
2.1.1. Access to a computer for dishonest gain
Under Section 161(1)(c) of the Crimes Ordinance (Cap. 200) (“CO”)
in Hong Kong, it is an offence for anyone to obtain access to
a computer with a view to dishonest gain (either for himself
or for another). Such an offence can attract a sentence of 5 years
imprisonment.
In the WNS Case, the defendant had filmed himself having
sex with the victim, without her knowledge or consent. After
the victim ended their relationship, the defendant decided to
get revenge by uploading the video on the Internet together
with personal details of the victim (her name and home
address). The victim learned of this from a work colleague and
reported the matter to the police.The defendant pleaded guilty
to one count of obtaining access to a computer with a view
to dishonest gain for himself.
Section 161(2) of the CO provides that “gain” does not need
to be money or other property, and may include getting something that the defendant did not have previously, or keeping
something that they already had. “Gain” has generally been
1 [2017] HKEC 1578.
898 computer law & security review 33 (2017) 896–904
interpreted quite broadly, and has previously been found to
include obtaining photos or recordings. The WNS Case appears
to widen the definition further to include the revenge obtained by the defendant in uploading the video, though
unfortunately this was not discussed in detail in the judgment, as the defendant had pleaded guilty.
It is interesting to note that obtaining access to a “computer”
is not limited to obtaining access to a laptop or desktop. In Secretary for Justice v. Wong Ka Yip Ken,
2 the Court of First Instance
determined on appeal that a smartphone could amount to a
“computer” for the purposes of Section 161(1) of the CO. This
point was taken for granted in the WNS Case, where the defendant had used his smartphone to record the footage at issue.
During sentencing, the judge emphasised the “gross violation” of privacy involved and the fact that the sentence should
reflect the “public’s abhorrence of the defendant’s shameless
conduct” and should serve as a deterrent to others. The defendant was sentenced to 20 months imprisonment. The only
substantial mitigating factor taken into account by the judge
was his guilty plea.
The sentence imposed in the WNS Case is a much harsher
sentence when compared to other similar cases. In September 2012, a tutor was sentenced to only 4 months imprisonment
for taking up skirt photos of his students. Even in the infamous case involving local celebrity Edison Chen, the defendant
received a much lesser sentence.The computer technician who
stole over 1000 sexually explicit photos from Edison Chen’s computer, and subsequently made the photos available on the
Internet and through other media, was only sentenced to 8 and
a half months imprisonment.
The harsher sentence in the WNS Case may reflect the
courts desire to send a strong message to offenders, especially where covert photos or videos of the most intimate nature
are uploaded on the Internet. The damage that is done can
never be undone, even if the photo or video is taken down, as
cached copies of the uploads will continue to be available.
2.1.2. Data privacy complaint or prosecution under CO?
Whilst a violation of privacy is clearly a significant concern for
victims of revenge porn or covert recordings, such acts may
not in themselves amount to an offence under the Personal
Data (Privacy) Ordinance (Cap. 486) (“PDPO”). The PDPO regulates the collection, use and transfer of personal data by data
users in Hong Kong. A photo or video taken by a data user may
amount to personal data for the purposes of the PDPO, if it is
possible to directly or indirectly identify the individual featured in it, and if the purpose of collection was to identify the
individual in question.
Any explicit video recordings or photos obtained without
the knowledge or consent of the relevant individual should not
be taken or uploaded on the Internet. This seems to go handin-hand with common sense and morality. However, failing to
do so does not in itself amount to an offence under the PDPO.
Such acts will merely constitute a breach of a data protection
principle, the remedy for which is a complaint to the Privacy
Commissioner followed by an enforcement notice if an investigation by the Privacy Commissioner finds a breach to have
occurred. Given the complexities of making a case to the Privacy
Commissioner and the nature of the remedies available reporting such a case to the police for prosecution as a criminal
offence under Section 161(1)(c) of the CO is a surer way to obtain
commensurate punishment for a reprehensible deed.
While no precedent exists, it is likely that victims of revenge
porn may also start civil proceedings, especially after a criminal conviction is secured, as damages for injury to feelings can
be sought under the PDPO.
The WSN case has highlighted the inadequacy of the PDPO.
Section 64 of the PDPO, which was introduced when the law
was last amended in 2012, makes it an offence for anyone to
disclose personal data of an individual obtained from a data
user, without that data user’s consent and with the intent to
obtain gain (either for himself or anyone else) or to cause loss
to the relevant individual in the form of money or other property. The offence can incur a maximum fine of HK$ 1,000,0000
and 5 years imprisonment. Unlike Section 161(1)(c) of the CO,
Section 64 of the PDPO only applies where the “gain” or “loss”
is in the form of money or other property, and where personal data is taken from a data user without their consent. A
classic example is where an employee discloses or sells personal data held by its employer, without their employer’s
consent.
The section could not be invoked in the WNS Case or other
typical revenge porn scenarios, as the data user is the person
who took the videos or photos and uploaded them on the Internet (i.e. they did not steal them from another person), and
no money or other property is usually sought by the culprit
or is lost by the victim. The section can apply to situations that
are similar to the Edison Chen case. The Information Leaflet
issued by the Privacy Commissioner3 expressly cites the uploading of a celebrity’s intimate photos on the Internet by an
employee of a laptop repair company without the celebrity’s
permission as an example of an offence under Section 64, which
was in fact brought in because of the Edison Chen case. Anyone
who disseminates videos or photos on the Internet or through
other media, without the consent of the person who captured such videos or photos, in return for, say money (e.g.
blackmail, selling the images to the press, etc) may be found
guilty under both Section 64 of the PDPO and Section 161(1)(c)
of the CO. However, not everyone who takes such pictures or
makes such recordings themselves and disseminates them on
the Internet can be caught by this provision in the PDPO.
Other jurisdictions have introduced specific laws to target
revenge porn after having found that their existing legislation was insufficient to protect victims and tackle the growing
trend. For example, in England and Wales, the distribution of
private sexual images of an individual without their consent,
and with the intent of causing distress, is a criminal offence.4
This applies to distribution both online and offline, by any
means. The sanctions imposed for such an offence are only
12 months imprisonment and/or a fine on summary conviction, or 2 years imprisonment and/or a fine on conviction on
indictment, which are less severe than those provided under
Section 161(1)(c) of the CO and Section 64 of the PDPO.
2 [2013] 4 HKLRD 604.
3 Information Leaflet on the Offence for Disclosing Personal Data
Obtained Without Consent from the Data User, issued September
2012.
4 Section 33 of the Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015.
computer law & security review 33 (2017) 896–904 899
However, courts in England have also issued orders to ISPs
to block access to offending material and preserve the anonymity of victims.5
2.1.3. Conclusion
The unsanctioned disclosure of intimate recordings or photos
is being taken more seriously by the courts in Hong Kong, and
harsher punishments can be expected in the future. How will
we deal with inadvertent recordings and equally inadvertent
disclosure of intimate household scenes by IoT enabled applications? Given the rapid development in technology, the everchanging nature of offences is likely to render obsolete any
amendment to the legislation by the time it is brought in.
3. India
Stephen Mathias (Partner), Kochhar & Co. (stephen.mathias
@bgl.kochhar.com).
3.1. Indian Supreme Court rules right to privacy is a
fundamental right
On 24 August 2017, in a landmark judgment, a nine judge constitutional bench of the Supreme Court of India ruled that the
right to privacy is a fundamental right under the Constitution of India. The court held that the right to privacy is part
of the right to life and personal liberty and other freedom rights
(right to speech, movement, etc) under the Constitution.
The case arose out of a constitutional challenge to the implementation of Aadhaar, a biometrics based identity project, which
the Indian government plans to make mandatory for many government and quasi-government services.The Government had
argued in that case that there is no fundamental right to privacy
and, accordingly, petitioners could not challenge the implementation of Aadhaar because it did not adequately protect
the privacy of individuals.The Government cited two cases from
the 1950–1960s which had larger benches and which stated that
there is no fundamental right to privacy. Keeping in mind the
larger benches in those cases compared to later cases, which
had held that there is a fundamental right to privacy, the court
hearing that case referred the matter to a larger constitutional bench.
The ruling dwelled in detail on past case law in India on
the right to privacy as well as case law and jurisprudence in
other countries, most notably, the US, EU, Canada and South
Africa. The court however accepted that the right to privacy
would not be unfettered but would be subject to limitations
that pass the tests previously laid down by the court while considering restrictions on fundamental rights.
The effect of the ruling is a possible stalling of the Aadhaar
project until the Government considers additional regulation
to deal with privacy concerns. It is likely that it will result in
India finally proceeding to enact a comprehensive privacy law.
While the arguments were being heard by the court, the Government appointed a committee to suggest a framework for
data protection in India and a new draft law. Unfortunately,
the committee, headed by a retired judge, has only one other
lawyer and only one expert on data protection. The terms of
reference also refer to data protection but not to privacy.
However, with this ruling, it is likely that the committee will
suggest a comprehensive data privacy law since government
handling of personal information without privacy protections would otherwise become unconstitutional.
4. Malaysia
Charmayne Ong Poh Yin (Partner), Skrine (co@skrine.com)
4.1. Malaysia’s New Digital Free Trade Zone (“DFTZ”)
4.1.1. What is the DFTZ?
In collaboration with Jack Ma and the Alibaba Group, Malaysia recently announced the commencement of the new DIGITAL
FREE TRADE ZONE (“DFTZ”) initiative. The DFTZ will be the world’s
first special digital trade zone with the main aim of promoting the growth of e-commerce by providing a platform for SMEs
and enterprises to conduct businesses and services.
4.1.2. How will the DFTZ be implemented?
The implementation of the DFTZ will take place in 2 main
phases, namely the DFTZ@Aeropolis and Kuala Lumpur Internet City (“KLIC”). The DFTZ@Aeropolis will consist of a
regional eCommerce and logistics hub near the Kuala Lumpur
International Airport. DFTZ@Aeropolis is designed to be the regional fulfilment facility with warehousing services and a
centralised customs clearance for speeding up clearance for
imports and exports.
The KLIC, as part of the DFTZ, will be the digital hub for
Internet-related companies targeting Southeast Asia. KLIC will
facilitate end-to-end support services, provide the opportunity for networking and encourage knowledge-sharing with the
aim to drive innovation in the Internet and eCommerce industry. The hub is expected to be launched end-2019.
4.1.3. What does the DFTZ mean for us?
The DFTZ is part of the Malaysian government’s commitment to accelerate the growth of the digital economy by
providing a robust environment for online traders to compete.
Malaysia has a crucial geographical advantage in terms of its
strategic location as a gateway to the Southeast Asia region.
The DFTZ is deliberately structured in terms of proximity to
the sea and airports for a more efficient circulation and transportation of goods.
A vital part of the DFTZ initiative is the incentives for businesses such as tax exemptions and the assurance of a faster
and improved regulatory process leading to faster customs and
cargo clearance. For instance, it has been reported that the purchase of goods via the Internet or eCommerce worth RM 1200
and below will be exempted from paying tax in the DFTZ.
Further, the development of an integrated government services and digital e-services platform allows access to leading
global service providers.
It is believed that the DFTZ will benefit manufacturers,
traders and service providers. In particular, SMEs and Malaysian 5 AMP v Persons Unknown [2011] EWHC 3454.
900 computer law & security review 33 (2017) 896–904
manufacturers/brands looking to export will benefit from the
streamlined logistical solutions in the DFTZ and improved regulatory processes, which reduces costs.The DFTZ will also benefit
entities looking to use and source from Malaysia as a regional centre as well as international brand owners looking to
reach ASEAN customers due to the strategic location of Malaysia. Local and global service providers providing support
services such as fulfilment, last-mile delivery, payments and
insurance are also expected to be one of the main beneficiaries of the DFTZ initiative.
The long-term benefits of the DFTZ remain to be seen but
it is expected to create 60,000 direct and indirect jobs for Malaysia and double the export growth of SMEs.
5. New Zealand
Karen Ngan (Partner), Simpson Grierson (karen.ngan
@simpsongrierson.com); Nick Jens (Law Graduate), Simpson
Grierson (nick.jens@simpsongrierson.com).
5.1. Recent prosecutions under the Harmful Digital
Communications Act 2015
The High Court has delivered its first judgment regarding a complaint under the Harmful Digital Communications Act 2015
(HDC Act).6 With it, the High Court has provided its interpretation on what constitutes “harm to the victim” under the HDC
Act.
5.1.1. Background
The offender and the victim were married but separated, and
a temporary protection order was in place against the offender. The offender made threats to post intimate photos on
Facebook of the victim if the victim did not comply with various
demands. The offender had also been stalking the victim. The
offender subsequently posted the intimate photos on Facebook that were later discovered by the victim. At the time of
discovery, the victim began to show signs of anger, anxiety, and
frustration and also felt depressed. The victim’s emotional distress continued for some time and the victim made a complaint
to the police that proceeded to a hearing in the District Court.7
5.1.2. The law
For a criminal prosecution to succeed under the HDC Act
Section 22 requires that a three-stage test be met being:
(a) the person posts a digital communication with the intention to cause harm to a victim;
(b) the communication would cause harm to an ordinary
reasonable person; and
(c) the communication causes harm to the victim.
5.1.3. District Court judgment
The District Court held that there was a prima facie case to
answer in respect of the first two limbs of the Section 22 test.
However, the District Court held that in this case the digital
communication did not cause harm to the victim, therefore
failing the third limb of the statutory test. The HDC Act defines
“harm” as “serious emotional distress”. This definition is the
only guidance the HDC Act gives when interpreting harm under
the Section 22 three-stage test. The District Court considered
that while the evidence clearly pointed to some degree of emotional distress, it was not sufficient to satisfy the Court that
it had reached the threshold of serious emotional distress.
5.1.4. Appeal to High Court
The prosecution appealed on the ground the District Court erred
in its interpretation of serious emotional distress. In terms of
the statutory test under Section 22, the High Court was only
to consider limb (c) of the test – whether the communication
caused harm to the victim, specifically, the interpretation of
harm.
5.1.5. High Court judgment
The High Court upheld the appeal and found the District Court
Judge had erred by failing to consider the unchallenged evidence of the distress suffered by the complainant in its totality,
and without reference to context. The High Court considered
that the District Court had isolated each of the emotions rather
than assessing them in totality. The District Court Judge also
had no apparent regard to context – which included the threats
of publication and the demands the offender made of the
victim.
5.1.6. Key points
The significance of the High Court’s decision is that it is the
first (and currently, only) decision under the HDC Act.
When considering whether any harm suffered meets the
threshold of serious emotional distress:
• there does not need to be mental injury or a diagnosed psychiatric disorder, but something more than initial emotional
distress;
• the distress suffered should be considered in its totality; and
• regard should be had to context.
6. Singapore
Lam Chung Nian (Partner), WongPartnership LLP (chungnian.lam
@wongpartnership.com);
Gareth Liu (Associate), WongPartnership LLP (gareth.liu
@wongpartnership.com).
6.1. Public consultation on new Cybersecurity Bill
The Ministry of Communications and Information (“MCI”)
and the Cyber Security Agency (“CSA”) issued a public consultation on the draft Cybersecurity Bill (the “Bill”) on 10 August
2017. The submission period for responses ended on 24 August
2017.
The Bill is meant to establish a framework for the oversight and maintenance of national cybersecurity in Singapore.
6 Police v B [2017] 3 NZLR 203. 7 R v Partha Iyer [2016] NZDC 23957.
computer law & security review 33 (2017) 896–904 901
MCI and CSA commenced work on the Bill in late 2015, and
thereafter engaged in several rounds of consultations with key
stakeholders, including regulators of Singapore’s critical sectors,
potential critical information infrastructure (“CII”) owners, industry associations, and cybersecurity professionals.
The MCI and CSA have stated that the Bill has four
objectives:
(1) To provide a framework for the regulation of CII. This
formalises the duties of CII owners in ensuring the
cybersecurity of their respective CIIs.
(2) To provide CSA with powers to manage and respond to
cybersecurity threats and incidents. These powers
augment the existing powers related to cybersecurity set
out in Section 15A of the current Computer Misuse and
Cybersecurity Act (“CMCA”). Specific powers will also be
vested in CSA officers as sitting powers.
(3) To establish a framework for the sharing of cybersecurity
information with and by CSA, and the protection of such
information.
(4) To establish a light-touch licensing framework for
cybersecurity service providers.
6.1.1. Definition and designation of CII
In the Bill, a CII is defined as a computer or computer system
that is necessary for the continuous delivery of essential services, which Singapore relies on, the loss or compromise of
which will lead to a debilitating impact on national security,
defence, foreign relations, economy, public health, public safety
or public order of Singapore. The government has identified
essential services in 11 critical sectors: government, security
and emergency, healthcare, telecommunications, banking and
finance, energy, water, media, land transport, air transport, and
maritime.
The list of essential services is to be set out in a schedule,
with new essential services being added from time to time by
the Minister. Computers and computer systems that are necessary during times of national emergency may also be
designated as CIIs.
Section 7 of the Bill will allow the Commissioner to designate a computer or computer system as a CII by way of written
notice to the owner of the computer or computer system. The
CII owner is the person who (a) has effective control over the
operations of the CII and has the ability and right to carry out
changes to the CII; or (b) is responsible for ensuring the continuous functioning of the CII.
As the Commissioner would need sufficient information to
determine whether a computer or computer system fulfils the
criteria of a CII, the Commissioner is empowered to require the
owner of a computer or computer system to provide certain
information about the computer or computer system.
The designation of a computer or computer system as a CII
is an official secret under the Official Secrets Act and is not
to be divulged to the public.
6.1.2. Duties of CII owners
As CII owners are responsible to ensure the cybersecurity of
their CIIs, every CII owner is subject to certain statutory duties,
including:
(a) Duty to provide information, i.e. to provide the Commissioner with information on the technical architecture
of the CII;
(b) Duty to comply with codes and directions, i.e. to comply
with such codes of practice or directions in relation to
the CII as may be issued by the Commissioner;
(c) Duty to report incidents, i.e. to notify the Commissioner of (i) any cybersecurity incident that occurs in
respect of the CII; and (ii) any cybersecurity incident that
occurs in respect of any computer or computer system
under the owner’s control that is interconnected with
or communicates with the CII;
(d) Duty to conduct audits, i.e. to cause regular audits of the
compliance of the CII with the Bill, codes of practice and
standards of performance to be carried out by an auditor
approved or appointed by the Commissioner;
(e) Duty to conduct risk assessments, i.e. to carry out regular
risk assessments of the CII as required by the Commissioner; and
(f) Duty to participate in exercises, i.e. to participate in
cybersecurity exercises as required by the Commissioner.
There are certain criminal offences in the Bill, which are
associated with failure to comply with the above duties. These
offences apply to CII owners in cases where they fail to perform
their duties wilfully, or fail to comply with the Commissioner’s directions without reasonable excuse. CII owners will
however not be directly penalised for cybersecurity breaches.
6.1.3. Powers to investigate cybersecurity threats and
incidents
The Bill also grants the Commissioner (and his delegates)
powers as may be necessary to determine the impact or potential impact of cybersecurity threats or incidents, to prevent
further harm arising from a cybersecurity incident or to prevent
subsequent cybersecurity incidents. These powers include:
• requiring, by written notice, any person to attend at such
reasonable time and at such place as may be specified by
the investigating officer to answer any question or to provide
a signed statement in writing concerning the cybersecurity
incident or cybersecurity threat;
• requiring, by written notice, any person to produce to the
investigating officer any physical or electronic record, document or copy thereof in the possession of that person, or
to provide the investigating officer with any information,
which the investigating officer considers to be related to any
matter relevant to the investigation, and without giving any
fee or reward, inspect, copy or take extracts from such record
or document; and
• examining orally any person who appears to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances relating to the
cybersecurity incident or cybersecurity threat and to reduce
to writing any statement made by the person so examined.
Greater powers are granted in respect of cybersecurity
incidents satisfying certain severity thresholds. Examples
include directing, by written notice, any person to carry out
such remedial measures, or to cease carrying on such activities, as may be specified, in relation to a computer or computer
902 computer law & security review 33 (2017) 896–904
system that the investigating officer has reasonable cause to
suspect is or was impacted by a cybersecurity incident. This
is in order to minimise cybersecurity vulnerabilities, scanning for cybersecurity vulnerabilities, or taking possession of
computers or equipment for further analysis. Such severity
thresholds include where the cybersecurity incident or
cybersecurity threat:
• creates a real risk of significant harm being caused to a critical information infrastructure;
• creates a real risk of disruption being caused to the delivery of an essential service;
• creates a real threat to the national security, defence, foreign
relations, economy, public health, public safety or public
order of Singapore; or
• the cybersecurity threat is of a severe nature, in terms of
the severity of harm that may be caused or the number of
computers or value of information put at risk, whether or
not the computers or computer systems put at risk are of
the nature of a critical information infrastructure.
6.1.4. Licensing for cybersecurity service providers
The Bill also aims to introduce a light-touch licensing regime
for cybersecurity service providers that service the Singapore
market, and to improve the standing of cybersecurity
professionals.
There are two types of licenses:
1. Investigative Cybersecurity Service: this is a cybersecurity
service that is investigative in nature and (i) involves circumventing the controls implemented in another person’s
computer or computer system; or (ii) requires the person
performing the service to obtain a deep level of access to
the computer or computer system in respect of which the
service is being performed, or to test the cybersecurity defences of the computer or computer system, thereby giving
rise to a potential for significant harm to be caused to the
computer or computer system.
An example of the above is a penetration testing service
provider.
2. Non-Investigative Cybersecurity Service: this is a
cybersecurity service that is not of an investigative nature.
An example of the above is a managed security operations centre monitoring service provider.
Licensed service providers (both investigative and noninvestigative) will need to meet certain basic requirements,
including:
(a) Requirement for key executive officers to be fit and proper
persons (such criteria include the person’s honesty, integrity and financial soundness);
(b) Retention of service records for five years (e.g. client information, service provided, name of employee who
provided the service);
(c) Compliance with a Code of Ethics (e.g. maintaining confidentiality about client information); and
(d) Requirement for a process in place to ensure that employees performing the licensable services are fit and
proper.
The licensing framework will not take immediate effect, and
CSA has indicated that it will engage in further consultation
with the industry on detailed requirements before the framework is operationalised.
6.1.5. Comments
The threat of cyberattacks is real, and as Singapore embraces
the use of technology, the defence of Singapore’s CII systems
certainly merits oversight and scrutiny. The introduction of the
Bill will empower government oversight of such systems and
to mitigate risks of disruption to essential services.
The Bill will have the largest impact on government and
private sector organisations providing essential services, but
may also affect service providers to such organisations as well
(e.g. cloud service providers servicing essential service companies). Cybersecurity service providers will also be subject to
the proposed licensing regime and it remains to be seen what
specific licensing requirements and/or obligations would apply
to such service providers.
The bill raises a number of issues, which merit further deliberation and consideration. For example, the core concept of
a CII may need clarification, as well as greater clarity on interconnected systems, and when breach-reporting obligations
will be triggered. It remains to be seen whether such concerns will be addressed in a future revision of the Bill.
7. Taiwan
Po-Hsiang Ou (Associate), Eiger Law (ph.ou@eiger.law).
7.1. Court: gamer currency not same as stored-value
cards
A recent criminal law judgment of the Taiwan New Taipei District Court8 clarified the scope of the Act Governing Issuance
of Electronic Stored Value Cards (the “Act”).9 This is one of the
few cases in the field of electronic stored-value card regulations and provides a further definition of these payment cards.
The defendant, ADDCN Technology Co. Ltd. (“ADDCN”), was
charged with violating the Act in relation to its online trading
platform “www.8591.com.tw” (the “8591-Web”) and its online
currency “T-coin”. The 8591-Web provides a platform for online
gamers to trade in-game inventories and currencies, and uses
the T-coin as its unit of trade and/payments. The prosecutor
claimed that T-coins from 8591-Web should be considered as
electronic stored-value cards, and thus ADDCN had violated
the Act by issuing stored-value cards without a license from
the Financial Supervisory Commission (“FSC”).10
8 Taiwan New Taipei District Court judgement, 22 June 2017
(台灣新北地方法院103年金重訴字第6號刑事判決). 9 電子票證發行管理條例: http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/
LawAll.aspx?PCode=G0380207. 10 Article 30 of the Act.
computer law & security review 33 (2017) 896–904 903
While it sounds quite far-fetched for an online virtual currency to be deemed a stored-value “card”, the legal text of the
Act does include “other forms of debt obligation” into its definition. Article 2 of the Act defines electronic stored-value cards
as:
an IC chip, card, certificate or other forms of debt obligation that
uses electronic, magnetic or optical means to store monetary value
and performs the function of data storage or computing, and is
used for multiple payment purposes.
Following a textual interpretation, the FSC and the prosecutor argued that T-coins are a form of debt obligation that
uses electronic means to store monetary value and data for
multiple payment purposes (i.e. trading with various online
gamers). The Court, however, following the principle of nulla
poena sine lege, emphasized that pure literal interpretations of
legal text may be too arbitrary, and argued that systematic as
well as teleological interpretations are necessary for understanding the scope of the Act. More specifically, the Court ruled
that ADDCN was not guilty, based on four key reasons:
(1) T-coin is not a “card” as other smart cards or storedvalue cards envisioned by the legislators, nor can it
“perform the function of data storage or computing”, as
it is only a token or virtual account, without having any
embedded digital circuitry or memory.
(2) The concept of “other forms of debt obligation” should
be understood as other physical devices similar to IC
chips, smart cards or certificates, following a teleological interpretation. T-coins as virtual tokens should not
be defined as stored-value cards.
(3) T-coins are not for “multiple payment purposes”, as
gamers using 8591-Web are not “contracted merchants”
defined by the Act. The service of 8591-Web is different
from the meaning of multiple payment purposes for
stored-value cards.
(4) T-coins and 8591-Web do not have “automatic deduction” functions as indicated in Article 1 of the Act, i.e.
T-coins are “transferred” between various accounts as
tokens, but not automatically deducted as amounts in
other stored-value cards.
It should be noted that this judgment is only a district
court ruling and the prosecutor may still appeal the case
before the High Court. Although it seems unfitting to regulate T-coins through regulations for stored-value cards, the
8591-Web case does present a grey area between stored
value and payment devices. Taiwan promulgated the Act
governing Electronic Payment Institutions in 2015,11 and it
is important to observe how the two regulatory regimes
(e-payment and stored-value card) interact, especially in
borderline cases.
11 電子支付機構管理條例: http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/
LawAll.aspx?PCode=G0380237.
904 computer law & security review 33 (2017) 896–904