Read online:
Scan this QR
code with your
smart phone or
mobile device
to read online.
South African Journal of Business Management
ISSN: (Online) 2078-5976, (Print) 2078-5585
Page 1 of 12 Original Research
http://www.sajbm.org Open Access
Authors:
Nkhulang T. Matsepe1
Elma van der Lingen1
Affiliations:
1
Department of Engineering
and Technology
Management, Faculty of
Engineering, Built
Environment and Information
Technology, University
of Pretoria, Pretoria,
South Africa
Corresponding author:
Elma van der Lingen,
elma.vanderlingen@up.ac.za
Dates:
Received: 04 Dec. 2020
Accepted: 13 Jan. 2022
Published: 24 Feb. 2022
How to cite this article:
Matsepe, N.T., & Van der
Lingen, E. (2022).
Determinants of emerging
technologies adoption in the
South African financial sector.
South African Journal of
Business Management, 53(1),
a2493. https://doi.
org/10.4102/sajbm.
v53i1.2493
Copyright:
© 2022. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS. This work
is licensed under the
Creative Commons
Attribution License.
Introduction
The fourth industrial revolution (4IR) is rapidly transforming business processes and models
across a range of sectors. Emerging innovative technologies – such as artificial intelligence
(AI), machine learning (ML), distributed ledger technologies (DLT) and cloud computing –
present various opportunities for organisations that manage to adopt these capabilities
successfully. Studies have explored the implications of the 4IR for organisations of varying
sizes and across various industries (Barreto, Amaral, & Pereira, 2017; Centre of Excellence in
Financial Services, 2017; Haddud, Desouza, Khare, & Lee, 2017; Kunwar, 2019). For financial
services organisations, investment in AI and cloud computing will improve their ability to
implement emerging technologies most relevant to solving their critical business problems
(Propson & Galaski, 2020).
Emerging technologies such as blockchain present secure mechanisms for creating, transferring
and storing data (OECD, 2018). The analysis of large complex data sets, commonly referred to as
‘big data’, enables financial services organisations to model consumer-risk profiles accurately,
thus providing financial products that are tailored to address the consumer’s needs (Hassani,
Unger, & Beneki, 2020). Through interconnected ‘smart technological devices’, the internet of
things (IOT) enables financial organisations to generate big data (OECD, 2018). The successful
adoption of emerging technologies, therefore, may serve as a source of competitive advantage in
the modern economic environment.
Purpose: The fourth industrial revolution (4IR) enables firms to leverage various emerging
technologies to reduce operating costs, improve business efficiencies and gain competitive
advantage. This article uncovers the determinants influencing emerging technology adoption,
particularly artificial intelligence (AI), cloud computing and distributed ledger technologies
(DLT), in South African (SA) financial services firms.
Design/methodology/approach: Seventeen technology experts from the SA banking,
insurance, financial technology and financial regulation and compliance sectors were
interviewed. A semi-structured interview was used to conduct one-on-one interviews,
followed by a focus group interview. Qualitative data were analysed using a thematic
network analysis.
Findings/results: The results revealed that the determinants – adopter traits, technology
usability, industry characteristics, organisational leadership and organisational characteristics
– were influential towards technology adoption. It is suggested that the new model could be
strengthened further by incorporating a new construct, leadership diversity, which had not
been previously proposed in the literature.
Practical implications: By understanding the influential adoption determinants, leaders can
take bold, calculated risks in adopting AI, cloud computing and DLT. However, the importance,
prior to adopting these technologies, of clearly understanding the need for them, and their
business benefits is also emphasised.
Originality/value: Research on the adoption of AI, cloud computing and DLT in the SA
financial sector is limited. This article leverages the models of the diffusion of innovations
(DOI), the technology–organisation–environment (TOE) and the technology readiness index
(TRI) to propose a new model that illustrates technology adoption in the SA financial sector at
individual and firm levels.
Keywords: technology adoption; 4IR; fourth industrial revolution; emerging technologies;
financial sector.
Determinants of emerging technologies adoption
in the South African financial sector
Read online:
Scan this QR
code with your
smart phone or
mobile device
to read online.
Page 2 of 12 Original Research
http://www.sajbm.org Open Access
Existing research exploring adoption determinants of
emerging technologies, particularly AI, ML, DLT and cloud
computing, in the context of the South African (SA) financial
sector is limited. This article contributes towards addressing
this gap and provides financial services organisations with
greater insights into the factors that influence the decision to
adopt and use emerging technologies. A novel contribution
is made through the development of a new technologyadoption model that seeks to model individuals’ adoption
behaviour in their personal and work environments. The
article also explores the adoption challenges encountered by
financial services organisations during the adoption of these
technologies, enabling technology leaders in the sector to
revise and improve adoption strategies.
Literature review
Financial technology
The literature presents a compelling argument for the
adoption of digital technologies in the financial sector.
According to Alt, Beck and Smits (2018), technology-driven
financial solutions can digitally transform entire value chains
and positively impact banking clients, channels (bank
branches and online platforms) and traditional financial
services providers (FSPs), for example, insurers, banks, nonbanks and interbank system networks. Financial technology
(fintech) combines innovative business models with
technology solutions to facilitate the provision of daily
financial services (Md Husin, Haron, & Aziz, 2020, p. 13). For
FSPs such as insurers, fintech solutions present opportunities
to innovate across processes including client advisory
management and risk management. For example, big data
enable insurers to offer personalised risk premiums to their
clients (Puschmann, 2017). Studies further suggest that
various factors influence fintech adoption across different
global locations (Arner, Barberis, & Buckley, 2016).
For organisations and consumers in the West, fintech
adoption appears to be largely driven by the results of the
2008 financial crisis; whereas, in Africa, adopters are in
pursuit of economic opportunities (Arner et al., 2016). A
study by Saksonova and Kuzmina-Merlino (2017) noted that
fintech adoption in Latvia was very low compared with the
European financial sector. This was attributed to a lack of
public awareness regarding innovative financial products
and services. Strict regulatory requirements in the Latvian
financial sector also inhibited the development of fintech
start-up firms.
In addition to the 2008 financial crisis contributing towards
the emergence of fintech, Alt and Puschmann (2012) indicate
that this global disaster along with the continuously evolving
behaviour of banking customers, the emergence of nonbanking FSPs and the rate at which innovative information
technology (IT) solutions are diffusing into downstream
financial processes is driving the sector towards a more
customer-oriented landscape. A customer-oriented financial
services infrastructure increases the bargaining power of
technology end-users by introducing new interfaces to which
they can access financial services, thereby generating
opportunities for fintech start-up firms to penetrate the sector
(Alt & Puschmann, 2012). The adoption of fintech solutions
in the sector has also generated concerns regarding the extent
to which financial regulators supervise these technologies.
Zalan and Toufaily (2017) discovered that technology
executives in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA)
region believed that fintech start-ups were not as regulated
as incumbent banking institutions, and were, thus, more
favourably positioned to disrupt the banking sector.
However, in a contrasting statement, Zalan and Toufaily
(2017) indicated that stringent regulatory requirements for
financial advice prevented fintech start-ups from offering
lower fees to consumers in the region. Fintech is an emerging
concept and has not yet been formally supervised by financial
regulators in the region. This also contributes to the varying
opinions about the extent of fintech regulation in the MENA
region. The rapid development of fintech products coupled
with the significant rate at which non-regulated fintech
providers have entered the financial market, has presented
significant challenges for financial regulators around the
world (Gerlach, Simmons, & Lam, 2016).
The consequences of inadequate regulatory oversight are
illustrated by the bankruptcy of Ezubao, a peer-to-peer (P2P)
lending platform in China which was suspected to have
defrauded over 900 000 victims (Albrecht, Morales, Baldwin,
& Scott, 2017; Wang, 2018). This platform facilitated financial
lending to individuals who had been denied loans by banks
because they were deemed to be ‘high risk’ (Saksonova &
Kuzmina-Merlino, 2017). As the adoption of emerging
technologies in the SA financial sector increases, regulators
will need to play a more critical role in protecting customers
against incurring financial losses.
The South African Reserve Bank (SARB) has acknowledged
this risk and has emphasised the implications of inadequate
regulatory oversight as fintech adoption in SA increases
(SARB, 2017). The SARB will have to indicate clear guidelines
on how both fintech firms and incumbent banks will need to
comply with existing regulatory requirements. Failure to
achieve this may result in systemic implications that will put
the stability of the banking sector at risk (Coetzee, 2018).
By partnering with fintech firms early during the development
phase, regulators will be able to steer fintech development
towards acceptable regulatory frameworks and promote sound
financial innovation (Saksonova & Kuzmina-Merlino, 2017).
However, adopting a ‘wait-and-see’ approach may also enable
regulators to focus only on fintech innovations. These appear to
be significantly adopted by the market (Arner et al., 2016),
allowing regulators to determine whether the market adopts
fintech innovations before amending regulatory policies.
Technology adoption models
Studies have summarised the most popular individual and
firm-level technology-adoption models in information 
Page 3 of 12 Original Research
http://www.sajbm.org Open Access
systems research (Taherdoost, 2018; Van den Berg & Van der
Lingen, 2019). The complex social networks in financial
services organisations warrant an examination of adoption
behaviour at both individual and firm levels. This article
leverages constructs from the diffusion of innovations (DOI),
technology-organisation-environment (TOE) and technology
readiness index (TRI) models to examine technology adoption.
Diffusion of innovations
The DOI model has its roots in sociology, and has four main
elements: time, the innovation, channels of communication
and the social system (Rogers & Shoemaker, 1983). The
model considers the transfer of innovations within social
systems via appropriate channels of communication over
time to predict users’ adoption patterns (Rogers & Shoemaker,
1983; Taherdoost, 2018).
In addition to the main elements of innovation diffusion, the
DOI model has three main characteristics: innovation
characteristics, adopter characteristics and the innovationdecision process (Taherdoost, 2018). The innovation
characteristics are trialability, relative advantage and
complexity (Rogers & Shoemaker, 1983). Adopters are
characterised as early adopters, innovators, laggards, early
majority and late majority (Rogers & Shoemaker, 1983;
Taherdoost, 2018). The innovation-decision process outlines
five phases of an information-seeking process in which the
potential adopters are encouraged to reduce their perceived
uncertainty about a technological innovation and thus
increase adoption (Miranda, Farias, Schwartz, Pascualote, &
De Almeida, 2016).
Technology–organisation–environment framework
The TOE framework was developed as a way to unveil the
dimensions of an organisation’s context that affect the rate
at which innovations are adopted (Aboelmaged, 2014).
The framework consists of three contextual dimensions:
technological, organisational and environmental
(Aboelmaged, 2014; Al-jabri & Alabdulhadi, 2016). The
technological context describes adopters’ perceptions of
the technology’s attributes, for example, perceived benefits
and ease of use; the organisational context examines the
organisational characteristics such as firm size and
management structure; and the environmental context
describes the firm’s interaction with other firms, regulatory
bodies and consumers (Amini & Bakri, 2015; Awa, Ojiabo, &
Orokor, 2017; Tornatzky & Fleischer in Lin, 2014). Unlike
the DOI model, the TOE framework focuses solely on firmlevel technology adoption whilst also incorporating
environmental aspects (Amini & Bakri, 2015).
Scholars (Aboelmaged, 2014; Lin, 2014; Lin & Lin, 2008) have
examined the TOE framework to validate its theoretical
depth and effectiveness in examining readiness for various
innovations. Aboelmaged (2014) found that the TOE
determinants – such as anticipated benefits and firm size,
amongst others – influenced elements of e-maintenance
technology readiness. Competitive pressure was found to
influence electronic business (e-business) diffusion (Lin &
Lin, 2008), whilst the readiness of e-maintenance in
manufacturing firms was not influenced by this determinant
(Aboelmaged, 2014).
Technology readiness index
‘Technology readiness’ describes an individual’s propensity
to embrace new technology to accomplish goals in his or her
work lives or homes (Parasuraman & Colby (2001) in Lai,
2017). The TRI model measures the extent to which an
individual is ready to accept and use new technologies, and
has four dimensions: optimism, innovativeness, discomfort
and insecurity (Nugroho & Fajar, 2017; Nugroho, Susilo,
Fajar, & Rahmawati, 2018). High levels of optimism and
innovativeness promote technology adoption, whilst an
individual’s level of discomfort and insecurity inhibit
adoption (Aboelmaged, 2014; Awa et al., 2017). The
technology readiness level categorises individuals into
laggards, paranoids, sceptics, pioneers or explorers.
Regarding 4IR technologies in the financial sector, laggards
may prefer banking via traditional physical banking channels
(such as visiting the bank branches) over modern digital
banking platforms. These users are generally the last group
to adopt emerging technology (Nugroho et al., 2018).
Innovations excite paranoids; however, their perception of
technology is also driven by some elements of fear, and so
these users will consider risk factors such as the regulatory
implications of P2P lending before completely adopting the
technology. Sceptics have a low motivation to accept
innovations. These users must, therefore, be exposed to the
potential benefits of incurring lower banking fees before they
can accept 4IR technologies. Pioneers show significant
optimism about innovations; however, these users will
also stop using the technology if they encounter any
significant challenges (Nugroho et al., 2018). Lastly, explorers
are typically the first group of users to try out new technology,
and will eagerly commit to sharing data about
their driving patterns with insurance firms to try out
innovative ‘pay-as-you-drive’ capabilities (Tselentis, Yannis,
& Vlahogianni, 2016).
Conceptual model
The limited research on influential determinants of AI, cloud
computing and DLT in the SA financial sector allows for a
deeper understanding of this phenomenon from the
individual’s perspective. This article proposes a conceptual
model towards addressing this gap. The model is formulated
with relevant constructs drawn from the DOI, TOE and TRI
models. Studies (Aboelmaged, 2014; Miranda et al., 2016;
Rogers & Shoemaker, 1983; Taherdoost, 2018) show that
these models have been widely referenced to model
technology adoption at individual and firm levels.
Table 1 outlines the proposed determinants and constructs of
the conceptual model illustrated in Figure 1. The conceptual
model is discussed in Table 1 to propose the influences
exerted by the model’s constructs.
Page 4 of 12 Original Research
http://www.sajbm.org Open Access
Figure 1 illustrates the proposed influences exerted by the
determinants and constructs outlined in Table 1.
The conceptual model in Figure 1 illustrates the proposed
individual level determinants: adopter traits and technology
usability, as well as the firm level determinants: industry
characteristics, organisational leadership and organisational
characteristics. The development of this model along with
the proposed influences exerted by the model’s constructs on
adoption use behaviour is discussed in the following section.
Effects of adopter traits on innovation adoption
‘Adopter traits’ describe an individual’s innate ability to
acquire new technical skills, as well as his or her inclination
to try innovations that optimise his or her current methods of
working. Adopter traits can be characterised by constructs
such as knowledge of innovation, technical skill and personal
innovativeness (Awa et al., 2017; Nugroho et al., 2018; Rogers
& Shoemaker, 1983). It is proposed that adopter traits
(proposition – P1 in the conceptual model) will influence AI,
cloud computing and DLT adoption.
Aboelmaged (2014) and Nugroho and Fajar (2017) state
that adopter traits such as personal innovativeness and
user optimism promote innovation adoption, whilst
insecurity and discomfort impede innovation adoption.
Saksonova and Kuzmina-Merlino (2017) attributed the low
penetration of fintech innovations in Latvia to a lack of
knowledge about the innovations. Jaafar, Ramayah, AbdulAziz and Saad (2007) and Aboelmaged (2014) noted that
employees who were highly rated in technical skills had a
higher likelihood of being effective in technology readiness
and support. It is proposed that knowledge of the
innovation, technical skill and personal innovativeness
(Propositions P1-1, P1-2, and P1-3 in the conceptual model)
will positively influence AI, cloud computing and DLT
adoption.
Effects of technology usability on innovation
adoption
‘Technology usability’ refers to the extent to which an
organisation believes that a technology can be learned and
effectively integrated (Van den Berg & Van der Lingen,
2019). Awa et al. (2017) found technology usability to be a
critical factor in the adoption of innovative technologies in
Nigerian service-based SMEs. This was attributed to the
inhibition of adoption caused by complex, sophisticated
information systems. It is proposed that technology usability
(Proposition P2) will influence AI, cloud computing and
DLT adoption.
TABLE 1: Determinants and constructs supporting the conceptual model.
Number Determinant Model constructs
1 Adopter traits • Knowledge of innovation (DOI)
• Technical skill (TOE)
• Personal innovativeness (TRI)
2 Technology usability • Trialability (DOI)
• Complexity (DOI)
• User insecurity (TRI)
3 Industry characteristics • Competitive pressure (TOE)
• Regulatory support (TOE)
• Customer demands (TOE)
4 Organisational leadership • Opinion leadership (DOI)
• Risk orientation (DOI)
5 Organisational characteristics • Firm size (TOE)
• Top management support (TOE)
• Communication mechanisms (TOE)
DOI, diffusion of innovations; TRI, Technology readiness index; TOE, Technology–organisation–
environment.
Knowledge of innovaon
P1-1 P1-2 P1-3
P2-1
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P2-2 P2-3
P3-3
P3-2
P3-1 P4-2
P4-1
P5-1
P5-2
P5-3
Technical
skill Personal
innovaveness
Trialability Complexity
User
insecurity
Adopon use behaviour
Customer
demands
Regulatory
support
Compeve
pressure
Risk
orientaon Opinion
leadership
Communicaon mechanisms
Top management support Firm size
Adopter traits
Technology
usability
Individual level
determinants
Industry
characteriscs
Organisaonal
leadership
Organisaonal
characteriscs
Firm level
determinants
FIGURE 1: Conceptual model for the adoption of fourth industrial revolution technology in the South African financial sector.
Page 5 of 12 Original Research
http://www.sajbm.org Open Access
Cheung, Chang and Lai (2000), and Al-Jabri and Sohail (2012)
described ‘complexity’ as the extent to which an innovation
could be considered relatively difficult to comprehend, and
found that it inhibited the adoption of internet-based
technologies. Au and Kauffman (2008), Mallat (2007) and
Ondrus and Pigneur (2006) and Al-jabri and Sohail (2012)
found that the perceived complexity of mobile banking
technology negatively influenced users’ intentions to adopt
the technology. It is proposed that complexity (Proposition
P2-1) will negatively influence AI, cloud computing and DLT
adoption.
‘Trialability’ describes the ability of a user to experiment with
an innovation before adopting it (Al-jabri & Sohail, 2012). As
potential adopters experiment with an innovation, their
comfort increases, thus improving the chances of them
adopting it (Agarwal & Prasad, 1998 and Rogers (2003), and
Al-jabri & Sohail, 2012). It is proposed that trialability
(Proposition P2-2) will positively influence AI, cloud
computing and DLT adoption.
‘User insecurity’ describes the user’s distrust of the new
technology (Nugroho & Fajar, 2017). The greater the users’
insecurity, the more they feel unsafe when using the
technology, which in turn influences their adoption decision.
Walczuch, Lemmink and Streukens (2007) found that
insecure employees in financial services firms had a negative
perception of the ease of use of IT. It is proposed that user
insecurity (Proposition P2-3) will negatively influence AI,
cloud computing and DLT adoption.
Effects of industry characteristics on innovation
adoption
‘Industry characteristics’ describe the extent to which a firm
believes that the industry in which the firm operates is
conducive to innovation adoption (Van den Berg & Van der
Lingen, 2019). Partnerships between financial regulators and
fintech firms have had the potential to strengthen innovation
in the sector (Saksonova & Kuzmina-Merlino, 2017). Alt and
Puschmann (2012) indicated that the evolving needs of
banking customers enabled fintech firms to enter the market
and offer customer-oriented financial solutions. It is proposed
that industry characteristics (Proposition P3) will influence
AI, cloud computing and DLT adoption.
‘Competitive pressure’ refers to the pressure arising from the
probability of losing competitive advantage (Lin, 2014). Lin
and Lin (2008) found competitive pressure to have a positive
influence on the external diffusion of e-business. Verma and
Chaurasia (2019) found competitive pressure to have a
significant influence on the adoption of big data analytics. It
is proposed that competitive pressure (Proposition P3-1) will
positively influence AI, cloud computing and DLT adoption.
‘Regulatory support’ describes the assistance provided by
regulatory bodies in promoting IT innovation by firms in a
particular industry (Ling in Amini & Bakri, 2015). Stringent
compliance and data privacy laws may inhibit firms’ abilities
to innovate. Regulatory support was found to positively
influence the adoption of cloud computing technologies in
Malaysian SMEs (Amini & Bakri, 2015). It is proposed that
regulatory support (Proposition P3-2) will positively
influence AI, cloud computing and DLT adoption.
‘Customer demands’, amongst other environmental factors,
exert normative pressures in an organisation, thus influencing
innovation adoption (Awa et al., 2017). Awa et al. (2017)
found that the presence of normative pressures positively
influenced technology adoption amongst small services
enterprises in West Africa. It is proposed that customer
demands (Proposition P3-3) will positively influence AI,
cloud computing and DLT adoption.
Effects of organisational leadership on
innovation adoption
The tactical and strategic direction of an organisation is
largely influenced by the peculiar attributes of powerful
actors (Awa et al., 2017). Leadership plays a significant role
in motivating strategic flexibility and generating higher
business benefits (Kristianto, Ajmal, Tenkorang, & Hussain,
2012). Aziz, Md Rami, Razali and Mahadi (2020) discovered
authentic leadership to play a significant role in managing
technological changes within organisations in the oil and
gas industry. Furthermore, Schepers, Wetzels and De
Ruyter (2005) proposed that organisational leadership
(Proposition P4) will influence AI, cloud computing and
DLT adoption.
‘Opinion leadership’ refers to the extent to which a leader can
frequently and informally influence other individuals’
attitudes (Rogers & Shoemaker, 1983). These leaders are
characterised as having significant access to external
communication, possessing high socio-economic status and
exhibiting high levels of innovativeness (Rogers & Shoemaker,
1983). It is proposed that opinion leadership (Proposition P4-
1) will positively influence AI, cloud computing and DLT
adoption.
Risk-seeking executives are more likely to pursue aggressive
corporate growth strategies, and are, thus, more likely to
embrace innovative initiatives, including technologies (Czaja
& Shari, (1998) and Venkatesh & Morris (2000), in Van den
Berg & Van der Lingen, 2019). It is proposed that decision
makers’ risk orientation (Proposition P4-2) will positively
influence AI, cloud computing and DLT adoption.
Effects of organisational characteristics on
innovation adoption
‘Organisational characteristics’ describe the degree to which
the attributes of the firm are perceived to promote or restrict
innovation adoption. It is proposed that organisational
characteristics (Proposition P5) will influence AI, cloud
computing and DLT adoption.
Larger firms tend to be more comfortable and assured when
faced with decisions to adopt innovations (Aboelmaged, 
Page 6 of 12 Original Research
http://www.sajbm.org Open Access
2014). Arslan, Bagchi and Kirs (2019) indicated that larger
firms were more likely to adopt innovative information
communication technologies owing to their comparative
resource advantage. It is proposed that increasing firm size
(Proposition P5-1) will positively influence AI, cloud
computing and DLT adoption.
Top management support is amongst the key contributing
factors to a supportive work environment (Al-jabri &
Alabdulhadi, 2016). Adoption levels of cloud computing
technologies in Malaysian SMEs were higher when supported
by top management (Amini & Bakri, 2015). It is proposed that
top management support (Proposition P5-2) will positively
influence AI, cloud computing and DLT adoption.
Rogers and Shoemaker (1983) highlight the positive influence
that open communication structures have on innovation
diffusion, as information can be disseminated across a wider
group of individuals. Lee, Lee and Schuman (2005) indicated
that communication factors could serve as significant
predictors in the adoption of electronic banking technologies.
It is proposed that effective communication mechanisms
(Proposition P5-3) will positively influence AI, cloud
computing and DLT adoption.
Methodology
The phenomenological research philosophy is commonly
adopted in management research, owing to the dynamic
nature of organisational culture (Saunders, Lewis, & Thornhill,
2000, p. 86). Although the analysis and interpretation of
qualitative data may be a complex exercise, phenomenological
research enables a thorough understanding into people’s
meanings (Easterby-Smith, Thorpe, Jackson, & Jasperen, 2018).
An exploratory research design was used to uncover adoption
determinants and their influential constructs. A qualitative
approach was used to generate textual data via semi-structured
interviews and a focus group interview. The focus group
interview consisted of four respondents from the banking
sector, fintech fraternity, regulatory and compliance, as well as
the insurance sector, respectively. It is important to note the
potential threats to a qualitative study’s reliability and validity
including participant error and bias, as well as observer error
and bias, respectively (Saunders et al., 2000, p. 86).
Triangulation using the literature review’s findings, one-onone interviews and a focus group interview was used to
strengthen the study’s reliability. Because of the limited
number of participants interviewed in this study, it follows
then that external validity, also referred to as generalisability,
could pose a threat to the research. The results drawn from
this research could then be used as grounding theory towards
generating further generalisable research on the adoption of
AI, cloud computing and DLT in the SA financial sector.
The semi-structured interview enabled the generation of rich
in-depth information from the respondents’ perspectives
(McCallum & Viviers, 2020). It is presented in Appendix 1.
The interviews were recorded and data were transcribed as
text and coded to eliminate irrelevant data.
Data were collected from purposively-selected technology
experts in the SA financial sector. Selection was based on the
respondents’ extensive experience in the development of
technology solutions and the administration of financial
regulatory and compliance policies in the SA financial sector.
Interviews were conducted using virtual online platforms
including Google Hangouts, Microsoft Teams and Zoom.
Seventeen respondents were interviewed from the following
sectors: banking (five), insurance (three), fintech (five) and
financial regulation and compliance (four respondents).
Table 2 outlines the respondents’ roles, areas of expertise and
total working experience.
A thematic network analysis was used to analyse qualitative
data emanating from the interviews. Thematic network
diagrams are web-like structures which systematically
summarise the main themes within textual data (AttrideStirling, 2001). The themes generated from the qualitative
data consisted of basic themes, organising themes and global
themes. Basic themes are the most lower-ordered themes
evident in the text and provide little information on their
own. They are categorised to form an organising theme.
Organising themes are categories of basic themes which
have been organised into clusters of similar ideas. And
lastly, global themes are super-ordinate themes, which
summarise the key metaphors in the text holistically
(Attride-Stirling, 2001).
TABLE 2: Respondents’ roles, fields of expertise and experience.
Respondent’s
number
Respondent’s role Area of expertise Working
experience
(in years)
[1] Data scientist AI and ML 4
[2] Data and reporting
specialist
Cloud computing
technology
16
[3] Managing
director/4IR advisory
council member
Financial risk, compliance
and governance
17
[4] Blockchain architect DLT 13
[5] Co-founder and CEO Conversational AI/Fintech 11
[6] Lead machine learning
engineer
AI, ML and cloud computing
technology
6
[7] Data science manager AI, ML and cloud computing
technology
4
[8] Anti-money laundering
analyst
Financial risk, compliance
and governance
14
[9] Technical founder and
CEO
Fintech 5
[10] Machine learning
specialist
AI and ML 5
[11] Innovation and business
development / author
Fintech 4
[12] Statistical data scientist AI and ML 10
[13] IT and data risk
manager
Financial risk, compliance
and governance
5
[14] Head of merchant
analytics
Fintech 10
[15] Enterprise architect Cloud computing
technology
21
[16] Data scientist AI and ML 8
[17] Business development
manager
Financial risk, compliance,
and governance
19
CEO, Chief Executive Officer; AI, artificial intelligence; ML, machine learning; DLT, distributed
ledger technologies; 4IR, fourth industrial revolution.
Page 7 of 12 Original Research
http://www.sajbm.org Open Access
Ethical considerations
This article followed all ethical standards for research
without direct contact with human or animal subjects.
Results and discussion
Individual level determinant
The results on individual level determinants, namely,
adopter traits and technology utilisation, and their respective
constructs are discussed in the following subsections.
Adopter traits
Knowledge of innovation: Awareness, exposure and a highlevel understanding of 4IR technologies were found to
influence technology adoption. An acute exposure to ML and
AI was found to influence short-term usage intent, whereas
long-term use behaviour was significantly influenced by the
need for the technologies in the lives of consumers. This was
prevalent amongst respondents in the banking sector.
Exposure was influenced by individual adopters’ personal
experiences with the technology. For example, individuals
who had been exposed to the negative aspects of emerging
technologies were less likely to adopt these technologies. It
was, thus, crucial to have credible sources introducing
concepts of 4IR technologies to potential adopters in order to
improve adoption.
Adequate knowledge of emerging technologies, particularly
AI and DLT, had a role to play in reducing the fears arising
from a lack of understanding of these technologies.
Respondents in the insurance and financial regulatory sectors
were concerned about potential job losses arising from the
proliferation of 4IR technologies in the sector. These findings
are supported by the following statements:
[4] ‘[… I]f we say that blockchain is used for hiding illicit
activities from government, they’re most likely to stay away
from it.’
[3] ‘The unions are acutely aware that robots are going to replace
humans, and are not yet at the point of understanding what we
are saying when we say unemployment might not increase.’
These findings support proposition P1-1, and suggest that
knowledge of the innovation positively influences technology
adoption.
Technical skill: Technical training and sufficient work
experience were beneficial for the adoption of 4IR technologies
amongst working professionals. However, this was not as
relevant to end-users. Instead, end-users were more
concerned about the value that the technologies would add
to their lives than with the technical components comprising
these technologies.
Sufficient technical understanding of emerging technologies by
professionals enabled them to develop technologies that were
beneficial to their customers or the financial institutions that
employed them. For example, a thorough understanding of
DLT and ML enabled investment banks to research and develop
technology that would reduce interbank settlement periods
from days to minutes. Retail banks were also able to leverage AI
to improve profitability whilst reducing operating costs.
These findings support proposition P1-2, and suggest that
technical skill positively influences technology adoption.
Personal innovativeness: Personal innovativeness was
characterised by basic constructs such as the willingness to
innovate, a curiosity about exploration and the ability to take
risks and try out new technologies as they become available.
These basic constructs had a stronger influence on
individuals’ (both professionals and customers) adoption
intent and use behaviour than those that characterised the
technical skill organising construct.
Individuals who were willing to try out ML and AI were more
likely to adopt these technologies than individuals who had the
technical skill but lacked the willingness. This was prevalent
amongst respondents from the banking and insurance sectors.
Whenever individuals had the curiosity to explore the benefits
that the bank could harness from these technologies, they were
able to motivate the acquisition of resources (budget allocation,
hiring of skilled professionals, etc.) for technology adoption.
These findings are supported by the following statement:
[1] ‘I found that your sponsor doesn’t have to be an AI expert,
but must have the willingness to adopt data-driven principles
and have the willingness to see that data is useful.’
These findings support proposition P1-3, and suggest that
personal innovativeness has a strong positive influence on
technology adoption. It can, thus, be inferred from the
findings that adopter traits are an influential determinant of
the adoption intent and use behaviour with emerging 4IR
technologies in the SA financial sector.
Technology usability
Trialability: The ability of data scientists to experiment with
AI prior to large-scale development reduced the risk of
failure. This culture encouraged technologists to ‘fail fast and
recover quickly’, thus contributing to innovation. Deploying
ML algorithms in a phased approach increased the chances
of obtaining successful outcomes. It also enabled data
scientists to demonstrate the benefits of AI to the rest of the
business, and garner support from executives. The following
statement supports this finding:
[4] ‘Introducing it through small iterations, just changing one
non-core function of the bank and putting that on a decentralised
network and showing value, and it gets the right kind of people
at the right levels to get excited about the technology.’
Customers also preferred to test new technology before fully
adopting and using it in long-term. This also minimised the
potential risks associated with the technology, creating a
sense of comfort for the customer. The following statement
supports this finding:
Page 8 of 12 Original Research
http://www.sajbm.org Open Access
[2] ‘People like to try things to see that it will work and benefit
them.’
These findings support proposition P2-1, and suggest that
trialability positively influences technology adoption.
Complexity: Customers were very quick to abandon the use
of a new technology if they experienced it as complex.
This increased firms’ technology marketing efforts, and
subsequently the costs associated with the technology. At the
firm level, cloud computing platforms increasingly became
the preferred data storage mechanism owing to the reduced
maintenance costs. The complexity associated with DLT
inhibited firms from trying out blockchain-related technologies.
The following statement supports these findings:
[4] ‘Some companies are saying that this type of technology will
never work because of the sheer complexity involved.’
Delays caused by the complexity of deploying AI models
rendered the models irrelevant to solving the business
problems for which they were specifically designed. These
models then had to be retrained with new data, which further
reduced confidence in the adoption of AI. This was prevalent
amongst fintech firms.
These findings support proposition P2-2, and suggest that
complexity has a negative influence on technology adoption.
User insecurity: Professionals in the banking and insurance
sectors were concerned that cloud computing and AI would
make their current technical expertise irrelevant, potentially
leading to job losses. This discomfort was exacerbated by the
high unemployment levels in SA, and generated scepticism
about the adoption of these technologies. Cyber security
concerns also inhibited adoption, particularly in banking
institutions. Professionals were also concerned about the
misrepresentation of AI and ML and the types of problems
these technologies could solve. It was feared that ongoing
misrepresentation would generate a negative sentiment
about the technology, and contribute to reduced adoption.
The following statement supports these findings:
[6] ‘[…P]eople are just like so fed up of how much under-delivery
that AI and machine learning is bringing in. Because people
don’t understand what it is, but they’ve pitched it in the wrong
way.’
These findings support proposition P2-3, and suggest that
user insecurity negatively influences technology adoption. It
can, thus, be inferred that technology usability is an influential
determinant of the adoption of emerging 4IR technologies in
the SA financial sector.
Firm level determinant
The results on firm level determinants, namely, industry
characteristics, organisational leadership and organisational
characteristics, and their respective constructs are discussed
in the following subsection.
Industry characteristics
Competitive pressures: Banks relied significantly on
technology as a source of competitive advantage, and this
generated interest in AI adoption in the sector. The agility of
fintech firms exerted pressure on incumbent financial
institutions to accelerate innovation.
Unlike AI, cloud computing technology did not generate a
clear-cut competitive advantage for adopting firms. This was
attributed to the costs, which often reversed the benefits of
the technology. Firms were motivated by the ability to
leverage cloud computing platforms to service clients more
seamlessly, thus gaining a competitive edge over rivals. The
following statement supports these findings:
[6] ‘And if the competitors are making use of machine learning
and AI, and that’s caused a lot of excitement in the market, and
people are leaning in that direction, then people are bound to
feel the pressure, and they’re going to try and adopt these things
even if they aren’t ready for it.’
These findings support proposition P3-1, and suggest that
competitive pressure positively influences technology
adoption.
Regulatory support: Financial regulators in SA were reported
to have consulted widely about the adoption of 4IR
technologies. However, the reactive nature of the regulators
inhibited adoption, as innovating firms would be expected to
explain their innovations to the regulators. This was
attributed to a lack of understanding of the technology.
A proof-of-concept called ‘Project Khokha’, facilitated by the
SARB, was used as one example of the consultative approach
taken by regulators to promote the adoption of DLT and
improve the settlements infrastructure in the banking sector.
Amendments to the existing policy framework were
recommended to improve the industry’s adoption of emerging
technologies whilst maintaining regulatory oversight on the use
of these technologies.
The regulation of fintech start-ups was minimal to nonexistent. This was attributed to the nature of the data used by
fintech firms, as it was deemed to be less sensitive than that
used by regulated financial institutions. A lack of understanding
of the risks associated with emerging innovations also
contributed to the lack of regulatory oversight.
These findings support proposition P3-2, and indicate that
regulatory support positively influences technology adoption.
Customer demands: Clients with a significant stake in a
firm had a strong influence on the firm’s technology strategy,
including its adoption of emerging technologies. For
fintech firms, shareholders could significantly influence
senior management to incorporate AI in their innovation
strategies. Investment banks also yielded to the demands of
clients with a significant financial stake in the bank.
However, individual retail banking clients and insurance 
Page 9 of 12 Original Research
http://www.sajbm.org Open Access
policy holders had a weaker influence on the technology
adopted by their service providers. These clients were
increasingly using digital channels as a way to engage. The
wide adoption of smart devices by individual and retail
clients was a strong motivating factor for fintech start-ups as
they built innovations that leveraged smart devices.
Regulators were also prompted to establish working groups
to respond to the rate at which regulated institutions were
adopting ML, AI and DLT. The following statement supports
these findings:
[4] ‘The biggest thing for us as an investment bank is that we
need to serve our customers the best way possible.’
These findings support proposition P3-3, and suggest that
customer demands positively influence technology adoption.
It can, thus, further be suggested from the findings that
industry characteristics (proposition P3) are an influential
determinant towards the adoption use behaviour of AI,
cloud computing and DLT in the SA financial sector.
Organisational leadership
Opinion leadership: Opinion leaders played a significant
role in persuading the organisation to accept 4IR technologies.
In the banking environment, these leaders had great foresight
into market trends, and were able to influence senior
management to support the development of AI, DLT and ML
platforms. The following statement supports these findings:
[1] ‘When he speaks, everyone wants to listen. I think he was one
of the early adopters.’
Leaders who inspired employees to take part-ownership of
the innovation strategy were more effective in influencing
banking institutions to adopt 4IR technologies. This created a
community of leaders in the bank, instead of a single focal
point of leadership.
In fintech firms, leaders were also founders and or
shareholders in the firms, and had a significant influence
over the firms’ technology strategies. This generated a lack of
diversity in the leadership opinion governing the firm, and
negatively impacted the chances of successfully adopting
innovations. Diversity in the leadership structures was
necessary to interrogate the business need and clearly
articulate the capabilities of AI for the adopting firm.
These findings provide support for proposition P4-1, and
suggest that opinion leadership positively influences
technology adoption. In addition to opinion leadership,
leadership diversity was also found to influence technology
adoption positively.
Decision-maker risk orientation: Emerging 4IR technologies
represented uncharted territories in which the potential
benefits of technologies such as AI were not yet fully
understood. Therefore, it was crucial for leaders in a firm to
acquire resources in the awareness that the expected benefits
might not be realised. The following statement supports these
findings:
[4] ‘Leaders will understand that this is a nascent technology,
and you must be willing to take some level of risk.’
These findings suggest that the decision-makers’ risk
orientation positively influences technology adoption, in line
with proposition P4-2. It can be inferred from these findings
that organisational leadership is an influential determinant
of the adoption of emerging 4IR technologies in the SA
financial sector.
Organisational characteristics
Firm size: Fintech start-up firms were more agile than larger
incumbent financial institutions, and had insignificant legacy
constraints (people, processes and technologies) to overcome
when adopting innovations. In the context of cloud computing
technologies, fintech firms were swift to replace on-site data
centres with cloud infrastructure. Fintech firms implementing
conversational AI technology were able to react swiftly
to their customers’ demands, constantly improving their
product offerings to suit their market.
Larger incumbent financial institutions, particularly regulated
banks and insurance firms, were more risk-averse, and had
significant protocols in place that hindered the proliferation
of emerging 4IR technologies in these organisations. However,
where technology adoption was successful, these institutions
were able to reach larger adoption scales owing to the
significant number of resources at their disposal. The
following statement supports these findings:
[5] ‘When smaller companies take on the new technology, they
do it faster and go into market with it faster, but the bigger
companies are slower in adopting, but they can implement them
easier because they have the financial capacity.’
These findings, therefore, do not support proposition P5-1,
and indicate that neither increasing nor decreasing the firm’s
size influences technology adoption.
Top management support: Senior executives in the banking
sector have a key role to play in articulating the necessity of
AI technology adoption by a bank. These leaders could
incentivise ideation processes in the organisation, motivating
employees to solve business problems using ML. Senior
managers were also tasked with outlining the bank’s strategic
direction, and so were not expected to take a conservative
approach to innovation. Having innovation champions at the
senior executive level was also essential to acquiring financial
resources and communicating the need for innovation
amongst other senior business executives. The following
statement supports these findings:
[2] ‘I think it is more about having a vision and strategy from a
CIO level of management to accept that technology needs to be
part of the overall vision and roadmap.’
Departments in the banks whose CEOs were cognisant of
cloud computing technology encountered fewer challenges
during the deployment of this technology. Amongst insurers,
CIOs who managed to articulate an innovation strategy 
Page 10 of 12 Original Research
http://www.sajbm.org Open Access
clearly, to facilitate transparency and to celebrate successes
were more effective in encouraging cloud computing
technology adoption in their departments.
These findings support the proposition P5-2, and suggest that
top management support positively influences technology
adoption.
Communication mechanisms: Flatter organisational structures
were more effective in disseminating information across the
organisation, and thus were more conducive to innovation.
Effective communication mechanisms enabled senior bank
managers to diffuse strategy across the organisation and enable
employees to communicate their innovative technological
ideas to senior management. The following statements support
these findings:
[2] ‘[… C]ommunication is very important, and it should be a
two-way thing so that people can give feedback and suggestions
and present the skills that they have.’
[7] ‘To show that the flat system works, me as the manager of the
data science division, I was able to communicate with the CEOs
of the retail division and engage my teams’ work to the … group
CEO.’
These findings support proposition P5-3, and suggest that
effective communication structures positively influence
technology adoption. It can, thus, further be suggested from
the findings that effective communication structure
(proposition P5) is an influential determinant towards the
adoption use behaviour of AI, cloud computing and DLT in
the SA financial sector.
Conclusion
This article reveals the determinants influencing 4IR
technology adoption in SA financial services firms. This was
obtained by means of a proposed model using existing
determinants from the DOI, TOE and TRI adoption models.
A semi-structured interview tool was used to assess
qualitatively the validity of the model in a series of one-onone interviews, followed by a focus group discussion.
The results indicated that at the individual level, the model
constructs of knowledge of innovation, technical skill,personal
innovativeness and trialability promoted technology
adoption, whilst complexity and user insecurity inhibited
adoption. At the firm level, competitive pressure, regulatory
support, customer demands, decision-maker risk orientation,
opinion leadership, effective communication mechanisms
and top management supported adoption. Firm size was
found to have no influence on technology adoption. The
results validated the model in predicting the adoption of
emerging 4IR technologies in the SA financial sector at both
individual and firm levels.
This study contributes to the limited research on this topic by
presenting a new model to assist technology leaders in better
understanding the determinants of 4IR technology adoption.
Although leaders are encouraged to take calculated risks in
adopting technology, articulating the business need for these
technologies is also emphasised.
This research was limited to the SA financial sector, and
focused on the banking, insurance, fintech and financial
regulation and compliance sectors. It also examined the
adoption of AI, ML, DLT and cloud computing technologies.
Future studies could focus on a specific emerging 4IR
capability to generate in-depth knowledge on the topic.
Quantitative studies would improve the ability to generalise
findings. The findings also indicated that the new model
could be strengthened by incorporating a new construct,
leadership diversity, which had not been proposed in the
literature.
Acknowledgements
The authors are thankful to the Graduate School of
Technology Management, University of Pretoria, for
permission to publish the results.
Competing interests
The authors have declared that no competing interest exists.
Authors’ contributions
Both authors contributed to the development and writing of
the article. N.T. Matsepe conducted the research as part of his
Master’s dissertation under the supervision of Prof E. van
der Lingen.
Funding information
This research received no specific grant from any funding
agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
Data availability
Raw data were generated at the University of Pretoria.
Derived data supporting the findings of this study are
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable
request.
Disclaimer
The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or
position of any affiliated agency of the authors.
References
Aboelmaged, M.G. (2014). Predicting e-readiness at firm-level: An analysis of
technological, organizational and environmental (TOE) effects on
e-maintenance readiness in manufacturing firms. International Journal of
Information Management, 34(5), 639–651. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijinfomgt.2014.05.002
Agarwal, R., & Prasad, J. (1998). A conceptual and operational definition of personal
innovativeness in the domain of information technology. Information Systems
Research, 9(2), 204–215. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.9.2.204
Albrecht, C., Morales, V., Baldwin, J.K., & Scott, S.D. (2017). Ezubao: A Chinese Ponzi
scheme with a twist. Journal of Financial Crime, 24(2), 56–259. https://doi.
org/10.1108/JFC-04-2016-0026
Page 11 of 12 Original Research
http://www.sajbm.org Open Access
Al-Jabri, I.M., & Alabdulhadi, M.H. (2016). Factors affecting cloud computing adoption:
Perspectives of IT professionals. International Journal of Business Information
Systems, 23(4), 389–405. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJBIS.2016.10000364
Al-Jabri, I.M., & Sohail, M.S. (2012). Mobile banking adoption: Application of
diffusion of innovation theory. Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, 13(4),
379–391.
Alt, R., Beck, R., & Smits, M.T. (2018). Fintech and the transformation of the financial
industry. Electronic Markets, 28(3), 235–243. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12525-
018-0310-9
Alt, R., & Puschmann, T. (2012). The rise of customer-oriented banking – Electronic
markets are paving the way for change in the financial industry. Electronic
Markets, 4(22), 203–215. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12525-012-0106-2
Amini, M., & Bakri, A. (2015). Cloud computing adoption by SMEs in the Malaysia: A
multi-perspective framework based on the DOI theory and TOE framework. Journal
of Information Technology & Information Systems Research, 9(2), 121–135.
Arner, D., Barberis, J., & Buckley, R. (2016). The evolution of fintech: A new post-crisis
paradigm? Georgetown Journal of International Law, 47, 1271–1319. https://doi.
org/10.2139/ssrn.2676553
Arslan, F., Bagchi, K.K., & Kirs, P. (2019). Factors implicated with firm-level ICT use in
developing economies. Journal of Global Information Technology Management,
22(3), 179–207. https://doi.org/10.1080/1097198X.2019.1642022
Attride-Stirling, J. (2001). Thematic networks: An analytic tool for qualitative
research. Qualitative Research, 1(3), 385–405. https://doi.org/10.1177/
146879410100100307
Au, Y.A., & Kauffman, R.J. (2008). The economics of mobile payments: Understanding
stakeholder issues for an emerging financial technology application. Electronic
Commerce Research and Applications, 7(2), 141–164. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
elerap.2006.12.004
Awa, H.O., Ojiabo, O.U., & Orokor, L.E. (2017). Integrated technology–Organisation–
Environment (T-O-E) taxonomies for technology adoption. Journal of Enterprise
Information Management, 30(6), 893–921. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-03-
2016-0079
Aziz, F., Md Rami, A., Razali, F., & Mahadi, N. (2020). The influence of leadership style
towards technology acceptance in organization. International Journal of Advanced
Science and Technology, 29(7), 218–225.
Barreto, L., Amaral, A., & Pereira, T. (2017). Industry 4.0 implications in logistics: An
overview. Procedia Manufacturing, 13, 1245–1252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
promfg.2017.09.045
Centre of Excellence in Financial Services. (2017). The impact of the 4th industrial
revolution on the South African financial services market. Johannesburg: Centre of
Excellence in Financial Services. Retrieved from www.Coefs.org.za.
Cheung, W., Chang, M.K., & Lai, V.S. (2000). Prediction of internet and world wide web
usage at work: A test of an extended Triandis model. Decision Support Systems,
30(1), 83–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-9236(00)00125-1
Coetzee, J. (2018). Strategic implications of fintech on South African retail banks.
South African Journal of Economic and Management Sciences, 21(1), 1–11.
https://doi.org/10.4102/sajems.v21i1.2455
Czaja, S., & Sharit, J. (1998). Age difference in attitudes towards computer. Journal of
Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences, 53(5), 329–341. https://doi.
org/10.1093/geronb/53B.5.P329
Easterby-Smith, M., Thorpe, R., Jackson, P.R., & Jasperen, L.J. (2018). Management &
business research (6th ed.). London: Sage.
Gerlach, C.A., Simmons, R., & Lam, S. (2016). U.S. regulation of FinTech – Recent
developments and challenges. Journal of Financial Transformation, 44, 87–96.
Haddud, A., Desouza, A., Khare, A., & Lee, H. (2017). Examining potential benefits and
challenges associated with the Internet of things integration in supply chains.
Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management, 28(8), 1055–1085. https://
doi.org/10.1108/JMTM-05-2017-0094
Hassani, H., Unger, S., & Beneki, C. (2020). Big data and actuarial science. Big Data and
Cognitive Computing, 4(4), 40. https://doi.org/10.3390/bdcc4040040
Jaafar, M., Ramayah, T., Abdul-Aziz, A., & Saad, B. (2007). Technology readiness among
managers of Malaysian construction firms. Engineering, Construction and
Architectural Management, 14(2), 180–191. https://doi.org/10.1108/096999
80710731290
Kristianto, Y., Ajmal, M., Tenkorang, R.A., & Hussain, M. (2012). A study of technology
adoption in manufacturing firms. Journal of Manufacturing Technology
Management, 23(2), 198–211. https://doi.org/10.1108/17410381211202197
Kunwar, M. (2019). Artificial intelligence in finance: Understanding how automation
and machine learning is transforming the financial industry. Dissertation. Centria
University of Applied Sciences.
Lai, P.C. (2017). The literature review of technology adoption models and
theories for the novelty technology. Journal of Information Systems and
Technology Management, 14(1), 21–38. https://doi.org/10.4301/S1807-
17752017000100002
Lee, E.-J., Lee, J., & Schumann, D. (2005). The influence of communication source and
mode on consumer adoption of technological innovations. Journal of Consumer
Affairs, 36, 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6606.2002.tb00418.x
Lin, H. (2014). Understanding the determinants of electronic supply chain
management system adoption: Using the Technology–Organization–Environment
framework. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 86, 80–92. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.techfore.2013.09.001
Lin, H., & Lin, S. (2008). Determinants of e-business diffusion: A test of the technology
diffusion perspective. Technovation, 28, 135–145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
technovation.2007.10.003
Mallat, N. (2007). Exploring consumer adoption of mobile payments – A qualitative
study. Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 16(4), 413–432. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jsis.2007.08.001
McCallum, S., & Viviers, S. (2020). Exploring key barriers and opportunities in impact
investing in an emerging market setting. South African Journal of Business
Management, 51(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.4102/sajbm.v51i1.1601
Md Husin, M., Haron, R., & Aziz, S. (2020). Adoption of financial technology in Islamic
crowd-funding: Predicting small and medium-sized enterprises’ intention to use the
investment account platform. In N. Naifar (Ed.), Impact of financial technology
(FinTech) on Islamic finance and financial stability (pp. 12–35). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Miranda, M.Q., Farias, J.S., Schwartz, C.D.A., Pascualote, J., & De Almeida, L. (2016).
Technology adoption in diffusion of innovations perspective: Introduction of an
ERP system in a non-profit organization. RAI Revista de Administração e Inovação,
13(1), 48–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rai.2016.02.002
Nugroho, M.A., & Fajar, M.A. (2017). Effects of technology readiness towards
acceptance of mandatory web-based attendance system. Procedia Computer
Science, 124, 319–328. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2017.12.161
Nugroho, M.A., Susilo, A.Z., Fajar, M.A., & Rahmawati, D. (2018). Exploratory study of
SMEs technology adoption readiness factors. Procedia Computer Science, 124, 329–336. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2017.12.162
OECD. (2018). Financial markets, insurance and private pensions: Digitalisation and
finance.
Ondrus, J., & Pigneur, Y. (2006). Towards a holistic analysis of mobile payments: A
multiple perspectives approach. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 5(3), 246–257. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elerap.2005.09.003
Parasuraman, A., & Colby, C.L. (2001). Techno-ready marketing: How and why your
customers adopt technology. New York, NY: The Free Press.
Propson, D., & Galaski, R. (2020). Forging new pathways: The next evolution of innovation
in financial services [online]. Retrieved from https://www.weforum.org/reports/
forging-new-pathways-the-next-evolution-of-innovation-in-financial-services
Puschmann, T. (2017). Fintech. Business & Information Systems Engineering, 59(1),
69–76. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-017-0464-6
Rogers, E. (2003). Diffusion of innovations. New York, NY: Free Press.
Rogers, E.M., & Shoemaker, F. (1983). Diffusion of innovation: A cross-cultural
approach (3rd ed.). New York, NY: The Free Press.
Saksonova, S., & Kuzmina-Merlino, I. (2017). The possibilities and problems of
implementation. European Studies Journal, 20(3A), 961–973. https://doi.
org/10.35808/ersj/757
Saunders, M.N.K., Lewis, P., & Thornhill, A. (2000). Research methods for business
students (2nd ed.). London: Pearson Education Limited.
Schepers, J., Wetzels., M., & De Ruyter, K. (2005). Leadership styles in technology
acceptance: Do followers practice what leaders preach? Managing Service
Quality, 15(6), 496–508. https://doi.org/10.1108/09604520510633998
South African Reserve Bank (SARB). (2017). Financial stability review (1st ed.).
Pretoria: Financial Stability Unit, SARB.
Taherdoost, H. (2018). A review of technology acceptance and adoption models and
theories. Procedia Manufacturing, 22, 960–967. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
promfg.2018.03.137
Tselentis, D.I., Yannis, G., & Vlahogianni, E.I. (2016). Innovative insurance schemes:
Pay as/how you drive. Transportation Research Procedia, 14, 362–371. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.trpro.2016.05.088
Van den Berg, J., & Van der Lingen, E. (2019). An empirical study of the factors affecting
the adoption of mobile enterprise applications. South African Journal of Industrial
Engineering, 30(1), 124–146. https://doi.org/10.7166/30-1-1992
Venkatesh, V., & Morris, M. (2000). Why don’t men ever stop to ask for directions?
Gender, social influence and their role in technology acceptance and usage
behavior. MIS Quarterly, 24(1), 115–139. https://doi.org/10.2307/3250981
Verma, S., & Chaurasia, S. (2019). Understanding the determinants of big data
analytics adoption. Information Resources Management Journal, 32(3), 1–26.
https://doi.org/10.4018/IRMJ.2019070101
Walczuch, R., Lemmink, J., & Streukens, S. (2007). The effect of service employees’
technology readiness on technology acceptance. Information & Management, 44, 206–215. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2006.12.005
Wang, J. (2018). Reasons and theoretical explanations for the rapid development of
Internet Finance in China. The secret worry and countermeasures. In: H.Q. Zhou
(Ed.), International symposium on social science and management innovation
(SSMI 2018) (pp. 415–421), 15–16 December, 2018. Xi’an City: Atlantis Press.
Zalan, T., & Toufaily, E. (2017). The promise of fintech in emerging markets: Not as
disruptive. Contemporary Economics, 11(4), 415–430.
Appendix 1 starts on the next page→
Page 12 of 12 Original Research
http://www.sajbm.org Open Access
TABLE 1 A1: The research instrument.
Construct Code Description Reference
Selection criteria N/A What is your current role in your line of work? Subject matter expertise
N/A In which sector within the South African financial services industry do you operate? Insurance,
banking, financial regulation or fintech sector?
Sector classification
N/A To which 4IR technologies have you been exposed to, and to what extent has your exposure
been?
4IR technology classification
Adopter traits AT1 How does being exposed to 4IR technologies such as AI, big data, cloud computing and
blockchain influence the intent to adopt these technologies?
Knowledge of innovation
AT2 In what manner does the awareness of these technologies influence an individual’s decision to
use these technologies on a prolonged basis?
Knowledge of innovation
AT3 How does an individual’s technical aptitude impact on their intent to adopt and use emerging
4IR technologies to carry out daily tasks?
Technical skill
AT4 How does an individual’s innate affinity with exploring new technology impact his or her intent
to adopt and use 4IR technologies?
Personal innovativeness
Technology usability TU1 To what extent are users able to experiment with 4IR technologies before fully adopting and
using the technologies? How does the ability to experiment influence their intention to adopt
and use the technologies?
Trialability
TU2 To what extent are 4IR technologies relatively easy to understand and use? How does the
complexity of the technology influence users’ adoption intent and usage?
Complexity
TU3 Is there any factor concerning 4IR technologies that makes you feel unsafe when using the
technologies? If there is, how does it affect your intent to adopt and use the technologies?
User insecurity
Industry
characteristics
IC1 How does the need to gain competitive advantage over competitors influence a firm’s decision
to adopt and use 4IR technologies?
Competitive pressure
IC2 What role do financial regulators play in the industry-wide adoption of 4IR technologies in
South Africa?
Regulatory support
IC2 How do financial regulators promote or inhibit the adoption and use of 4IR technologies
within South African financial services organisations?
Regulatory support
IC3 How have customer demands changed over time, and has this had any influence on the
organisation’s decision to adopt and use 4IR technologies?
Customer demands
Organisational
leadership
OL1 How do opinion leaders influence members of the firm to adopt and use 4IR technologies in
this sector?
Opinion leadership
OL1 Are there any other leadership styles that may be influential in 4IR technology adoption and
usage in the firm? How do these styles promote or inhibit 4IR technology adoption?
Opinion leadership
OL2 How do risk-seeking leaders and or managers influence the firm’s intention to adopt and
use 4IR technologies in this sector?
Risk orientation
Organisational
characteristics
OC1 In your experience, are larger organisations more or less inclined to adopt and use 4IR
technologies? Why is this the case?
Firm size
OC2 What role do senior executives in the organisation play in promoting or inhibiting the
adoption of 4IR technologies?
Top management support
OC3 Does your organisation have effective communication channels and structures in place? Communication mechanisms
OC3 What impact do effective communication mechanisms have on 4IR technology adoption and
usage?
Communication mechanisms
AT, adopter traits; OC, organisational characteristics; IC, industry characteristics; TU, technology usability; OL, organisational leadership; 4IR, fourth industrial revolution; AI, artificial intelligence.
Appendix 1