Calculated risk? A cybersecurity evaluation tool for SMEs
Michael Benz a
, Dave Chatterjee b,
*
a Vice President, Information Technology, Kraus-Anderson Construction Co., 501 S.
Eighth Street, Minneapolis, MN 55404, U.S.A.
b Terry College of Business, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602-6114, U.S.A.
KEYWORDS
NIST;
Cyber-risk mitigation;
Cybersecurity
evaluation tool;
Cybersecurity risk
management;
Cyber resilience
Abstract Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are among the least mature and
most vulnerable in terms of their cybersecurity risk and resilience. In this article, we
describe a methodology developed using the National Institute of Standards and Technology’s (NIST) Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) as a starting point. The NIST CSF does
not meet all the needs of the SME IT leader, but it offers a solid foundation for a useful
evaluation and recommendation methodology. We propose an SME cybersecurity evaluation tool (CET) that consists of a 35-question online survey to be completed by IT
leaders to self-rate their maturity within the five NIST framework categories: identify,
protect, detect, respond, and recover. We outline this approach to cybersecurity risk
management before discussing its effectiveness and implications for practitioners.
Many cybercriminals are specifically targeting
midsize companies that are in the cybercrime
“sweet spot.” They’re big enough to have
significant bank accounts, but they often
don’t use the latest cybersecurity defenses.
Also, middle-market firms are often the
gateway to bigger targets for cyberthieves.
d Tom Clark, CIO Cadence Bank
1. Why are SMEs most vulnerable to
cybersecurity risks?
With the cyber epidemic gathering momentum, no
industry or organization type will be spared
(Deppen, 2018; Manworren, Letwat, & Daily, 2016;
Slowey, 2016). Cybercrime damages are expected
to cost the world $6 trillion annually by 2021, up
from $3 trillion just a year ago. Global spending on
cybersecurity products and services is predicted to
exceed $1 trillion by 2021 (Morgan, 2019). The
number of unique cyber incidents in the second
* Corresponding author
E-mail addresses: benz0018@umn.edu (M. Benz), dchatte@
uga.edu (D. Chatterjee)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2020.03.010
Business Horizons (2020) 63, 531e540
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
www.journals.elsevier.com/business-horizons
quarter of 2018 was 32% higher than in the same
quarter the previous year (Deppen, 2018; Positive
Technologies, 2018). Thus, cybersecurity preparedness is emerging as a critical competency
central to organizational survival and growth
(Chatterjee, 2019; Hooper & McKissack, 2016).
Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) face
many of the same cybersecurity issues as large
enterprises, but they do not have the commensurate resources to address the risks effectively
(Horn, 2017). These businesses often serve as
vendors, contractors, and partners of larger organizations and are digitally connected. Therefore,
cyber attackers use them as gateways to hack into
the systems of larger organizations (Better
Business Bureau, 2017).
Ignorance can be bliss, and that is often the
case with SME leaders who are overly confident
about the level of preparedness and defense capabilities in their organization. A particular study
found that 95% of the surveyed SME information
technology (IT) leaders believe they have an
above-average security posture (Bisson, 2017; RSM
US LLP, 2018).
Contrary to the predominant leadership belief,
the actual state of cybersecurity preparedness and
maturity of these SMEs can be quite subpar. According to a National Center for the Middle Market
(2016) survey, “55% of SME companies lack either
an up-to-date cyber-risk strategy or any defined
cyber-risk strategy at all,” and “50% of IT leaders
say they don’t know where to start to improve
their security posture.” It is rare for these organizations to conduct a thorough cyber-risk assessment, and their IT and business leadership teams
are often not on the same page when it comes to
cybersecurity risk management (Sweeney, 2016;
Visner, 2016). Saddled with small IT teams and
inadequate security budgets, these midrange organizations are often at a significant disadvantage
to deal with cyber threats effectively (Howard,
2018; Stasiak, 2018).
SME IT leaders are bombarded with anecdotal
information about daily cybersecurity incidents
but do not have solid information about the relevance to their business or appropriate riskreduction strategies. While they may be confident in their ability to manage their company’s
technology stack (i.e., network infrastructure,
software development, end-user support), cybersecurity is new, obscure, and potentially catastrophic (Osborn, 2014).
For senior management, cybersecurity has not
been a high priority for most SMEs. Few business
executives understand the risks and do not see
themselves as likely targets. They underestimate
the value of their information to competitors and
consider cybersecurity to be a problem for larger
companies, not theirs. Security-related activities
do not appear to add any measurable value to the
bottom line. If they are aware of the risks, they do
not perform the standard risk calculation: risk Z
threat ) vulnerability ) likelihood ) impact.
Managers do not perceive sufficient risk to justify
the expenditure of resources, nor do they desire to
slow down their employees’ workflows or change
their relationships with business partners (Stasiak,
2018).
2. How do you correct this ineffective
approach to cybersecurity risk
management?
To correct this ineffective approach to cybersecurity risk management, SME IT leaders need to
adopt a more systematic approach guided by the
following types of questions (Kaila & Nyman,
2018):
 Where is our company exposed to serious
cybersecurity risks?
 What is an acceptable level of risk?
 How do we compare with others in our
industry?
 What can we do to improve in areas where we
are sub-standard?
The challenge is to find an effective cybersecurity
risk evaluation methodology. While there are many
information security governance frameworks and
resourcesdincluding ISO, CIS, PCI DSS, and
COBITdthey can be complicated to interpret and
evaluate as well as expensive to implement
(Abraham, Chatterjee, & Sims, 2019). For
example, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (2018) Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity Version 1.1 contains 55 pages describing the process for
implementing the framework, which would be no
easy task for an SME organization with limited resources and expertise in this type of work. Also
absent in NIST’s methodology are any specific riskreduction recommendations based on an organization’s measured weaknesses.
Outsourcing cybersecurity management is always an option, but it creates an overdependence
on consultants and a lack of in-house capability.
There is anecdotal evidence to suggest that
532 M. Benz, D. Chatterjee
Table 1. NIST CSF standards and self-rating options*
Calculated risk? A cybersecurity evaluation tool for SMEs 533
external vendors are unlikely to provide the quality of customized care that a dedicated in-house
team can provide (Austin & Short, 2009).
Another option is for the IT leader to continue
to buy and implement security products in reaction
to newly perceived risks, emerging threats, or the
company’s most recent cybersecurity incident.
However, these purchases are ineffective as they
are not part of a well-planned strategy (Conick,
2017). Reactive solutions may not fill the most
important gaps or be the best use of resources.
Unless organizations develop a robust, formalized
cybersecurity governance approach, reactivity is
often the worst possible option (Downing &
Jackson, 2018).
The purpose of our study is to offer a validated
methodology that informs SME IT leaders about
their cybersecurity risk exposure and provide
strategies for risk reduction.
3. Developing an SME cybersecurity
evaluation tool
We present a tool and methodology that builds
upon the National Institute of Standards and
Technology’s (NIST) cybersecurity framework
(CSF). While the NIST CSF does not meet all the
security needs of the SME IT leader, it does offer a
strong foundation to develop a useful evaluation
and recommendation system.
3.1. What is NIST CSF?
This framework is one of the most respected and
widely used standard cybersecurity methodologies.
Its mission goes beyond serving the security needs
of individual organizations. It was established to
guide the development of the nation’s cyber resiliency infrastructure and thereby help maintain a
safe and secure environment.
The NIST CSF provides a common language to
describe cybersecurity activities, risk profiles,
business objectives, and goals for improvements.
It is designed to meet specific business requirements, risk tolerance levels, and resources of
public and private organizations. The NIST CSF lists
96 standards that are grouped into categories and
subcategories (see Table 1).
Unfortunately, the NIST CSF has several
limitations. While “The Framework enables
organizations e regardless of size, degree of
cybersecurity sophistication e to apply the principles and best practices to risk management”
(National Institute of Standards and Technology,
2018) it is not a trivial effort to undertake. For
example, it requires learning an entirely new vocabulary described in a detailed 55-page guidebook. The framework is also very complicated to
comprehend and implement. While the NIST CSF
allows the IT leader to rate themselves on each of
the stated standards, it does not specify acceptable ratings for those standards. In the absence of
comparative data, organizations are unable to
gauge the effectiveness of implementing the recommended security policies and procedures. The
NIST CSF does not provide best practices or specific
recommendations on how to improve, requiring
each organization to set its target for improvement based on its environment (Abraham et al.,
2019; Lord, 2018).
Figure 1. SME cybersecurity evaluation tool (CET) methodology
534 M. Benz, D. Chatterjee
3.2. SME cybersecurity evaluation tool
As mentioned earlier, the NIST CSF provides the
basis for the development of this cybersecurity
evaluation tool (CET). More specifically, the CET
draws upon 35 of the 96 standards set by NIST;
these 35 standards (see Table 1) are the most
relevant from the standpoint of measuring the
Figure 2. CET report card
Calculated risk? A cybersecurity evaluation tool for SMEs 535
Figure 3. CET recommendations
536 M. Benz, D. Chatterjee
typical SME company’s operational risk profile. We
selected these standards based on our experience
with risk-reduction evaluation. Using a smaller but
representative set of controls would also make it
easier for the respondents to complete the
cybersecurity risk assessment survey. Besides, an
SME may not have the time to address each of the
96 controls as they have limited resources and will
want to apply its effort where it will have the most
impact. The steps involved in developing CET are
depicted in Figure 1.
3.2.1. Step 1: Online survey
We invited 50 SME IT leaders to participate in an
online survey to rate their company’s cybersecurity
preparedness maturity for each of the 35 standards.
The lead author sent out invitations to 50 IT leaders
in his circle of peersdmostly SMEs in architecture,
engineering, and construction organizations who
often collaborate on industry trends. He did not
narrow the selection to eliminate any participants.
The relatively short list of 35 standards enabled the
respondents to complete the rating survey in under
10 minutes. This minimal time commitment
contributed to a 52% response rate. Reasons for
nonparticipation ranged from lack of time to lack of
interest, as well as concern about sharing details of
the vulnerabilities in their organizations.
3.2.2. Step 2: CET evaluation engine
In advance of distributing the survey, we established a best practices maturity score for each
standard. After all survey responses were collected,
the evaluation engine computed an average maturity score for each standard. Whenever an individual
response fell more than one point below the average
or it fell two points below the best-practices scores,
the evaluation engine flagged a serious gap. Each
gap signaled the need to suggest a specific recommendation for improvement. Then, the CET engine
prints a report card and a recommendation report
for the respondent.
The list of recommendations, rating scale, and
estimation tools were developed by the lead
author based on his experience and were validated
by academic and industry experts.
3.2.3. Step 3: CET report card and
recommendations
The CET report card groups the 35 questions into
these NIST CSF categories: identify, protect,
detect, respond, and recover. As shown in
Figure 2, the rating scores for each group of
standards were plotted on a graph showing:
 The respondent’s average maturity score
(blue bars);
 The industry average maturity score (yellow
circles); and
 The best practices maturity score (green
diamonds).
Whenever an individual response fell more than
one point below the average or it fell two points
below the best-practices scores, the evaluation
engine suggests a specific recommendation for
Table 2A. Key to external costs (rough order of
magnitude for a typical SME company)
External
Cost
Description
$ Low cost (under $5,000 year)
$$ Medium cost ($5,000 d $10,000 year)
$$$ High cost (over $10,000 year)
*Cost estimates are based on quotes obtained from cybersecurity solution vendors. These are based on the cost for a
typical SME company with 500 employees, 100 servers, 500
computers, and 1,000 mobile devices.
Table 2B. Key to effort (rough order of magnitude
for a typical SME)
Effort Description
L Low Effort e Under 40 hours per year. This
effort may be able to be added to a current
employee’s workload without major
disruption. Calculate the diversion cost (40
hours x $50/hour burdened labor rate [
under $2,000 per year for this
improvement).
M Medium Effort e 40e200 hours per year.
This effort may not easily be added to a
current employee’s workload without
major disruption. Calculate the diversion
cost (40e200 hours x $50/hour burdened
labor rate [ $2,000-$10,000 per year for
this improvement).
H High Effort e Over 200 hours per year. This
will require additional staffing. Calculate
the diversion cost (200 hours x $50/hour
burdened labor rate [ over 10,000 per year
for this improvement).
*These estimates of labor hours recognize that existing staff
can only absorb a limited number of additional hours per year.
At some point, the IT leader will need to assign resources to
additional security efforts by (1) diverting employee hours
from existing responsibilities, (2) adding additional staff, or
(3) hiring a consultant or fractional employee. These estimates serve to help the IT leader with understanding the
comparative of one risk-reduction effort vs. another.
Calculated risk? A cybersecurity evaluation tool for SMEs 537
improvement. Each recommendation includes a
cost/benefit value of correcting the gap as well as
advice on how best to implement the recommendation (see Figure 3).
The CET methodology and tool provides
actionable recommendations for each potential
gap. These recommendations are based on 10
years of SME IT security experience, a literature
review, and feedback from experts in the cybersecurity industry and academia. The original NIST
CSF publication does not offer any specific recommendations, which are sorely needed by SME IT
leaders. A second useful feature of the CET
methodology is that for each recommendation, the
typical implementation cost and effort details are
also provided to the SME user.
The CET tool also provides a cost/benefit score.
This score is based on the estimated external costs
(see Table 2A) and internal effort (see Table 2B)
compared with the anticipated benefits of implementing each recommendation.
To get the most benefit from the CET recommendation report, the IT leader must evaluate the
identified risks and suggested recommendations
and create a plan to prioritize and implement the
most appropriate improvements. The report card
and recommendations report can be a valuable
communications tool to explain the gaps and sell
improvements to the organization.
4. Tool validation
After administering the survey, compiling the results,
and sharing the specific recommendations with survey participants, we solicited feedback from 12 of
the participants. All respondents found the rating
scale, recommendations, cost, and effort estimates
to be surprisingly accurate. Here is a sampling of the
feedback from the survey participants:
 “The graphic definitely represents our overall
status in a clear manner.” e Vice President of
an engineering firm in southern Minnesota
 “This report accurately depicts our current
state of affairs as it relates to cybersecurity. I
recently promoted one of our IT professionals
and have included in his responsibilities
cybersecurity as I want to be more proactive in
this area. I find that many mid-sized companies rely on detection rather than reviewing
the source systems. I have recently reviewed
our servers and applications patches and found
that we were behind by more than one patch
in many systems. We are currently making
changes to not only catch up but also to put in
our work plans to patch consistently and to
have quarterly reviews. This report helps a
nontechnical person by bucketing the security
phases from identifying to recovery and
therefore creates some focus on where to
spend time and money to improve security
efforts. Great job!” e Senior vice president &
CFO, SME construction company, Chicago, IL
 “The recommendations matched the weakness that I had already identified.” e IT director, SME company, San Diego, CA
 “It definitely helped reinforce that we were
working on the right things; it will also help us
communicate that to the rest of the leadership team.” e IT director, SME industrial
company, Toledo, OH
 “The recommended improvements were
valid.” e IT director, SME construction company, Atlanta, GA
 “This compared favorably to the services
offered by audit and consulting firms costing
$20,000e30,000. I’m going to use those dollars somewhere else.” e CIO, SME real estate
firm, Minneapolis, MN
5. Implications for practitioners
SME companies have lagged in their adoption of
technology and the security protections necessary
to manage their risk effectively (Bougaardt &
Kyobe, 2011; Stasiak, 2018). They cannot afford
to look away as cybersecurity preparedness is key
to sustenance and survival in today’s digital environment. The Consumer Data Protection Act proposed by Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon is seeking
to impose significant sanctions on executives and
companies not being proactive and diligent. The
penalties could be as severe as “jail time of up to
20 years for executives who knowingly sign off on
incorrect or inaccurate annual certifications of
their companies’ data-security practices” (U.S.
Congress, 2018). The bill also recommends a fine
of up to 4% of a company’s annual revenue.
The proposed CET tool and recommendation
system is representative of an approach that
538 M. Benz, D. Chatterjee
executives could adopt to evaluate their current
level of cybersecurity readiness. This methodology
will not only help identify strengths and weaknesses but it also makes best-practice recommendations for how to plug security loopholes
effectively. In other words, by using an evaluation
methodology such as the one described in this
article, IT leaders can quickly:
 Identify their greatest vulnerabilities;
 Compare their maturity to their peers based
on a set of standard measures; and
 Choose the most valuable improvement
efforts.
SMEs cannot afford to delay. Every company surveyed fell well below the ideal level of maturity
recommended by the SME CET. Every reasonable
effort made to take stock of the state of information security and act on the recommendations is
a step in the right direction. At least the striving
company will be in a credible position to respond
to this fundamental post-breach question: Did the
institution make every reasonable effort to proactively secure sensitive data?
References
Abraham, C., Chatterjee, D., & Sims, R. (2019). Muddling
through cybersecurity: Insights from the U.S. healthcare
industry. Business Horizons, 62(4), 539e548.
Austin, R. D., & Short, J. C. (2009). iPremier (B): Denial of
service attack (HBS Case 601115-PDF-ENG). Available at
https://store.hbr.org/product/ipremier-co-b-denial-ofservice-attack/601115
Better Business Bureau. (2017). 2017 state of cybersecurity
among small businesses in North America. Available at
https://www.bbb.org/globalassets/shared/media/state-ofcybersecurity/updates/cybersecurity_final-lowres.pdf
Bisson, D. (2017, January 31). Small companies overconfident about
their security posture, finds survey. Tripwire. Available at
https://www.tripwire.com/state-of-security/risk-basedsecurity-for-executives/connecting-security-to-the-business/
small-companies-overconfident-security-posture-finds-survey/
Bougaardt, G., & Kyobe, M. (2011). Investigating the factors
inhibiting SMEs from recognizing and measuring losses from
cyber crime in South Africa. Electronic Journal of Information Systems Evaluation, 14(2), 167e178.
Chatterjee, D. (2019). Should executives go to jail over cyber
attacks? Journal of Organizational Computing & Electronic
Commerce, 29(1), 1e3.
Conick, H. (2017, February 12). Four things middle market
companies must do to improve cybersecurity. American
Marketing Association. Available at https://www.ama.org/
marketing-news/four-things-middle-market-companiesmust-do-to-improve-cybersecurity/
Deppen, L. (2018, July 17). Why cybersecurity incidents are up
32% from last year. TechRepublic. Available at https://www.
techrepublic.com/article/why-cybersecurity-incidents-areup-32-from-last-year/
Downing, J., & Jackson, C. (2018, October 9). Midmarket tech
investments: IT governance falls short. The Wall Street Journal. Available at https://deloitte.wsj.com/cio/2018/10/09/
midmarket-tech-investments-it-governance-falls-short/
Hooper, V., & McKissack, J. (2016). The emerging role of the
CISO. Business Horizons, 59(6), 585e591.
Horn, A. (2017, December 11). Why cybersecurity should be a
top concern for middle-market companies. SmallBizDaily.
Available at https://www.smallbizdaily.com/cybersecuritymiddle-market-companies/
Howard, L. S. (2018, February 21). SMEs underestimate cyber
risks which could prove ‘fatal’: Allianz report. Insurance
Journal. Available at https://www.insurancejournal.com/
news/international/2018/02/21/481113.htm/?comments
Kaila, U., & Nyman, L. (2018). Information security best practices: First steps for startups and SMEs. Technology Innovation Management Review, 8(11), 32e42.
Lord, N. (2018, June 25). Healthcare information security: The
top INFOSEC considerations for healthcare organizations
today. Digital Guardian. Available at https://
digitalguardian.com/blog/healthcare-information-securitytop-infosec-considerations-healthcare-organizations-today
Manworren, N., Letwat, J., & Daily, O. (2016). Why you should
care about the Target data breach. Business Horizons, 59(3),
257e266.
Morgan, S. (2019, June 10). Global cybersecurity spending
predicted to exceed $1 trillion from 2017e2021. Cybercrime
Magazine. Available at https://cybersecurityventures.com/
cybersecurity-market-report/
National Center for the Middle Market. (2016). National Center
for Middle Market Study. Available at https://www.
middlemarketcenter.org
National Institute of Standards and Technology. (2018, April 16).
Framework for improving critical infrastructure cybersecurity (Version 1.1). Available at https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/
nistpubs/CSWP/NIST.CSWP.04162018.pdf
Osborn, E. (2014). Business versus technology: Sources of the
perceived lack of cyber security in SMEs [Working Paper].
Oxford University Research Archive. Available at https://
ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:4363144b-5667-4fdd-8cd3-
b8e35436107e
Positive Technologies. (2018, July 17). Positive Technologies
report: Number of cyber incidents in Q1 jumped by 32 percent.
Available at https://www.ptsecurity.com/ww-en/about/
news/number-of-cyber-incidents-in-q1-jumped-by-32-
percent/
RSM US LLP. (2018, May 15). Middle market businesses advance
cybersecurity protections but might underestimate risk, RSM
survey finds. PR Newswire. Available at https://www.
prnewswire.com/news-releases/middle-market-businessesadvance-cybersecurity-protections-but-mightunderestimate-risk-rsm-survey-finds-300648315.html
Calculated risk? A cybersecurity evaluation tool for SMEs 539
Slowey, K. (2016, August 11). A future ‘hot target’ for attackers:
How construction companies can improve cybersecurity.
Construction Dive. Available at https://www.
constructiondive.com/news/how-construction-companiescan-improve-cybersecurity/424217/
Stasiak, K. (2018, July 26). Middle-market companies underestimate cybersecurity risks. IndustryWeek. Available at
https://www.industryweek.com/leadership/article/
22026028/middlemarket-companies-underestimatecybersecurity-risks
Sweeney, B. (2016, September 13). Cybersecurity is every executive’s job. Harvard Business Review. Available at
https://hbr.org/2016/09/cybersecurity-is-everyexecutives-job
U.S. Congress. (2018). S.2188 e Consumer data protection act.
Available at https://www.congress.gov/bill/115thcongress/senate-bill/2188/text
Visner, C. (2016, November 15). Cybersecurity is everyone’s
responsibility e and it starts at the top. CSO. Available at
https://www.csoonline.com/article/3140924/
cybersecurity-is-everyones-responsibility-and-it-starts-atthe-top.html
540 M. Benz, D. Chatterjee