Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
Available online 23 November 2023
Review
Cybersecurity threats in FinTech: A systematic review
Danial Javaheri a,*
, Mahdi Fahmideh b
, Hassan Chizari c
, Pooia Lalbakhsh d
, Junbeom Hur a,*
a Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea b School of Business, University of Southern Queensland, Springfield, QLD 4300, Australia c School of Business, Computing and Social Sciences, University of Gloucestershire, The Park Campus, Cheltenham GL50 2RH, Gloucester, UK d Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3168, Australia
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Banking trojan
Business sustainability
Cyber-attacks
Data privacy
Financial technology
ABSTRACT
The rapid evolution of the Smart-everything movement and Artificial Intelligence (AI) advancements have given
rise to sophisticated cyber threats that traditional methods cannot counteract. Cyber threats are extremely
critical in financial technology (FinTech) as a data-centric sector expected to provide 24/7 services. This paper
introduces a novel and refined taxonomy of security threats in FinTech and conducts a comprehensive systematic
review of defensive strategies. Through PRISMA methodology applied to 74 selected studies and topic modeling,
we identified 11 central cyber threats, with 43 papers detailing them, and pinpointed 9 corresponding defense
strategies, as covered in 31 papers. This in-depth analysis offers invaluable insights for stakeholders ranging from
banks and enterprises to global governmental bodies, highlighting both the current challenges in FinTech and
effective countermeasures, as well as directions for future research.
1. Introduction
FinTech, an important player in the global economy and financial
arena, emphasizes technological innovations aimed at automating
financial, a sector notably susceptible to cyber-attacks and cyber espionage. The FinTech ecosystem is characterized by a dynamic, multifaceted network of agents, interacting seamlessly to provide a diverse
range of financial products and services to end users (Muthukannan
et al., 2020). The transformative influence of FinTech on financial services, coupled with the rise of new start-ups and business models, has
been so significant that it’s termed the ‘Fintech Revolution’ (Gomber
et al., 2018; Gozman et al., 2018). Digital threats targeting FinTech
services are deemed as potent weapons of mass destruction. The United
States classifies significant breaches in this sector as acts of war, meriting retaliatory actions, as highlighted in an Allianz1 report. However,
technological evolution presents a paradox. On one hand, it equips
legitimate sectors with sophisticated, but on the other, it arms malevolent actors with enhanced tactics, leading to advanced cyber-attacks
(Ashta & Herrmann, 2021), cyber espionage (Mocanu, 2021), the creation of deep fakes (Mirsky & Lee, 2021), and potential misuse of sophisticated AI constructs such as ChatGPT (Liebrenz et al., 2023). The
rapid rise of FinTech can be attributed to the mutual integration of
cutting-edge technologies, in particular AI, neural networks, cloud/edge
computing, Blockchain (BC), and embedded systems. This fusion,
however, has also positioned FinTech as an important playground for
different IT-based and AI-enabled technologies and applications, some
leveraged as avenues for malicious activities and cyber threats (Ge et al.,
2022; Nasir et al., 2023). Based on X-Force Threat Intelligence Index
20232 report, the Finance and insurance sector ranked second among the
industries most targeted by cyber criminals since 2018.
FinTech utilization in small and medium enterprises (SMEs) during
the COVID-19 pandemic is the most crucial facet in the growth of FinTech and the strength of SMEs. Major banks worldwide have been
seriously trying to develop and implement their own FinTech platforms
or extend their collaboration with other relevant FinTech start-ups to
change their banking landscape from traditional systems to the modern
era (Karim et al., 2022). Although FinTech-powered services have provided ease of access and high availability, they have caused new
cybersecurity concerns, in particular for banks and businesses. For
example, from the beginning of Feb. 2020 to the end of Apr. 2020, attacks on the financial sector surged by 238 % globally, with 80 % of
financial institutions reporting an increase in cyber-attacks, according to
* Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: javaheri@korea.ac.kr (D. Javaheri), mahdi.fahmideh@usq.edu.au (M. Fahmideh), hchizari@glos.ac.uk (H. Chizari), pooia.lalbakhsh@monash.
edu (P. Lalbakhsh), jbhur@korea.ac.kr (J. Hur). 1 https://www.agcs.allianz.com/news-and-insights/expert-risk-articles/cyber-attacks-on-critical-infrastructure.html. 2 https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/DB4GL8YM.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Expert Systems With Applications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eswa
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.122697
Received 26 September 2023; Received in revised form 9 November 2023; Accepted 21 November 2023 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
2
Modern Bank Heists 3.0 report from VMware.3
Considering this alarming number of attacks against FinTech, the
necessity for systematic and comprehensive analysis on the topic
increasingly arises to deal with the potent attacks and mitigate their
increasing threats (Bajunaied et al., 2023). To pave this way, our survey
investigates the most potential cyber threats against FinTech and looks
into the most effective strategies against them. Although some previous
works have discussed the cyber threats against FinTech, they lack
studying new cyber threats that emerged in the past three years and
offering defensive solutions. Also, none of them has considered threats
originating from human mistakes and paid less attention to procedurebased threats. To our best knowledge, this study is the first work that
has investigated new cyber threats that emerged after 2020; considered
threats from all possible sources, i.e. technology, humans, and procedures; and offers defensive strategies to deal with these threats as well as
put them into comprehensive comparison. Aiming to bridge gaps in
previous surveys, this survey responds to the following research questions (RQs).
RQ1- What are the most recent cyber threats against FinTech
systems?
RQ2- What cyber threats are more sophisticated and destructive?
RQ3- What are existing defensive strategies to tackle these threats
and what threats can be mitigated by a certain defensive strategy?
RQ4- How to adopt and/or implement defensive strategies in FinTech systems to respond to potential threats in the real world?
RQ5- What lessons can be learned from previously occurring cyberattacks?
RQ6- What are the future research directions to deal with cyber
threats in FinTech?
Our contribution can be summarized as (a) investigating the most
significant security threats in FinTech, ranking them based on impact
and severity by reviewing 43 of 74 papers, (b) finding the most effective
solutions to neutralize/mitigate these threats by examining 31 of 74
papers, (c) presenting a novel taxonomy of security threats within FinTech, and establishing a hierarchy for defensive measures, (d) conducting a comprehensive comparison of the current security threats,
assessing their impacts, and evaluating defensive strategies based on
their effectiveness and technical details, (e) highlighting existing security vulnerabilities in today’s FinTech systems and suggesting future
research directions to address these shortcomings.
2. Related work
Studies in the independent realm of FinTech and cybersecurity are
abundant; however, only a few papers have reviewed cybersecurity
threats and their implications against FinTech.
Gai et al. (Gai et al., 2018) conducted a survey on FinTech challenges,
in particular, Security and Privacy (S&P), by reviewing contemporary
achievements. They proposed a theoretical data-driven framework,
named DF2, looking into a broad range of data security techniques in
FinTech from three dimensions, i.e. Business operations, Outsourcing,
and Fin-privacy. In this survey, four technical perspectives were
considered for discussing S&P challenges, which are (i) hardware and
infrastructure, (ii) data techniques, (iii) service models, and (iv) applications and management. This work focused on analyzing the practical
applicability of defensive technologies, e.g. fully homomorphic encryption
(FHE), to neutralize insider/outsider attacks in FinTech, leading to the
conclusion that an up-to-date and precise awareness of FinTech is urgently needed for both industry and academia.
Another systematic review was performed on publicly available reports by Huang et al. (Huang et al., 2018) to indicate how cyber-attacks
and cybercrime have become organized against businesses and the
financial sector from a value chain standpoint. This includes existing,
evolving, and emerging threats. The authors have recognized 24 critical
value-added activities and the correlation among them by focusing on
the commercialization, specialization, and cooperation for cyberattacks. They also extracted a framework and cybercriminal value chain
model for understanding the financial sector’s cybercriminal ecosystem.
Considering six factors, Ease of attack, Potential benefit, Ease of benefit
realization, Psychological costs, Expected penalty cost, and Operational
costs, in different case studies, they assessed the effectiveness of the
proposed framework in developing secure financial systems able to
tolerate novel adversaries attack. Eventually, this study concluded with
recommendations for encouraging collaboration between different sectors to react against the attacks and targeting cybercrime control points
like hacker training/recruiting communities.
Mehrban et al. (Mehrban, 2020) reviewed existing open challenges
with FinTech. They showed that current FinTech is associated with
many sensitive issues, such as security threats, cyber-attacks, and privacy concerns in the financial sector. They reported that security incidents are practiced in institutions and state organizations that offer ITbased financial services more than any other sector. Among their findings, cyber-attacks were recognized as the most crucial challenge in the
future of FinTech. Aiming to make FinTech more secure, the authors
analyzed the most recent cyber-attacks, privacy concerns, and existing
detection tools. They further proposed a taxonomy of current
technology-based cyber threats and security solutions for FinTech, such
as risk detection, risk reduction, authentication and access control, data
storage and processing, and data usage cycle. They also gave some
anticipation about future security threats in the financial industry.
Table 1 compares previous surveys and our systematic review from
various points of view. There are also studies looking into cybersecurity
challenges in FinTech focusing on specific technologies such as Blockchain (Chen et al., 2020). Moreover, for general surveys on FinTech and
cybersecurity, we refer the readers to (Bollaert et al., 2021) and (Kaloudi
& Li, 2020), respectively.
As indicated in Table 1, none of the previous related surveys has
considered all technology, human, and process-originated security
threats. Besides, the latest surveys return to 2020; hence, the new threats
that emerged after 2020 have not been investigated. To our best
knowledge, this paper is the first that studies security threats from all
sources, including technology, humans, and procedures, and meanwhile
analyzes, ranks, and discusses the most effective strategies to deal with
them. This paper also offers recommendations from real-world experience in mitigating security threats in FinTech.
Table 1
A comparison between related surveys and our systematic review.
# Comparison
aspect
Ref. (Gai
et al.,
2018)
Ref. (
Huang
et al.,
2018)
Ref. (
Mehrban,
2020)
This
paper
Year of survey 2017 2018 2020 2023
Technologyoriginated
threats
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Humanoriginated
threats
× × × ✓
Procedureoriginated
threats
✓ × × ✓
Taxonomy or
hierarchy
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Attack detection
methods
× × ✓ ✓
Defensive
solutions
✓ × × ✓
Future research
directions
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
3 https://www.vmware.com/learn/security/modern-bank-heists-2020.html.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
3
3. The survey methodology and statistics
This survey was conducted based on the PRISMA methodology
(Liberati, 2009). The following query was used to retrieve papers from
ten well-known scientific libraries i.e. ScienceDirect, IEEE Xplore,
Springer Link, ACM Digital Library, Taylor and Francis, MDPI, Wiley,
IET Digital Library, Emerald, and Hindawi.
“(cyber*) AND (threat* OR attack* OR crime*) AND (financ*) AND
(Business* OR Industr* OR Organization*OR Institution* OR “Enterprise” OR Bank*)”
To conduct this survey, we have followed the steps of PRISMA
methodology, i.e. 1- Identification, 2- Screening, 3- Eligibility, and 4-
Inclusion. After running the aforementioned query on the ten designated
libraries and filtering the output to a time window from 2015 to date,
3620 papers were identified (Step 1). We considered an 8-year timeframe, aiming to focus on the most recent studies as cyber-attack patterns are changing and evolving rapidly and to maintain the length of
this survey appropriate for readers. Removing the duplicate studies by
checking the titles, 2109 papers remained in total (Step 2). After that, by
manual inspection through reading the abstract, we found 512 papers
eligible for full-text reading (Step 3). Ultimately, by full reviewing the
papers remaining from Step 3, 74 papers included for qualitative synthesis (Step 4) of which 68 studies are journal articles and 6 records are
from conferences.
The inclusion criteria by manual inspection during Step 3 and Step 4
were (i) published by leading venues, a Q1/Q2 WoS-indexed journal or
an A*/A/B CORE Ranking conference, aiming to stay focused on more
important studies, (ii) availability of validation in the paper - empirical
papers rather than white papers, (iii) written in English, (iv) exactly
related to the RQs mentioned in Section 1. The relevancy was validated
by reading the abstract in Step 3 and full reviewing of the papers in Step
4 to ensure the candidate paper has either addressed a cybersecurity
threat in the FinTech sector or proposed a solution to deal with an
already discovered threat. To distinguish these 74 papers included for
qualitative synthesis from general references that were added to support
claims or further delineation of threats/defense models, their list with
publishing venues was reported in Table A1, Appendix.
Fig. 1 illustrates the diagram of the PRISMA methodology, including
Fig. 1. The steps of the PRISMA methodology in our survey where (n) indicates the number of included/excluded papers at each step.
Fig. 2. The number of papers eligible for full-text reading (Step 3) compared to
the number of papers included for qualitative synthesis (Step 4).
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
4
all four Identification, Screening, Eligibility, and Inclusion steps, along
with the number of included/excluded papers (n) at each step.
Furthermore, to provide a better resolution, the number of papers in
Step 3 (papers eligible for full-text reading) and Step 4 (papers included
for qualitative synthesis) for each year from 2015 to 2023 has been
indicated in Fig. 2.
As shown in Fig. 2, there has been an ascending trend in the number
of published papers related to FinTech security since 2015, indicating
the topic has become more critical and attracted the attention of more
researchers. Fig. 3 indicates the number and percentage of papers
included for qualitative synthesis (Step 4) for each library. As indicated
in Fig. 3, with 60.8 % (45 records), the majority of papers on this topic
were published by ScienceDirect, followed by IEEE Xplore with 14.9 %
(11 records).
To provide a novel taxonomy of new cybersecurity threats against
FinTech and corresponding defensive methods, we first manually classified the papers included for qualitative synthesis (Step 4) into two
‘Threats’ and ‘Defenses’ which are studied in Section 4 and Section 5,
respectively.
4. Implications of potential security threats
After perusing each of the papers included for qualitative synthesis
(Step 4), we manually labeled and classified them into 3 classes:
technology-based, human-originated, and procedure-related, aiming to
evolve the previous classifications. A resilient cybersecurity framework
as a control against cybersecurity threats in the financial services and
socio-technical system was proposed by Ambore et al. (Ambore et al.,
2017) in which the human element (either as the originator, the medium, or the actual executor) was applied to the former technologybased taxonomy of cyber-threat landscape presented by European
Union Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA).4
Furthermore, William Stallings in his textbook (Stallings & Brown,
2018), has considered humans as an essential attack surface, in addition
to technology (hardware/software). Meanwhile, in the definition of
Vulnerability in the Glossary of Key Information Security Terms published
by the US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),5
weaknesses in security procedures and internal controls have been
underscored as an attack surface. Although some studies have emphasized the role of policies and procedures on specific requirements for
cybersecurity, this attack surface has not been well-addressed so far. To
bridge this gap and to our best knowledge, our survey is the first that has
included all three technology-based, human-originated, and procedurerelated elements to present a novel and refined taxonomy of threats and
corresponding defenses in the FinTech sector.
4.1. Technology-based threats
Papers have been further subdivided into 11 subclasses after running
a Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) topic modeling and classification on
the whole text of 43 papers already labeled as ‘Threats’ manually. The
model has classified the papers based on the relevancy and closeness of
their topics, the distance between words, and the frequency of similar
words. Ultimately, we tuned the titles for each subclass from a cluster of
words and expressions offered by the model and assigned them to each
Fig. 3. The number and percentage of paper included for qualitative synthesis (Step 4) for each library.
Fig. 4. Top-five dominant banking malware in recent years.
4 https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/etl2015. 5 NIST IR 7298 Revision 2, https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2013/NIST.
IR.7298r2.pdf.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
5
of the three main technology-based, human-originated, and procedurerelated groups, according to our knowledge of the paper.
The majority of cybersecurity threats in FinTech originate from
technology flaws, misuse, and misconfiguration, or using technology to
deceive individual victims, which are explained in the following 6
subsections.
4.1.1. Malware attacks
Financial Services has absorbed 19 % of the total number of malware
attacks and has seen about 18.3 billion dollars of loss merely in 2017,
putting it the top sector targeted by malware, followed by Utilities and
Energy sector, according to the reports published by Evolve.6
Although spyware families, including keyloggers and screen recorders, have posed an extreme threat to FinTech-enabled systems, some
classes of malware have been dedicatedly designed to target financial
services, called financial-targeted or banking malware (Black et al.,
2018; Javaheri et al., 2018). Carbanak, GCMAN, Dridex, Shylock, and
Zbot have been recognized as the most destructive instances of financialtargeted or banking malware. They are responsible for targeting many
banks and financial institutions for illegitimate money transferring over
recent years (Santini et al., 2019). After illegitimate money transferring,
hijacking credit card credentials from POS devices using memory
scraping was the second dominant attack seen in banking malware,
followed by robbing crucial corporate information to get ransom from
the victims (Noor et al., 2019). Fig. 4 indicates the dominant percentage
and era that such malware programs have been active considering
financial services, according to reports published by Kaspersky.7 As
shown in Fig. 4, Zbot has been the most dominant banking malware over
recent years; however, Ramnit has taken the lead from Zbot since 2022.
Malware production has experienced significant annual growth in
recent years; in contrast, the number of banking malware has remarkably decreased, as shown in Fig. 5, according to data published by AVATLAS.8 Upon examining the underlying causes, we discovered that the
prevalence of banking malware has not actually decreased; rather, these
malicious programs have evolved to become more covert, thereby
eluding detection by Anti-virus scanners (AVs). The root cause includes
sophisticated obfuscation techniques and metamorphic engines used by
novel banking malware to evade Anti-virus detection, as well as the
adoption of Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) tactics that involve
executing attacks in a deliberately slow and low-key manner. APT
classes of malware split the attack procedure into several steps with time
gaps between them. Therefore, AVs cannot correctly identify the correlation between features associated with malicious behavior. This is
because indicators are distributed among various malware pieces/processes (Ghafir, 2018). Novel banking malware tries to swipe small sums
from a vast array of bank accounts (a feature of being low) in a way that
owners and/or auditors, even forensic analysts, often fail to detect the
loss. By repeating this procedure over an extended period across a
diverse customer base (a feature of being slow) malware developers
have accumulated significant financial gains.
Peris-Lopez and Martin (Peris-Lopez & Martín, 2017) have disclosed
a significant vulnerability in virtual keyboards employed by a large
number of banks across the world to deal with the threat of keyloggers.
By implementing a proof-of-concept hardware-based trojan (HT) able to
record the user’s passwords and PIN codes, they proved such virtual
Fig. 5. The number of banking malware against the number of total malware produced in recent years.
Fig. 6. The layout of an infected VGA core (a) on a Spartan-3E Xilinx FPGA
compared to the clean one (b), where 681 registers and 752 Slices were used in
the infected core against 645 registers and 721 Slices in the original clean core
and the number of LUTs was same in both cores, ().
adapted from Peris-Lopez & Martín, 2017
6 https://evolvemga.com/financial-loss/.
7 https://securelist.com/financial-cyberthreats-in-2022. 8 https://portal.av-atlas.org/malware/statistics.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
6
keyboards in e-banking applications are highly vulnerable to shoulder
surfing and malicious software-based attacks, particularly trojans. Their
adversary model was embedded on the board of a VGA/LCD display
controller core with such a negligible overhead of resources, i.e. 5.6 % of
registers and 4.3 % of Slices, that cannot be detected by visual inspection, as shown in Fig. 6, we barely could find just one small area -
indicated in Yellow - that differs from a clean VGA core. This HT is able
to reveal private information each time the user clicks on the virtual
keyboard using a GologicTM logic analyzer to recognize the corresponding digits. This HT was evaluated as extremely harmful as it can
defeat the defensive countermeasures, such as digit obfuscation or
keyboard mutation, used by e-banking applications to deal with common keylogger programs.
4.1.2. DDoS attacks
Although numerous comprehensive studies have identified denial of
service (DoS) and distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks, timely
detection of such attacks continues to pose a significant challenge to
commercial targets and high-profile government bodies. HSBC bank and
Irish National Lottery fell victim to the largest-ever DDoS attacks. They
witnessed coming in at 500Gbps of illegitimate traffic, which has been
away from malicious traffic of other types of cyber-attacks by far (HSBC
bank and Irish National Lottery ..., 2016). For instance, Low-Rate DDoS
(LR-DDoS) attacks, a specific subcategory of DDoS, are notoriously
difficult for Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) to identify and for firewalls to neutralize (P´erez-Díaz et al., 2020). This type can be categorized
as one of the APTs, causing issues in communication chains and infrastructures and can lead to service outages and network collapses
(Wang et al., 2021). Such failures are among the most damaging events
in terms of financial loss and reputation for targeted sectors. The study
referenced in (Varga et al., 2021), based on extensive interviews with
key stakeholders in the Swedish financial sector, suggests that DoS attacks represent the most likely threat facing the financial industry.
Recent efforts have aimed to tackle the persistent issue of LR-DoS
attacks. In a recent research study by P´erez-Díaz et al. (P´erez-Díaz
et al., 2020), a new IDS system based on machine learning techniques
has been proposed to detect LR-DDoS attacks. In this IDS, six machine
learning models, mainly tree-based classifiers, including RepTree,
Random Tree, Random Forest (RF), J48, Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP),
and Support Vector Machine (SVM), were put into experiments to detect
LR-DDoS attacks. The model was built using data from the Canadian
Institute of Cybersecurity and, when tested on an Open Network Operating System (ONOS) controller within a Mininet virtual environment,
demonstrated a peak detection accuracy of up to 95 %. Despite such
efforts, the risk of LR-DDoS attacks remains a critical concern for the
financial sector since state-of-the-art methods are still unable to detect
LR-DDoS attacks accurately and reliably. The existence of merely a 5 %
possibility of occurring LR-DDoS attacks can potentially disrupt essential financial services, translating to considerable financial and reputational losses for the industry.
Bandwidth Distributed DDoS (BW-DDoS) (Sharifian et al., 2023) is
another form of DoS attack wherein the attacker overwhelms the target
with excessive traffic volume, thereby impairing its ability to handle
legitimate requests. BW-DDoS attacks also differ in terms of the protocol
used to flood the target, in which a privileged zombie with full control
over its host, is a highly effective attack agent who can deliver fake IP
packets.
Flooding attacks are the most common subcategory of DDoS attacks
against cloud host FinTech services. Among flooding attacks, the session
initiation protocol (SIP) is a text-based application protocol used to
establish, control, and terminate multimedia sessions on voice-over IP
(VoIP) signaling protocols. Like other Internet protocols, deployment in
live scenarios showed its vulnerability to flooding attacks. These attack
patterns are similar to those against TCP protocol; however, it has
appeared at the application level of the Internet. An attacker can trigger
an INVITE flooding attack by sending a vast stream of INVITE messages
consisting of different session IDs like Call-Id, From, or To aim to drain
the SIP memory since the latter has to store the connection state information to ensure reliability for a designated time period. For instance, in
the case of an invalid URI in the SIP message, the proxy should forward it
to another domain and keep its state information or a copy of the message for 30 s or longer. Other SIP messages, such as Ack, Bye, OK, might
also be utilized to carry out flooding attacks by sending numerous
messages that do not belong to any session. Considering the vast
employment of VoIP authentication mechanisms by many banks, this
attack aims to make the bank server so busy that it can no longer respond
to authentication requests coming through the VoIP channel, besides
caller ID spoofing attacks to bypass the whole authentication mechanism
in mobile/telephone banking systems (Mustafa et al., 2018; Golait &
Hubballi, 2017).
Reflection-based attacks (Vijayakumar & Shiny Angel, 2021) represent another prevalent form of DDoS attack, in which uncompromised
systems are co-opted to direct a massive influx of traffic toward the
targeted entity, thereby exhausting its network bandwidth. The advantage of reflection-based attack strategies is that they allow attackers to
covertly channel traffic to the targeted system while helping the originating attack host remain undetected. In this scheme, the attacker sends
IP packets that carry the victim’s IP address in the source address field.
When the server receives the request, it responds to the victim rather
than to the actual source, making detection more difficult. Smurf attacks
are a specific type of network layer DDoS attack in which a large volume
of Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) packets, each with a
spoofed source IP pointing to the intended victim, are sent across a
computer network using an IP broadcast address. In amplification DDoS
Fig. 7. A hierarchy of DoS variants where those that have been more challenging for FinTech were highlighted.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
7
attacks (Javaheri et al., 2023), the attackers control a group of slave and
master zombies and coordinate them to flood a huge number of requests
into reflector systems. Botnets may be employed by attackers to intensify
these reflective attacks, further obscuring the attacker’s identity.
Amplification of Reflective DDoS attacks (Rizvi et al., 2023) is a subtype
of DDoS that augments the victim’s reflected traffic through certain
permitted protocols. These attacks are particularly complicated because
they generate a higher number of response messages than the original
requests from the attacker, leading to an exponential increase in
incoming data that overwhelms the victim’s resources. Protocols that
amplify traffic, such as DNS or Network Time Protocol, are commonly
exploited to execute these amplification attacks (Javaheri et al., 2023).
For a clear understanding, we have classified different DDOS attack
variants and highlighted those particularly challenging for FinTech, as
shown in Fig. 7.
4.1.3. Digital Extortion
Digital extortion, particularly through ransomware, has recently
surged as a major cyber threat to businesses, from SMEs to large enterprises that host FinTech services. These attacks not only cause immediate financial losses but also adversely affect accessibility,
productivity, and reputation, making them an escalating concern for
both governmental and business entities. This type of cyber-attack has
occurred more against the financial sector than other sectors due to the
higher data sensitivity level in financial systems (Keshavarzi & Ghaffary,
2020). Notably, the WannaCry and Petya ransomware attacks resulted
in estimated damages of $8 billion and $10 billion, respectively (Davies
et al., 2020). Although many victims employ robust anti-ransomware
and Anti-malware applications, these attacks were not entirely preventable. This underscores the current limitations in defense strategies
against ransomware threats, promoting intensified efforts to address
these vulnerabilities in recent years.
Sherman et al. (Sharmeen et al., 2020) explored the limitations of
current supervised learning methods in detecting ransomware variants.
These limitations mainly stemmed from difficulties in extracting the
inherent traits and concealed origins of various attack patterns in these
new ransomware variants, often a result of obfuscation, code encryption, and polymorphism.
Alternative defensive strategies concentrated on data backup, given
that emerging ransomware can evade detection using stealth techniques
such as executing a series of pre-attack API calls named ‘Paranoia’ which
mislead AVs and determine a potential time for execution (Molina et al.,
2022). Specifically, Min et al. (Min et al., 2022) devised a device-level
backup strategy that doesn’t require additional storage space. Their
method uses a hardware accelerator that runs content-based detection
algorithms to identify ransomware attacks at high speed paired with a
precise backup control mechanism that reduces data backup space
overhead. Using a Microsoft solid-state drive (SSD) simulator and a
prototype on the OpenSSD platform, their evaluation demonstrated the
solution’s efficacy in countering ransomware with high accuracy and
minimal performance overhead. Furthermore, their approach also
reportedly defends against ransomware classes that target and erase
backup data.
From the industry perspective, some leading cybersecurity firms
such as Kaspersky, Bitdefender, and McAfee have developed specialized
anti-ransomware applications to detect and counteract ransomware
threats, as addressing this type of malware often demands a dedicated
ML classifier. Despite these advancements, these attacks persist, resulting in significant financial and reputational damage daily.
4.1.4. Industrial espionage
In today’s competitive landscape, major producers and service providers across various industries face a surge in cyber-industrial espionage incidents. This competition is exacerbated by the swift integration
of information technology in contemporary businesses, especially within
the financial domain. The main motivation of notorious players is to
reap financial benefits from cyber-enabled industrial espionage (IE),
thereby undermining competitors’ market positions. IE is an umbrella
term that covers a broad spectrum of malicious activities aimed at
securing competitive edges. Unfortunately, nowadays, new technologies
such as Data Science and the Internet of Things (IoT) have notably
amplified the intensity and frequency of IE activities (Hou & Wang,
2020).
Sadok et al. (Sadok et al., 2020) identified insider attacks as among
the most significant cyber threats and explored technical countermeasures. Their research indicated that a combination of social and technological approaches can provide a more effective solution to
responding to insider attacks due to the nature of this type of cyberattack. They also highlighted the importance of fostering a securityaware culture, bridging the gap between solution designing and implementation across various entities.
H¨
arting et al. (Harting ¨ et al., 2022) indicated that susceptibility to
espionage isn’t solely based on business size but rather on its technological and innovative capacities. This study reveals that SMEs, given
their typically limited resources – human, financial, and technical - are
particularly vulnerable to industrial espionage, often resulting in undesirable knowledge leakage. Also, this study emphasized the fact that
it’s crucial to differentiate economic espionage from other industrial
espionage forms, as the initiators and the espionage’s nature vary based
on whether it’s state-sponsored or stems from the private sector. The
influences of different constructs in conjunction with the IE threat on
SMEs can be extracted from this study. Thirteen variables were designated and categorized into four aggregated determinants, i.e. motives,
significance of trade secrets, prevention, and security risks, as indicated
in Fig. 8. We further analyzed these variables and highlighted those that
are applicable to the financial sector and the security of FinTech
Fig. 8. The constructs of IE threats on SMEs where variables applicable to FinTech are underlined, ().
adopted from H¨
arting et al., 2022
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
8
systems.
It is worth noting that IE is associated significantly with insider attacks, making this attack more severe and complicated. Malicious insiders can inflict significant damage, providing adversaries access to
resources, establishing vulnerabilities, or leaking sensitive information.
Therefore, an in-depth understanding of IE is desperately vital in today’s
increasingly competitive global business landscape.
4.1.5. Vulnerabilities in industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)
The gigantic number of IoT devices is continuously and rapidly
increasing, leading to the interconnectedness and interoperability of
systems in numerous critical systems (He et al., 2022). Modern banking
systems widely employ this technology and devices to carry out financial
affairs more accurately and rapidly than traditional methods. In the
same way that IoT technologies enable cyber and physical interaction
between systems, they also enable sophisticated attack vectors against
vital systems. Hence, security has demonstrated vital importance in IoT
due to the emergence of many new threats, such as DDoS attacks, escape
attacks in the virtualization layer, as well as vulnerability exploitation
attacks in the software layer. In this context, there are many common
vulnerabilities between IIoT and standard IoT devices, which have
caused them to be assailable to attackers (Soni et al., 2022).
Advanced Persistent Escaper (APE), as a state-of-the-art threat, performs a cross-VM escape attack in the virtualization layer, in addition to
a cross-layer penetration in IIoT devices. This highly sophisticated attack
can barely be detected even by cutting-edge technologies, reported by
Sha et al. (Sha et al., 2019). They also suggested a method to detect crossVM and guest-to-host escapers at the virtualization layer. However, due
to the possibility that a portion of attacks remained undetected, they
ultimately offered to use an Identity-based Broadcast Encryption system
as a self-defense mechanism to secure the communications between
different modules in the virtualized environment.
Besides APEs, some novel classes of malware generated by advanced
obfuscator engines (Javaheri et al., 2021) are specifically designed to
penetrate IIoT devices, leading to a rapidly growing threat in this area.
Furthermore, botnet infection has propagated to IoT devices and plays a
significant role in a wide range of malicious activities, particularly
exploiting these devices to perform DDoS attacks. The most widespread
cyber-attack that exploited the distributed nature of IoT devices was
carried out by Mirai malware. Mirai is a botnet active on IoT devices,
which is responsible for several catastrophic DDoS attacks against many
with a significant portion of the Internet lockdown on October 21, 2016,
when millions of users lost their access to over 1200 important websites,
including Netflix, Twitter, and several international Banks, for about one
entire day (Zhang et al., 2020). Using forensic analyses of Mirai’s source
code provided by (Zhang et al., 2020; McDermott et al., 2018), we
depicted the attack pattern of Mirai malware shown in Fig. 9.
As illustrated in Fig. 9, Mirai malware initializes a DDoS attack by
triggering its Launcher through Botmaster at the first step. Then, the
Launcher sends a scanning command to the scanner application,
responsible for commencing a Telnet scan on IoT devices targeted as
bots (Step 2). During this scan in Step 3, vulnerable devices are determined as candidates to be compromised. Next, each penetrated device
sends a message to the malware’s C&C and reports its own IP (Step 4).
After that, the C&C decides to either compromise the candidate Bot or
seek a more prone candidate. This step iterates until a sufficient number
of devices get compromised and a network of bots (Botnet) is created.
Having a robust Botnet, C&C sends an infection command to the
Launcher (Step 5); afterward, the launcher missions the bots to start the
attack against a certain victim - targeted by the C&C - by generating and
sending network packets, Step 7–8. Since the packets come from heterogeneous IoT devices distributed worldwide, neither the victim’s IDS
systems can properly detect nature and trace the source of the attacks,
nor can its firewalls block the malicious incoming traffic. Receiving the
packets from different routes by the victim causes an overflow in its
incoming gateway bandwidth or computational/storage resources,
leading to system failures. Such system failures resulted in service outages and have imposed severe financial loss and reputation damage - in
some cases not compensable - to the financial sector and many household name banks.
Jiang et al. (Jiang et al., 2020) have measured the surfaces of attack
concerning IIoT devices in a network. In this research, several concrete
attack scenarios, including some variations of the Mirai malware
tailored for attacking industrial equipment (Vignau et al., 2021), were
implemented to gain the system’s control actuators and impose several
hazardous actions. In another study, Madan et al. (Madan et al., 2022)
indicated that Android is not the only OS used in IoT devices; several
distributions of Linux have widely been employed as the OS for IIoT
devices. Hence, the malware designed for the Linux OS needs to be
considered another source of threat. Perusing the existing detection and
classification methods, analysis techniques, and available tools for
dealing with Linux-based IoT malware, this research concluded that
plenty of efforts and research need to be conducted to bridge the existing
security gaps between the theory of IIoT and its real-world applications.
Taheri et al. (Taheri et al., 2021) reported the lack of sufficient IIoT
malware samples as the most severe challenge to training a DL-based
model to detect and classify such malware programs. To overcome
this barrier, they proposed a framework consisting of a server-side and a
client-side module. On the client-side, a generative adversarial network
(GAN) has been employed to generate the required data for performing
Fig. 9. The attack pattern of Mirai Botnet.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
9
poisoning attacks dynamically. At the same time, the server-side module
monitors the whole system and trains a collaboration model by feeding
anomalies aggregated via the GAN network. This method guarantees
that devices can efficiently communicate without privacy concerns.
Stellios et al. (Stellios et al., 2021) found that the threat of IoTenabled attacks is highly associated with cyber-physical systems.
Using risk-based analysis methodology, this study illustrated attack tree
topologies where the tree’s root indicates a critical system built recursively according to the recognized cyber-physical system interactions.
Well-known building blocks, such as Common Vulnerability Scoring
System (CVSS) and Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE), were
used for threat modeling, indicating multi-hop attack patterns, and
assessing the risks of IoT-enabled attacks against critical infrastructures
like financial technology.
4.1.6. Power attacks
The emergence of smart grids and virtual power plants, in which
power consumers become producers while offering numerous advantages and facilities, have paved the way for cyber-attacks against the
energy sector. In the past few years, these attacks disrupted a wide range
of services in the financial industry, resulting in millions of dollars of
financial loss, as well as terrible reputation damage. According to our
survey, this type of attack, as an alternative, occurs when the attackers
cannot directly target a financial system. The aim is to interrupt financial services and transactions by losing power supplies.
The consequences of this type of attack are so massive that they are
highly employed in modern cyber warfare, e.g. cyber-attacks against the
Ukraine power grid in December 2015 resulted in millions of dollars in
financial loss (Lee et al., 2016). It makes maintaining a power system
operational a vital task. Han et al. (Han et al., 2019) evaluated cyberattacks against an electric power organization in South Korea for a
four-year window. Their study included the examination of IPs and raw
data, which led to disclosing that about 95 % of these attacks originate
from outside the country. As a result, considering six different features, i.
e. real login, blocking complexity, foreign relation, external relation,
stopping impact, and stopping tolerance, they suggested a priority to
restrict external IPs not associated with a foreign business for vital
infrastructure.
Measurements and critical parameters are the most valuable targets for
attackers against smart grids. The critical parameters are a set of model
parameters, the errors of which cannot be recognized due to the lack of
local measurements. Attacks that target measurements should be carried
out in real-time. In contrast, attacks against network parameters can be
conducted offline as the attacker merely needs to alter the parameters
once. Such alternations are typically executed via code and false data
injection attacks, propelling the systems into a state of error (Yang et al.,
2020). False data injection attacks have the potential to disrupt the
power system state estimation process, leading to state estimators
providing incorrect information to system operators. This can culminate
in economic or physical harm to the power infrastructure (Liang et al.,
2017). The consequences of inaccurate estimations extend beyond the
power system themselves, potentially resulting in catastrophic outcomes
for electricity consumers. This includes the suspension of both Alternative Current power flow model and Direct Current supplies essential
to critical clients such as banks, leading to substantial financial losses.
Thus, ensuring the security and stability of power plants becomes an
intricate endeavor. Despite the implementation of various security
measures, cyber-attacks have still managed to cause large-scale blackouts and financial damages within smart grid systems (Wang et al.,
2017). Fig. 10 presents a schematic representation of a virtual power
plant (VPP), highlighting the strategy an attacker might use to disrupt
financial services by cutting the power connection between banks and
VPP infrastructure. Such link disruptions can be effectively achieved
through false data injection attacks targetting VPPs (Venkatachary et al.,
2021).
Furthermore, the injected errors by the attacker will always remain
undetectable because the criticality property of parameters is entirely
independent of the system’s operating points, making detecting and
confronting cyber-attacks against critical parameters more complicated,
studied by Xu et al. (Xu et al., 2020). They also modeled the attacks
against critical parameters based on a bi-level programming problem,
seeking the best attack pattern or the worst case the system operator can
encounter via simulations for injecting undetectable errors into critical
parameters. Security researchers have tried to mitigate the effects of
power attacks against the financial sector, but it still is a severe challenge with many open problems.
Fig. 10. VPP power supply system where the attacker tries to disrupt bank services via false data injection attacks, ().
adopted from Venkatachary et al., 2021
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
10
4.2. Human-originated threats
The second subclass of threats stems from human error or poor
practices. Unfortunately, human misbehavior, particularly lack of
knowledge, has significantly exposed FinTech systems and their clients
to a broad spectrum of vulnerabilities. Compared to the advanced cyber
defense tools available today, humans represent the most fallible
element within a digital ecosystem, where social, cultural, and psychological factors can remarkably affect their decisions. Hence, targeting humans is often the most accessible and least challenging gateway
for those seeking unauthorized access to secured environments.
4.2.1. Insider attacks
Insider threats originate from malicious employees and have always
been a persistent concern for businesses, companies, and organizations.
Over recent years, the number and scale of attacks carried out by insiders have rapidly increased in various domains, particularly in financial services. Previously, cybersecurity solutions in the financial sector
concentrated on defending against external attackers and intruders,
while the number of attacks established from inside was more than the
number of outsiders. Fig. 11 depicts and compares the rate of insider
attacks against outsiders during the last decade, according to M− Trend
report released by FireEye9 in 2023.
As shown in Fig. 11, insider attack poses a significant portion of
cyber-attacks. Besides, this report revealed that ransomware attacks are
the most common cyber threat from insider sources. This gap has
attracted the interest of many cybersecurity researchers to bridge it, so
some debates have broadened for threat management and paying more
attention to insider attacks, including trusted employees, contractors,
and business partners (Eggenschwiler et al., 2016). Although plenty of
efforts have been made by researchers to bridge this gap, the effectiveness of such solutions and tools has scarcely been indicated in real environments due to the carelessness of the owners, leading to numerous
cyber-attacks against businesses and the financial sector from insiders.
In this regard, Erola et al. (Erola et al., 2022) have cooperated with three
international financial-related companies to assess a proposed anomaly
detection system. Their system was fed with real data for over a year to
determine performance constraints for insider threats and intrinsic
weaknesses in the operational contexts and validate the results. Then,
the authors reported the outcomes of deploying the detection system in
real infrastructure, including the limitations, experiences, and lessons
learned.
Another challenge in dealing with insider threats is that ML-based
detection methods, which heavily rely on feature engineering, can
barely allow a precise distinction between the behavior of malicious
insiders and benign users. This is because of numerous obstacles related
to the characteristics of data in this area, including the lack of labeled
insider threats, sparsity, heterogeneity, complexity, and the adaptive
nature of insider threats. Further, novel deep learning (DL) approaches,
particularly artificial neural networks (ANNs), offered a new paradigm
to train end-to-end models from complex data, providing higher accuracy and performance than traditional ML models to detect insider
threats. Nonetheless, applying deep learning models to advance the insider threats task still faces many challenges and restrictions, such as
dealing with adaptive attacks and the lack of labeled data, as deep
learning models are data-hungry to be well-trained (Yuan & Wu, 2021).
Meanwhile, manual analysis by security experts is impossible for entities
with many employees. Therefore, insider attacks are categorized as one
of the most potent and dangerous threats against the financial sector,
and much more effort must be made to detect and confront these threats,
as human behavior can be much more sophisticated and obfuscated than
machines.
4.2.2. Social engineering attacks
Social engineering attack is a multi-faceted concept considering
physical, technical, social, and socio-technical dimensions, which
cannot be smoothly detected and blocked using technical protection
measures. There has been a substantial movement in the way social
networks and cloud apps are developed, from monolithic programs that
contain all functions in a single codebase to massive graphs of singleaspect loosely-coupled microservices (Gan, 2019). The improvements
in the secure implementation of digital infrastructures and innovative
cyber-defense strategies created a shift from targeting the system to
targeting humans using these systems (Li et al., 2022). As the weakest
links in information systems (IS), operators, technicians, and system
Fig. 11. The percentage of attack sources in the last decade.
9 https://www.mandiant.com/resources/blog/m-trends-2023.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
11
users play a crucial role in fulfilling social engineering attacks. In these
attacks, the victim is not a machine, library, or code. The victim is a
human, and the attacker uses social strategies to gain trust and run the
malicious plan. People are accessible through their emails, social media
accounts, etc., and all these access points can be harnessed to deploy and
implement a social attack vector (Hadnagy, 2018). The increasing
adoption of bring your own device (BYOD) policies within both private
sectors and business environments, including banks, coupled with
communication over third-party channels have broadened the spectrum
of attack vectors susceptible to sophisticated social engineering tactics.
When combined with the exploitation of zero-day vulnerabilities, social
engineering escalates into a formidable tool frequently deployed by
advanced persistent threat actors targeting major financial institutions
(Krombholz et al., 2015).
The 2019 pandemic event, which is still around, is very relevant to
social engineering attacks, where working in home offices using
personally available devices and communication channels became a
new normal. This attack aims to embarrass, threaten, and harass targeted entities, which can negatively affect the victims’ reputations. In
these new geographically dispersed workplaces, the security of the
communication infrastructure, which is generally cloud services, is
taken for granted, and an account profile or a trusted email address
could be enough to create trust. This mishap cannot be fixed by
strengthening the security of the infrastructure of the communication
channel (Botacin et al., 2018). Unfortunately, social engineering
methods for compromising information system security are not just a
theory or a potential threat. There have been many successful attacks
against companies like Facebook (Lee & Lee, 2015), PayPal (Trautman),
Toyota (Kumar et al., 2021), Shark Tank (Rambow et al., 2020), Sony
Pictures (Doubts remain over ..., 2015), and Uber (Rio, 2016).
Krombholz et al. (Krombholz et al., 2015) presented a taxonomy of
social engineering attacks and classified them based on operators,
channels, and types of attacks in different scenarios, as well as advanced
attack vectors used in modern communication technologies. These scenarios were gathered by examining real-world samples of successful
social engineering attacks against giant techs, big enterprises, and
banks. We further improved and refined this taxonomy by including
Doxing attack vector, which was a missing piece. Doxing refers to collecting information about entities, including people and companies, by
use of social media, search engines, and other publicly available information sources, which is the initial step for further steps and harsher
attacks, such as espionage and fraud (Khanna et al., 2016). With this
explanation, the new refined taxonomy of social engineering attacks is
indicated in Table 2, where the attack scenarios and vectors that have
taken place more frequently in the FinTech industry were asterisked.
All attack scenarios are articulated based on human psychology and
even customized for a specific character, mainly the person who has the
piece of knowledge the attacker is trying to obtain. The attack can be
initialized easily as a simple email, a phone call, or Doxing techniques,
which have been reported as the most prevalent media to perform a
social engineering attack (Granger, 2003). It can be elaborated through
socio-technical approaches to surf on human curiosity and infiltrate
information systems using infected road apples (Clark et al., 2011).
Spear-phishing attacks are another sophisticated type of social engineering attack that targets a small group of individuals and are built
around their personal and environmental profile. These attacks are
tailored according to relevant datasets and results from data-mining
strategies to increase the success rate of the attack.
When evaluating the social engineering taxonomy concerning the
financial industry, approaches might be interpersonal or noninterpersonal as the communication channels between attackers and
victims. The interpersonal technique via non-electronic means typically
involves direct face-to-face contact between the attacker and a particular victim. The threats of impersonation, shoulder surfing, and reverse
engineering are included in this section. Via human abilities such as
friendliness, compliance, and sympathy, an attacker can covertly get
financial credentials using a variety of tactics. Most social engineering
attackers try to avoid face-to-face contact with their victims; instead,
they prefer to use electronic means such as email, the Internet, and other
digital media to abuse human nature, betray the victim, and accomplish
their goals. Baiting, website spoofing, pretexting, and phishing are some
of the most common digital social engineering attacks (Al-Hamar et al.,
2021; Airehrour et al., 2018).
4.2.3. Internet fraud
Although the rapid emergence of modern banking has allowed
numerous facilities, including remote trading, it has also attracted
fraudsters to utilize the advancement of technology for their malicious
goals. Internet Fraud has resulted in a loss of billions of dollars to service
providers and customers in the world’s financial sector every year,
highlighting the severe need for fraud detection systems. Button et al.
(Button et al., 2023) investigated the statistics of Internet Fraud (IF)
against theft according to the Crime Survey of England and Wales
(CSEW) for the past decade. According to their findings, a 50 % drop in
police-recorded theft and the concurrent 63 % drop in CSEW theft
indicate that it is becoming less popular as an illicit way of acquisition.
Conversely, recorded fraud has more than doubled, and CSEW fraud has
surpassed theft, implying that acquisitive criminality has evolved,
shifting from theft to fraud.
Current fraud detection methods detect IF as an abnormality from
the regular purchasing routines of customers (Wang et al., 2022). In
research by Ali et al. (Ali et al., 2019), the anatomy of fraud in various
user-centered technologies was illustrated. This research indicated that
the anatomy of Internet fraud against banking systems consists of three
perspectives, i.e. technology-enabled frauds, mechanisms, and tools for
applying fraud attacks, and detection/prevention systems on traditional
Table 2
A refined taxonomy of social engineering attack scenarios and vectors - an improved version of (Krombholz et al., 2015).
Attack vectors
Attack scenarios Doxing Phishing* Waterholes Baiting* Shoulder
surfing Dumpster diving Reverse social engineering* APT*
Operator Human* ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Technology(software/hardware) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Type Social* ✓ ✓
Technical ✓ ✓
Socio-Technical* ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Physical ✓ ✓
Channel Social Media ✓ ✓ ✓
Instant Messenger ✓ ✓
VoIP* ✓ ✓
Email* ✓ ✓ ✓
Website* ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Physical ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
* Indicates those attack scenarios/vectors that have occurred more frequently against the FinTech sector.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
12
telecommunication, mobile, and the Internet. Based on this anatomy,
they also suggested some countermeasures to prevent fraud attacks.
Despite the efforts that have been made to improve the accuracy of
fraud detection systems, there is a significant gap in the accurate
detection of banking fraud, as reported by Carminati et al. (Carminati
et al., 2018). This study has studied the role of decision support systems
in detecting banking fraud. This research found that fraud detection in
the banking sector cannot be well-accurate without user-centric approaches to assessing each customer’s spending habits. This study also
showed simulation tools are desperately needed for running proofs-ofconcept codes to measure the accuracy of banking fraud detector
models and prove their performance.
During this survey, we realized that, unfortunately, the number of
published works that addressed this threat was not considerable, so
there is an obvious need for investigating this cyber threat against the
financial sector, especially for those attackers who are aware of the internal structure and mechanism of the system.
4.3. Procedure-related threats
This subsection studies the third and last subclass of security threats,
those that arise from inadequate or improperly implemented internal
policies within banks and financial institutions. It also considers the
threats due to flawed procedures among entities operating in the
financial sector, and eventually, the mishandling of data maintenance.
4.3.1. Data leak
Data leaks can be caused by simple human or technical errors, but
the impact on governments, companies, and users can be catastrophic.
Like social engineering attacks, data leaks might result from users’
mistakes. In this situation, they cannot be considered a consequence of
poor cyber-security strategies or a lack of equipment. Organizations
must create customized security policies and pieces of training according to their organizational architecture and cultural characteristics.
These policies might even differ from department to department. Along
with the evolution of the organization, data leak security policies must
be updated and evolved through effective security and shared awareness
pieces of training (Ahmad, 2021). Also, it is believed that the data
should be treated as it deserves, where the greater the secrecy, the more
likely the data is to leak; it is the lesson that can be learned from the
WikiLeaks phenomenon. To prevent data leak, countermeasures should
be applied against insider threats, which are the major cause of data
leaks. Also, the security of cloud services should not be taken for granted, as we saw several incidents of data leaks with Amazon, Google, etc.
(Gan, 2019); (Burow et al., 2020). Eventually, as Shannon’s information
theory reminds us, data is almost ultimately prone to leak, and to
address that, the focus should be on the weakest links, which are human
beings (Ahmad, 2021; Shannon, 1948). One of the biggest incidents in
this sector was the massive data breach concerning Equifax. In that, the
personal and credit card information of about 148 million clients had
been compromised (Noor et al., 2019), or millions of records leaked as TMobile was breached for the sixth time in four years (Millions of records
leaked ..., 2021).
4.3.2. Data Breach
In a study by Lee et al. (Lee et al., 2022), a routine activity theory
(RAT) was introduced to design a risk assessment model based on staff’s
perceptions of risks relative to potential breaches of sensitive data in
several financial institutions. The authors empirically evaluated indicators like potential targets, motivated offenders, and the influences of
managerial affairs. The results of this survey indicated that accessibility
of targets, inertia, and perceptions of value have the most impact on the
evaluation of risks of data breaches in banks and financial institutions.
This study also extends RAT to be accountable for determining the
amount of sensitive data prone to be breached among online informaTable
tion. Ultimately, they concluded that data breaches and data leaks in
3
A comparison of threats against FinTech perused in this paper.
Rank & name of
threat
References #
Papers
Targets Motivation Threat impact APT Main platforms Manual/
Automate Attack
Surface
Destruction
level
1- Malware
Attacks
(Black et al., 2018; Noor et al., 2019; Peris-Lopez & Martín, 2017) 3 Operating systems Massive destruction ✓ Network, Portable
devices
Automate
2- DDoS Attacks (P´erez-Díaz et al., 2020; Mustafa et al., 2018; Golait & Hubballi, 2017;
Javaheri et al., 2023)
4 Network
Infrastructure
Service disruption,
Reputation damage
× Network Automate
3- Digital
E✓tortion
(Keshavarzi & Ghaffary, 2020; Sharmeen et al., 2020; Molina et al., 2022;
Min et al., 2022)
4 Humans Financial gain × Web Hybrid
4- Industrial
Espionage
(Hou & Wang, 2020; Sadok et al., 2020; H¨arting et al., 2022) 3 Industrial control
systems
Technology thief ✓ ICS systems Automate
5- Vulnerabilities
in IIoT
(Soni et al., 2022; Sha et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; McDermott et al., 2018;
Jiang et al., 2020; Vignau et al., 2021; Madan et al., 2022; Taheri et al., 2021;
Stellios et al., 2021)
9 Edge devices Espionage, sabotage × IoT devices Automate
6- Power Attacks (Han et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020; Liang et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017);
(Venkatachary et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2020)
6 Power suppliers Financial gain/
reputation damage
× Power
distribution
network,
Smart grids
Automate
7- Insider Attacks (Erola et al., 2022; Yuan & Wu, 2021) 2 Anything Revenge, Financial
gain, and Espionage
✓ N/A Manual
8- Social
Engineering
(Krombholz et al., 2015; Botacin et al., 2018; Khanna et al., 2016; Al-Hamar
et al., 2021; Airehrour et al., 2018)
5 Employees Information gathering ✓ Social media Manual
9- Internet Fraud (Wang et al., 2022; Ali et al., 2019; Carminati et al., 2018) 3 Humans Financial gain × Web Hybrid
10- Data Leak (Ahmad, 2021; Burow et al., 2020; Millions of records leaked ..., 2021) 3 Humans Information gathering ✓ Covert channels Hybrid
11- Data Breach (Lee et al., 2022) 1 Humans Information gathering × Web Hybrid
very high high medium low.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
13
banks and financial institutions could cause significant damage to
organizations.
4.4. Comparison of threats
This subsection presents a meticulous comparison between investigated threats against FinTech. The comparison consists of various
standpoints, including the nature of attacks, motivations, the level of
danger/destruction, consequences, and technical details, as shown in
Table 3.
In Table 3, the level of destruction was measured based on the
amount of financial damage caused by each threat, according to the
published reports. The level of danger was determined according to the
frequency of the attack’s occurrence during the window of this survey,
and the other technical information was derived from papers studied in
this survey. Then, we sorted the attack based on the combination of
destruction level, danger level, motivations, as well as an attack surface.
Furthermore, Fig. 12 illustrates a timeline of the most destructive cyberattacks against FinTech and their damages in USD since 2015, according
to data published by CARNEGIE.10
5. Results of reviewing defense strategies
Upon applying LDA topic modeling on 31 papers corresponding to
‘Defenses’, they were classified into 9 subclasses according to the relevancy and closeness of their topics and words discovered and validated
by the model. Following a process similar to the one used for ‘Threats’, a
thorough review was undertaken. Subsequently, the 9 defense strategies
were manually labeled and assigned into three technology-based,
human-originated, and procedure-related groups.
5.1. Technology-based approaches
This subsection presents the findings from our review of technologybased defense strategies, which encompass a range of methods, tools,
and applications. These were synthesized from 23 defense papers that
were classified in this subclass. Each identified strategy is capable of
addressing one or more of the threats outlined previously in Section 4.
5.1.1. Anti-malware and Intrusion detection
Behavioral features and indicators need to be extracted and modeled
to determine whether a program is malicious. Banking trojans are wellequipped with obfuscation techniques, including metamorphic and
packing engines, to distort behavioral features and mislead AV scanners,
firewalls, and IDS systems. To extract latent behavioral features from
modern obfuscated and intelligent classes of malware, a precise analysis
approach with several considerations is desperately needed. Two main
categories of malware detection methods include traditional signaturebased methods and behavioral analysis methods (Singh & Singh,
2021). Behavioral analysis methods are classified into two static and
dynamic approaches. The static approach extracts features from malware’s file when stored on a hard disk - as a file - without any execution
(Naik et al., 2021). In contrast, the dynamic approach executes malware
binaries to extract features from its running process (Jing et al., 2022).
Fig. 13 compares these approaches from four aspects, i.e. scanning
speed, depth and accuracy of analysis, vulnerabilities against malware’s
obfuscation techniques, and burden of implementation.
As indicated in Fig. 13, signature-based methods provide the highest
scanning speed but the lowest depth and accuracy. These methods are
highly vulnerable to malware obfuscation techniques, which means they
can simply be deceived by banking malware. For example, when a
malware program inserts junk code among its executable sections to
change its structural signature, it becomes much more challenging to
detect by signature-based methods (Babun et al., 2021). On the other
hand, detection methods based on dynamic behavioral analysis provide
the highest depth of analysis and accuracy. They also have the most
minor vulnerabilities when confronting obfuscated and metamorphic
malware. However, implementing such strategies is complex since these
methods need an isolated environment, such as a VM or Sandbox, for the
risk-free execution of malware. Furthermore, the scanning speed of
these methods is low compared to the other methods. Dynamic malware
detection methods work based on the API name or frequency of API calls
as the features for behavioral modeling and detecting if a malicious
process is running on the system. However, these features are insufficient to detect banking malware as they can mislead these detectors
using dynamic code loading, runtime code generation, code injection,
puzzling, and other obfuscation techniques (Prachi et al., 2023).
Signature-based and static analysis approaches are inappropriate for
Fig. 12. A timeline of the most destructive cyber-attacks against FinTech since 2015.
Fig. 13. A comparison between malware detection methods.
10 https://carnegieendowment.org/specialprojects/protectingfinancialstabi
lity/timeline. Accessed 2023.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
14
dealing with modern obfuscated banking trojans. A hybrid strategy,
which utilizes the advantages of both static-behavioral and dynamicbehavioral analysis methods simultaneously, offers more chances to
detect banking trojans.
Bai et al. (Bai et al., 2021) developed an Anti-malware system named
DBank, to identify banking trojans designed for Android OS. They
extracted APIs from a dataset collected from VirusTotal11 and applied
graph mining techniques to detect Banking trojans. DBank adopts a
hybrid analysis approach and, according to the evaluation, it can identify banking trojans and distinguish them from good-ware accurately -
up to 99.9 % area under the curve (AUC) and 0.3 % of false positive rate.
The performance evaluation was conducted on a data-driven analysis of
Android Banking Trojans (ABT), including Asacub, BankBot, FakeToken, Marcher, and Svpeng, and compared to 63 AVs available on VirusTotal. Whereas this system is highly accurate in detecting Banking
Trojans, it conducts a binary classification, and its performance was not
evaluated against other banking malware classes.
Dassouki et al. (Dassouki et al., 2017) introduced a dynamic and
adaptive approach designed to safeguard cloud-hosted financial services
from SIP flooding attacks. This is achieved through the analysis of
temporal characteristics and fingerprints of message exchanges. The
main advantage of this system for the FinTech industry is that it was
evaluated on an extensive set of experiments employing geographically
distributed virtual machines (VMs) in cloud service providers. The
testing framework comprised nine clients from different countries and a
server positioned in a separate location. The SIP clients interfaced with
the Internet using the Java Jain-SIP library operating on Linux Ubuntu
within the Amazon AWS cloud environment. The server was built based
on a SIPP12 traffic generator running on a Linux Ubuntu VM hosted on
Digital Ocean, as indicated in Fig. 14(a). Since AWS allows dedicated
connections to route inter AWS regions, locating the main server on
Digital Ocean forces the incoming traffic from clients to employ public
Internet to reach the main server. In this system, the threshold for attack
detection is dynamically tuned considering the acceleration of an
imminent attack, as shown in Fig. 14(b). Once the detection system
raises a signal, the prevention system blocks the malicious incoming
traffic. It acts based on a threshold of abnormal events and a history
made of the session’s fingerprints instead of endpoints IPs and URLs,
Fig. 14. (a) A holistic view of the testbed, (b) exchanged messages in each call of cloud-based attack scenarios, ().
adapted from Dassouki et al., 2017
Fig. 15. S&P solutions for data protection on FinTech platforms, ().
adopted from Hern´
andez et al., 2019
11 https://www.virustotal.com/. 12 https://sipp.sourceforge.net/.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
15
which consume less computational resources and less restriction when
filtering attack traffic.
The system succeeded in resisting large-scale emulated flooding attacks launched from mutually distant data centers. This geographical
scalability in attack detection and prevention, as well as low detection
time and low sensibility to false alarms, are well-aligned with the international banks needs for Intrusion Detection and Prevention Systems
(IDPS) to mitigate DDoS attacks in general and Telephony Denial of
Service (TDoS) in particular, considering the intrinsic nature of global
banks to offer 24/7 financial services for numerous clients worldwide.
5.1.2. Access control systems
Misconfiguration of access control systems might have led to many
dynamic threats from outsiders and insiders, imposing risks to privacy
protections due to massive data sharing with third parties. This concern
is put to an extreme when financial data is shared. Some data protection
models have been presented so far to guarantee the privacy of customers’ information.
Malaquias and Hwang (Malaquias & Hwang, 2016) conducted an
empirical study on trust assessment as an essential factor in modern
banking systems. They conducted a Structural Equation Modeling and
Confirmatory Factor Analysis on a set of 1077 questionnaires collected
in Brazil in 2016. Their study demonstrated that a sort of information
asymmetry can be addressed to build trust in the FinTech systems,
accelerate its adoption, and thus the efficacy of banks. Meanwhile, they
reported a negative relationship between trust in FinTech systems and
undergraduate courses in technology. To address this barrier and build
trust, a comprehensive hierarchy of security and privacy (S&P) solutions
on FinTech platforms was proposed by Hernandez et al. (Hernandez ´
et al., 2019), as shown in Fig. 15.
Among S&P solutions, access control (AC) mechanisms have a
pivotal role. However, a limited number of these AC schemes are dedicated to financial services and FinTech platforms. As one of the state-ofthe-art models, Qiu et al. (Qiu et al., 2018) employed attributed-based
access control (ABAC) to enable the proactive protection of financial
customers’ privacy information and a data self-deterministic scheme
aiming to guarantee that unanticipated parties cannot reach the privacy
data. This scheme employed proactive determinative access (PDA) and
Attribute-based Semantic Access Control (A-SAC) algorithms to
constrain data access and prevent users’ data from unwanted operations
using a user-centric approach. The outcomes of this research can guarantee the privacy-preserving financial data of customers in banks and
financial institutes up to an acceptable extent.
Today’s market-based technologies, especially FinTech, need to
specify adjustable limitations on the power of attackers, admit systematic monitoring and the uniform identification of attacks, and allow
verifiable responsibility for cyber-attacks. AC systems used in the
financial sector require specialized instrumentation to regulate the trade
and use of access rights in banks’ databases. The importance and
sensitivity of financial data necessitate novel and customized approaches to AC that generic systems cannot fully provide. Therefore,
domain controlling and fine-tuning the exposure to attacks are required
in response to emerging risks, on-time detection of intrusions, minimizing resource unavailability, and statistical analysis of currency flaws
(Yemini et al., 2000). It is evident that access control in FinTech systems
is more complicated than the other domains and severely needs a
customized model well-tuned for the intrinsic nature of financial data.
5.1.3. Blockchain technology
A growing number of scientific and practical domains are eagerly
interested in leveraging Blockchain (BC) as a disruptive technique to
empower IS in many applications in FinTech, IoT, and token economy
(Fahmideh, 2022). A survey by Lei et al. (Lei & Ngai, 2023) profiled 443
articles published between 2016 and 22 to present a new classification
of BC applications and highlight the promising role of BC in the systems
designs of the future IS. This classification includes three phases for IS
innovation, i.e. (i) system design, (ii) implementation, and (iii) impacts,
containing 188, 114, and 68 articles, respectively. However, 73 articles
could not be categorized into any of these categories. Among their reports, we noticed that the finance sector and financial technology had
attracted a considerable number of published papers, 38 articles in total.
Employing BC, cryptocurrencies have appeared in a special place in
the free economy. Besides the significance and economic characteristics
of cryptocurrencies, the technical aspects of this field are also remarkably considerable (Sori et al., 2021). Using BC as a data store infrastructure in some financial-related applications instead of traditional
database systems has promoted data privacy, as well as transaction
integrity, by separating transactional data from personally identifiable
information (Raddatz et al., 2021). According to this reference, BC
awareness can potentially reduce privacy and security concerns with
FinTech.
Although BC has offered many advantages for banking systems and
FinTech, particularly minimizing fraud possibility, several new challenges appeared when facing big data. Nowadays, for any active player
in the financial sector, connecting to an immense network such as the
Internet and social media is not a choice but a necessity to survive in the
market, resulting in hasting the production of Big Data, particularly
business-generated data, with seven V’s features, namely Volume, Velocity,
Variety, Valence, Veracity, Variability, and Value (Chen & Chen, 2022).
This issue negatively affects the adoption of BC technology for FinTech.
Besides, new vulnerabilities, including crypto-mining, crypto-jacking
attacks, and uncertainty in the cryptocurrency market, have appeared
Fig. 16. The percentage of BC implementation in various sectors.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
16
by using the BC as the infrastructure for the financial sector. Also, there
is a concern with user anonymity in all cryptocurrencies since they
might be compromised for illegal financial flows and criminal activities.
Thus, de-mixing algorithms were proposed to mitigate this concern by
de-anonymizing the relationship between the input and output addresses of mixing services (Hong et al., 2018).
Berdik et al. (Berdik et al., 2021) have studied the role of BC in information systems as it becomes increasingly important when
combining software and hardware utilities to develop an allencompassing information system. They discussed how BC can be
leveraged to develop or improve the next generation of information
systems in modern enterprises, such as geographical information systems (GIS), healthcare information systems (HIS), media, energy, and
financial information systems (FIS). Fig. 16 shows the percentage of BC
implementation in various sectors, according to data reported by this
reference.
As demonstrated in Fig. 16, financial services, by far, have placed on
the top BC representation. A decentralized architecture of BC enables a
considerable deal of security and stability. However, the infancy of
current BC-enabled systems has also caused some uncertainties about
the capability of BC to appropriately manage data on a scale required by
most businesses, in addition to fault tolerance, storage, and broadening
use.
Blockchain technology serves as a foundational infrastructure for an
array of secure services. This encompasses money transfer, supply chain
management, and smart contracts. Each of these applications will be
explored in the following three subsubsections.
5.1.3.1. Money transfer. Since its inception, the digital currency has
taken the financial markets by storm. As a representative of digital
current, Bitcoin is based on BC and has enabled a decentralized payment
system based on peer-to-peer transactions. It has attracted the attention
of worldwide businesses, consumers, and investors because of the
uniqueness of its payment protocol. Bitcoin is proliferating so that major
retailers, like AT&T, Overstock, and Microsoft, have adopted Bitcoin as a
payment payload (Guo et al., 2021).
Du et al. (Du et al., 2019) highlighted the strategic impacts of BC on
organizations and discussed how to practically implement BC in organizations rather than studying technology’s potential impacts. The researchers employed affordance-actualization (A-A) theory as the
theoretical lens to conduct a case study of BC implementation in a real
organization. They presented three affordances: (i) subsidiaries and suppliers can settle payment directly, (ii) transaction participants can automate
transactions, (iii) small suppliers can secure loans from financial institutions,
and a process model for actualizing these affordances. Their process
model extended A-A theory by adding an experimentation phase where
BC’s payment system was added to the organization and tested through
conceptual adaptation and constraint mitigation. Fig. 17 indicates the
structure of the proposed BC-based payment system. As shown in
Fig. 17, the proposed BC-enabled payment system consists of five main
steps, from initiating a payment transaction to secure transfer of money
between entities. This payment system can pave the way toward a secure
money transfer mechanism in mobile payment platforms (Xia et al.,
2022).
It is worth noting that while BC-enabled payment methods are
significantly more secure than current systems, there is always a possibility of hacks due to the existing uncertainty of Bitcoin and also a delay
in Ethereum markets. For instance, 1.1 million Bitcoins were hacked and
robbed between 2013 and 2017. Considering the average price for a
Bitcoin in that year (i.e. $7572 in 2018), an equivalent of 8.9 billion US
dollars was lost, which emphasizes the importance of confronting these
illegal actions (Grobys, 2021).
Besides uncertainty, crypto-mining attacks have emerged as state-ofthe-art web-centered attacks, which break the confidentiality, integrity,
and availability of the victim’s system. In this attack, the attacker abuses
the victim’s resources, including GPU and CPU, to mine and produce
cryptocurrency. This attack will be completed in combination with other
types of attacks, including social engineering and watering hole attacks,
to deceive the victim into visiting infected web pages. This kind of attack
caused a paradigm shift to web-centered attacks, which disregard the
need for third-party exploiters. To encounter these attacks, Zimba et al.
(Zimba et al., 2019) have explored Cryptojacking injection attacks (a
state-of-the-art web-centric attack vector) in the crypto-mining attacks
landscape. This research also proposed a formal manner based on finite
Fig. 17. The structure of a BC-powered payment system ().
adopted from Du et al., 2019
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
17
state machines (FSM) to model such attacks. Their proposed model indicates how attackers can infiltrate and compromise core e-commerce
components to use their resources to generate Monero cryptocurrency.
In another recent study, Hassani et al. (Hassani et al., 2018) reviewed
the effects of BCs in the financial and banking sector, as well as the
challenges of big data facing BC infrastructure. Although they found
solid evidence of adopting BC technology in a number of banks, their
findings further indicated a severe need for conducting more research to
investigate deployment aspects of banking with BC. Their study also
highlighted the necessity to tackle the barriers currently hindering the
adoption of BC in banking across the globe. In conclusion, new BC
technology is increasing its significance as a solution in dealing with
cybersecurity threats and promising a more secure trend for the evolution of the financial sector.
5.1.3.2. Supply chain management. In Industry 4.0 era, the importance
of sustainability in supply chains (SC), as a critical component in today’s
digitalized circular economy, is more evident than ever (Sindhwani
et al., 2023). Supply chain finance (SCF) is crucial in facilitating the
efficient operation of corporate activities within the contemporary
global supply chain. In 2020, the global market for SCF reached a
noteworthy milestone, with a valuation of 46 billion USD. Currently, the
global market for BC-enabled SCF is valued at USD 84,540 million and is
projected to expand at a CAGR of 33.6 % from 2021 to 2026.13 BC also
plays a pivotal role in building trust in the system by employing a
decentralized ‘trustless’ network, which is one of the vital factors
influencing BC adoption (Wang et al., 2019).
The study by Paul et al. (Paul et al., 2022) examined the effects of the
COVID-19 pandemic declaration on the market value and trading volume of SCF businesses, focusing on banking. The researchers employed
an event study methodology to examine the impact of a specific event on
the valuation and trading volume of firms in the sustainable and socially
responsible investment sector. Their analysis revealed a substantial
decrease in valuation and an increase in trading volume for these firms
following the event. On the other hand, organizations that have implemented BC-enabled SCF systems are shielded against potential losses in
valuation and the associated fluctuations in trading, as well as security
threats. They also examined whether firm-level heterogeneity affects
value protection or loss owing to the announcement using crosssectional regression analysis. It has been shown in this study that
increased investment in research and development of BC-enabled SC
(being part of a blockchain consortium rather than working alone)
serves as effective measures in mitigating threats and losses.
In another recent study, Wamba et al. (Fosso Wamba et al., 2020)
systematically investigated and evaluated the feasibility of replacing the
current concept of money in new supply chains. They reflected the pros
and cons of such replacement in several industries, aiming to address the
existing challenges in FinTech. For the possibility of money replacement, this research has assessed the evolution of Bitcoin, Blockchain,
and FinTech over time. The outcomes and findings of this study
demonstrated that these technologies are drastically being persuaded,
and sooner or later, this replacement will take place. Hence, businesses
and organizations should embrace them as a competitive advantage.
Furthermore, organizations need to conduct more research on these
technologies to have a better understanding. With this knowledge and
novel technology, they can optimize their current strategies and policies
and develop insights for decision-making.
Whereas the adoption of BC in SC has offered many facilities, it has
increased the number of cyber threats and the system attack’s surface,
such as business data leakage, intellectual property theft, and interruption of business operations. Therefore, BC-enabled SCs have some
risks and uncertainties as their resilience from a research perspective is
in an early stage, and supply chain networks need several cybersecurity
considerations and threat management policies (Suryawanshi & Dutta,
2022). To further recognize cyber threats in SC, Syed et al. (Syed et al.,
2022) studied existing risks and cyber threats against supply chain
systems. Using a systematic asset-centric threat modeling method, they
included more than a hundred relations between threats, assets, and
countermeasures related to SC traceability. They also adopted the
STRIDE threat model to describe common threats. STRIDE includes
spoofing, tampering, repudiation, information disclosure, denial of
service, and elevation of privilege. This model consists of a multilayer
architecture for SCs where the analysts are able to accommodate a
concrete implementation and perform secure traceability and falsifiability by providing the sources used to establish the relation, i.e.
threats, assets, and countermeasures.
5.1.3.3. Smart contracts. Smart contracts leverage BC technology to
verify that two parties have signed an agreement, as well as to ensure
transactional integrity (Berdik et al., 2021). A smart contract is a piece of
code aimed to enforce the execution of a deal between two or multiple
parties. The program code can be self-executed and deployed as BC
infrastructure transactions; hence, no modification in its code is
possible. This feature significantly reduces the likelihood of fraud and
forgeries. Smart contracts also offer many advantages, including
removing/minimizing the possibility of money laundering and supplying terrorist groups, compared to the current trading systems. Meanwhile, the rapid deployment of smart contracts in businesses raises a
need for security verifications since failures in smart contracts or any
security breach can bring about substantial financial loss and global
panic (Suegami, 2022). To this aim, Almakhour et al. (Almakhour et al.,
2023) have proposed a framework for formal verification of composite
smart contracts security using FSM. They provided two verification
types, one suitable for all smart contracts with standard properties, and
the other one considers the context-dependent properties, called ‘specific properties’ varying based on the domain of usage, focusing on the
financial sector. A formal security verification can make use of smart
contracts possible in SC to replace traditional trades.
5.2. Human-originated approaches
The second subclass of defense strategies focuses on the human
element, addressing behaviors and activities. These strategies, which
primarily hinge on cultural education and technical training, aim to
mitigate cybersecurity knowledge gaps. By doing so, they hold the potential to neutralize a significant number of security threats targeting
FinTech systems and their clients.
5.2.1. Cyber-culture and security awareness
Cyber-culture and security awareness is recognized as the most
important missing part in FinTech services, which can address a wide
range of cyber threats, including insider attacks, social engineering, data
leaks, and Internet frauds.
In this regard, Varga et al. (Varga et al., 2021) presented a method to
evaluate the properties of a Common Operational Picture (COP) as a
base for establishing a Cyber Situational Awareness (CSA) team for
financial sector actors. In this study, a dataset was collected through
surveys and interviews with pivotal players in the financial sector concerning national-level crisis management. The questionnaire designed
by the authors included ten questions regarding the orientation category
of cyber threats. The main questions focused on five W questions (Ws)
and involved the information elements required in a COP and the
perception of cyber threats. The number of responses received was 42
out of 70 participants. Interviews were conducted with 270 persons
representing substantial Swedish financial sectors, including security
dealers, insurance companies, banks, and central financial system
13 https://www.marketwatch.com/press-release/blockchain-supply-chain-fin
ance-market-size-2021industry-analysis-size-share-trends-marketdemand-gr
owth-opportunities-and-forecast-2026–2020-12–09.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
18
players like stock market holders. This study classified sources of
cybersecurity operational risks into four classes, i.e. failed internal
processes, systems and technology failures, actions of people, and
external events. Their analysis results demonstrate that social engineering is the most threatening attack vector. Insiders and the lack of
real-time intrusion detection were also recognized as potential threats.
Moreover, their reports indicated that the most common technologybased cyber-attacks are DoS and malware attacks - Dridex, Shylock,
and Zbot - by 55 % and 52 % of the respondents, respectively. The authors also recommended seven provisions for having a complete CSA for
cyber defense against threats in FinTech. They included the awareness of
the current situation, why and how the current situation began, how the
situation evolved, the adversary of behavior, the impact of attacks, the
integrity and quality of the situational awareness information, and
assessment of probable future circumstances against the current state.
One of the important limitations of the recent reference is the validity of the conclusions that might have been obtained under particular
situations in Sweden and cannot necessarily exist elsewhere. Besides, the
Swedish financial sector comprises a few actors and the number of
participants in the questionnaire seems small.
Dealing with social engineering attacks and Internet fraud severely
requires a systematic analysis of possible attack patterns to accurately
detect the initial steps by which an attack gets started. Detecting these
attacks from the initializing steps makes countermeasures much more
effective. This highly needs an appropriate knowledge of cyber-culture
and security awareness. Airehrour et al. (Airehrour et al., 2018) proposed a model to identify the initial steps of social engineering attacks.
The procedure of this model for a single-stage social engineering attack
is illustrated in Fig. 18. As indicated in this figure, the model has consisted of five steps, i.e. reconnaissance, planning and preparing,
launching a phishing attack, information capturing, and finally,
exploiting the collected information, in which a defensive action has
been offered for each step of the attack. This model can be extended and
applied to multi-stage attacks since steps in the multi-stage attack are
also captured in a single-stage attack scenario.
5.2.2. Cybersecurity training
The current worldwide workforce’s cybersecurity skills have faced a
significant critical level of shortage; this issue has aggravated in the
financial sector (de Leon et al., 2018). Meanwhile, training well-skilled
cybersecurity staff in the numbers required by the financial sector is a
time-consuming task. It needs plenty of related experience and practical
efforts. However, employing hands-on exercises is one of the best
practices for quickly learning cybersecurity skills. Leon et al. (de Leon
et al., 2018) have designed a tutorial-based and classroom approach to
cybersecurity instruction, presenting six hands-on tutorials on operating
systems security.
Cybersecurity education, awareness raising, and training (CEAT)
undeniably affect the vitality of Internet services for various domains at
the national and international levels. CEAT includes one out of five aspects of a larger cybersecurity capacity-building model (CMM) developed by the Global Cybersecurity Capacity Centre. This aspect and its
related indicators of education, awareness, and training in cybersecurity
were presented by Shillair et al. (Shillair et al., 2022). This study
included a multinational analysis of CEAT outcomes on data gathered
from 80 countries considering different parameters, such as the Internet
usage scale and the country’s wealth. The results indicated that CEAT
could considerably and positively impact the vitality of Internet usage
for enabling financial services. Besides, the distribution of CEAT scores
recognized some key factors to determine the level of maturity for lowincome and under-developing countries. This study also reported the
responses from these countries as the basis for offering recommendations for making policies and practices to meet the need for actual
awareness, education, and training.
Some organizations have run several awareness and training courses
to improve cybersecurity knowledge, while fewer have considered
cybersecurity knowledge sharing. To fill this gap, Alahmari et al.
(Alahmari et al., 2022) produced a bespoke software application. This
application has developed a game to deliver security training based on
the theory of a transactive memory system (TMS). In addition, the authors have performed an empirical study on one hundred organizations
in Saudi Arabia to assess the impacts of this training application on the
employees. Their evaluation results indicated that their TMS-based
training application significantly has increased cybersecurity knowledge and awareness in those organizations.
5.2.3. Cyber-threat Intelligence sharing
Cyber-threat Intelligence (CTI) sharing has proved to be an effective
solution to detect suspicious traffic from notorious cyber actors; however, there are two main challenges concerning CTI sharing in FinTech.
First, using low-level Indicators of Compromise (IOCs), including IP/
Port addresses and domain names to attribute cyber-attacks, are highly
Fig. 18. The procedure of the user-reflective model to confront social engineering attacks, ().
adopted from Airehrour et al., 2018
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
19
prone to be deceived by attackers through changing, spoofing, proxies,
or anonymizing. These deceiving approaches have widely been
employed in novel attack patterns, particularly APTs, mainly when there
would be financial gains for attackers. Second, current methods are
usually based on manual analysis of IOCs taken from security information and event management (SIEM) systems, firewalls, and IDS applications. Manual analysis of IOCs is extraordinarily time-consuming and
tiresome, especially when a large volume of data is needed for a thorough inspection. Hence, several studies have introduced automated
approaches using machine learning techniques.
To this aim, Noor et al. (Noor et al., 2019) disclosed six cyber-threat
actors (CTAs) and presented an automatic framework to derive highlevel IOCs from existing unstructured human-readable CTI reports
applying natural language processing (NLP) and then attribute them.
Software tools, malware pieces, and tactics, techniques, and procedures
(TTP) used in attack patterns of cyber kill chains are considered highlevel IOCs. This study collected 327 CTI documents from 26 sources
between 2012 and 2018 to attribute 36 threats. They have proposed a
vocabulary to map the attack pattern queries to conceptual meaning by
labeling high-level IOCs from the Adversarial Tactics, Techniques, and
Common Knowledge (ATT&CK) dataset.14 ATT&CK taxonomy includes
188 TTP and 146 malware programs commonly utilized by CTAs. Then,
using Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) based on MITRE taxonomy3
, the
records were indexed, and a semantic search was conducted to seek
attack patterns. Five machine learning and deep learning algorithms
were employed to train the detector model. The authors used 10-fold
cross-validation to evaluate the performance of their proposed model.
The results indicated that the authors’ automated semantic system can
detect TTPs more accurately than manual approaches. The output’s
figures also demonstrated that the deep neural network (DNN) attributes
cybersecurity threats with higher precision, i.e. 94 %, compared to other
classifiers.
In another effort, Cascavilla et al. (Cascavilla et al., 2021) performed
a Topic Modeling Analysis (TMA) to extract features to recognize CTIs
from the Dark- and Deep-Web. This research further presented an
overview of features and risk parameters to detect threats of such
cybercrime activities. It also provided a taxonomy of threat engineering
and management to defeat their actors. Ultimately, this research
concluded with some recommendations, including website features and
the degree of anonymity for Law Enforcement Agencies to confront
cyber threats, particularly threats against the financial sector.
To hasten the international automated CTI sharing with a focus on IP
addresses in business-to-business trade, Sullivan and Burger (Sullivan &
Burger, 2017) published their findings of a cross-discipline research
project on perusing the data of 34 jurisdictions in the European Union
(EU). Despite the previous CTI sharing reviews developed at regional or
country levels, this study focused on a global scope for CTI sharing. This
study underscored the importance of recognizing whether an IP address
can be shared with third parties as a cyber threat intelligence legally or
not. After reviewing the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
agreed upon and officially adopted by the EU Parliament in 2016 and US
Data Protection Directive 95/46/EC (1995 Directive), they concluded
that automated business-to-business (B2B) CTI sharing of that data could
be carried out in the public interest under Article 6(1)(e) of the GDPR
and its equivalent in the 1995 Directive. This study proved that threat
intelligence sharing is in the public interest, and this interest can override the individual rights of a data subject under Article 8(1) of the
Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU and its equivalent in the 1995
Directive. However, they highlighted some deficiencies with Articles 13
and 14 of the GDPR concerning notification of the data subject and
recognizing bad/suspected actors. Hence, they proposed some policies
and procedures to bridge these gaps and pave the way for global automated CTI sharing in a lawful manner. The authors attempted to
convince the European Council and Parliament to adopt their proposal.
It is crystal clear that legal shortcomings exist in the legislation for
CTI sharing in FinTech, which has negatively affected the effectiveness
of this solution; hence, there is an urgent need to update/introduce new
legislation, particularly regarding automated sharing.
5.3. Procedure-related approaches
In concluding our review of defensive solutions, we outline methodologies put forth by five papers classified within the procedure-related
category of defenses. These solutions are designed to identify and close
the gaps in both internal and external policies and procedures of entities
operating within the FinTech sector.
5.3.1. Risk management policies
Risk management is the process of implementing an effective
cybersecurity plan, which has an undeniable role in international regulations for financial data protection. Some studies have reflected that a
complete perception of cyber risks is needed to ensure sufficient security
procedures in institutes and banks. The accuracy of risk management
highly depends on our knowledge of companies’ assets and features,
especially in the financial sector, since the main assets are money, securities, bonds, and stocks. Hence, a digital-asset assessment procedure
is desperately needed at the beginning step to allow suitable protection
against cyber threats, particularly for FinTech applications, in which
various technical and commercial assets have enclosed companies
(Bunnell et al., 2021). Unfortunately, proven models for measuring
cyber risks are scarce, and a few existing models have some limitations,
such as a lack of generalization, since most consider merely analyzing
past data to extract statistical and probabilistic models. Besides, quantitative approaches such as HTMA (Hubbard & Seierse, 2016) and FAIR
(Freund & Jones, 2015) are based on the likelihood of subjective evaluation of events, where the lack of sufficient quantitative data led to
inaccuracy with these models. On the other hand, while a sheer amount
of quantitative data allows a reliable assessment, it makes the analysis of
data usually time-consuming and sometimes not feasible (Masoud & AlUtaibi, 2022). Therefore, providing reliable models for cyber risk
exposure remains an open challenge. Besides, the financial sector needs
a fully customized risk management policy for cyber-insurance since the
assets in this sector are invaluable, easy to steal, and different from other
domains.
To bridge this lack, Santini et al. (Santini et al., 2019) suggest
combining objective data and probabilistic approaches as input for the
HTMA model to evaluate the cyber risk exposure in institutes and enterprises. The authors presented several data-driven key risk indicators
(KRIs) to be employed in the HTMA model in order to decrease the
subjectivity margin since lots of subjectivity in the risk assessment might
undermine the trustworthiness of results. They have combined a datadriven approach with a quantitative approach to assess the likely risks
of economic loss in a corporation and score its cyber exposure. The CIS
20 critical security controls were used to indicate the effectiveness of
applied measures. They have claimed that their proposed approach can
defeat the limitations of current risk assessment models based on estimating the occurrence likelihood and the observation of incidents that
have taken place in the past. Also, it has been claimed that this solution
is practically applicable to the financial sector and industrial
manufacturing world, which is a promising point.
5.3.2. Cyber-insurance
Insurance significantly decreases financial risks and allows protection against unexpected financial loss; however, the lack of sufficient
regulations has led to imperfect coverage of cyber incidents and cyberattacks. Pisoni et al., in their study (Pisoni & Díaz-Rodríguez, 2023),
indicated the requirements and specifications for these systems from a
regulation standpoint. Then, inspiring Tech-aided advisory systems in
all financial services, e.g. the AI-powered advisor that helps clients with 14 https://attack.mitre.org/.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
20
loans, they proposed a novel AI-based approach in which recommender
techniques were used to develop such an advisor to suggest insurance
coverage. This approach also included a transparent and trustworthy
system design responsible for designating which data can be relied upon
for the financial players. Insurance companies can deploy this system to
ensure the completeness of cyber insurance policies and cyber-attack
coverage.
5.3.3. Regularization technology
Regularization in FinTech is one of the primary requirements, and in
some cases like cryptocurrencies, is a missing point. Regulatory technology (RegTech) employs AI-enabled techniques for intelligent identification and early risk warning, which can be a powerful tool to reach
financial regulation. Chao et al. (Chao et al., 2022) have reviewed
intelligent technology applications in financial stability regulation to
analyze and highlight the limitations of RegTech. To achieve financial
stability, this research implemented RegTech by forming a framework
for the applications of machine learning, deep learning, knowledge
graphs, complex networks, and dynamic systems.
In another study, Currie et al. (Currie et al., 2018) conducted a
longitudinal study on the UK financial services industry. They investigated empirical data gathered over 12 years examining the deployment
of an investment management system in 8 financial firms. This study
proved how RegTech can be used in financial services to mitigate preand post-crisis, including cyber threats. Their findings indicated that
whereas a ’tsunami’ of financial regulations was introduced by government institutions and private investors in response to the financial
crisis so far, regulatory bodies should revise and impose compliance
mandates on financial firms to force them to adapt their financial
technologies in an ever-changing multi-jurisdictional regulatory
landscape.
6. Key findings
In this section, we discuss the results of our survey in detail. We
address the research questions outlined at the outset, share insights
gained, and offer recommendations for countering cyber threats in the
FinTech sector. We eventually suggest future research directions. Acronyms used in this section can be found in Table 4, where they are
expanded.
6.1. Most recent threats (RQ1)
To address RQ1, threats from various natures and origins, i.e.
technology-related, human factors, and procedures, can cause severe
hazards and put FinTech into jeopardy. According to our survey,
technology-related threats with six attack patterns are the most potent
type of threat against FinTech; in contrast, procedures with only two
attack vectors are the least possible threat, while threats that originate
from human factors are in an intermediate state. Fig. 19 displays the
distribution of these threats and their corresponding defenses, organized
by the percentage of related publications, and sorts them based on the
percentage of published papers in each category. This percentage was
derived from the number of papers retrieved using the query described
for this survey, adhering to the eligibility criteria explained in Section 3.
6.2. Most destructive threats (RQ2)
In addressing RQ2, we ranked threats based on their destructiveness
across various sectors, emphasizing the financial sector, as shown in
Fig. 20. In this figure, sectors that are highlighted have experienced
more frequent attacks and sustained greater damages from the corresponding threat(s). In the financial sector, Malware Attacks emerge as
the most prevalent and destructive, followed by DDoS and Social Engineering Attacks. This threat distribution is distinct for other sectors, e.g.
Internet Fraud and Industrial Espionage rank as the most common
threats in the health sector.
6.3. Existing defense strategies (RQ3)
In addressing RQ3, we present a comprehensive list of defensive
solutions in Table 5, detailing the threats each solution can mitigate. The
table offers a comparative analysis of these solutions from multiple
perspectives: their primary concept and contribution, their domain and
category, the specific service layer and channel they are designed for,
and finally, the environment in which the effectiveness of the solution
was evaluated.
As shown in Table 5, prominent features and limitations of the
offered defense methods were indicated. From one comparison, we
determined that using standard datasets is a necessary and inevitable
factor in performing a valid assessment of cyber threats. Hence, it is
inadvisable to place complete trust in studies that base their findings on
experimental datasets, especially when dealing with critical infrastructures like financial technology. Additionally, some studies have
overlooked the assessment of time complexity for their proposed feature
selection algorithms. An effective and on-time response to cyber-attacks
Table 4
The list of acronyms used in this section.
Acronym Expanded from Acronym Expanded from
A Application I Infrastructure
AC Access Control I Fraud Internet Fraud
And Android Int Det Intrusion Detection
Att Attacks Imp Implementation
Awar Awareness Malw Malware
BC Inf Blockchain Infrastructure Mng Management
CCS Cyber-culture & Security Mn Tns Money Transfer
Chn Channel P Platform
C Insur Cyber Insurance PW Power
CS Cybersecurity Ref Reference
DB Data Breach SC Supply Chains
Digi Extr Digital Extortion Sim Simulation
DL Data Leak Smrt Ctr Smart Contract
Env Environment Vulnr Vulnerability
Esp Espionage Win Windows
Fig. 19. The percentage of published papers in each category of threats and
defenses with a color spectrum.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
21
is heavily influenced by the computational complexity of these
algorithms.
6.4. Applying Defenses-to-Threats (RQ4)
This subsection addresses RQ4. Fig. 21 presents a taxonomy for
cybersecurity threats discussed in Section 4. Additionally, it provides a
hierarchical structure of defensive strategies derived from the papers
reviewed in Section 5. Besides, this subsection details the application of
these defensive solutions in countering imminent threats.
As shown in Fig. 21, threats originated from three main sources, i.e.
technology-based, human-originated, and procedure-related. Mirroring
this structure, defensive solutions are similarly categorized. Each
defensive method is capable of mitigating a single or multiple threats.
Two strategies exist for applying these solutions, represented as defensive layers, L1 and L2. The first utilizes AI-assisted decision support
systems for automatic threat response, while the second requires manual
intervention by a cybersecurity analyst.
L1 and L2 are responsible for identifying incoming threats and
selecting appropriate defensive strategies from available solutions. This
vital task is carried out in the first layer using AI-assisted decision support
systems. In the case of any failure or an unprecedented situation in which
the first layer (L1) would not be able to complete the task, and the
second layer (L2), i.e. Cybersecurity analysts, will take control to recognize the type of incoming attack and make a suitable decision to pick the
best possible defensive solution. Additionally, the cybersecurity analyst
can surveil and supervise L1 procedures and decisions. However, this
approach has a significant limitation since human analysts cannot
handle all the incoming threats, considering the sheer amount of today’s
cybersecurity attacks against FinTech. This underscores the indispensable need for an AI-assisted decision support system.
6.5. Lessons learned and recommendations (RQ5)
Lessons learned from studying identified papers regarding cyberattacks that occurred in FinTech as well as our recommendations, are
reported in Table 6. These recommendations can be beneficial for
businesses, banks, institutes, and entities active in the financial sector to
bear ever-growing cybersecurity threats, take an effective response, and
last their businesses.
6.6. Future research directions (RQ6)
With the advancement in IT and AI and considering their pervasive
nature in all aspects of today’s human life, researching to meticulously
investigate cybersecurity threats in other sectors, particularly
manufacturing, energy, and health, should urgently be undertaken. It
paves the way to propose and improve defense solutions against skyrocketed cyber threats that are rapidly evolving. Addressing RQ6, we
suggest directions for future research, aiming to address existing
drawbacks and limitations with current defensive methods and systems.
Fig. 20. The distribution of cyber threats against various sectors, where a bigger circle indicates a more destructive threat.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
22
Table 5
A list of the best-offered defensive solutions to mitigate cyber threats against FinTech.
Reference Main idea and contribution Domain Category Mitigated Threats Service
Layer
Chn Env
Malw DDoS Digital
Extortion
Insiders Social
Eng.
Internet
Fraud
Data
Breach
Data
Leak
I P A
Noor et al. (Noor
et al., 2019)
An automatic framework to derive high-level IOCs
from existing unstructured human-readable CTI
reports applying Natural Language Processing (NLP)
Technology CTI Sharing ✓✓ ✓ ✓ Web Imp
Cascavilla et al. (
Cascavilla et al.,
2021)
A Topic Modeling Analysis (TMA) to recognize the
most dangerous cyber threats in the Dark-Web and
Deep-Web.
✓ ✓ ✓ Web Sim
Sullivan and
Burger (
Sullivan &
Burger, 2017)
Investigating the legal aspects of automated CTI
sharing with a focus on IP addresses for international
B2B players by perusing 34 jurisdictions’ data.
Recommendations to revise the current GDPR in the
EU and the 1995 Directive in the US.
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Sherman et al. (
Sharmeen et al.,
2020)
A semi-supervised framework using ML-based
algorithms, including SVM and RF, for the detection
of Ransomware attacks
Anti-malware and
Intrusion
Detection
✓ ✓ ✓ Win Imp
Min et al. (Min
et al., 2022)
Proposed a defensive approach against Ransomware
attacks, containing a detection model and a recovery
method based on Solid-State Drive backup.
✓ ✓ ✓ Win Imp
Bai et al. (Bai
et al., 2021)
Using a triadic graph mining approach to detect
Android Banking Trojans based on APIs.
✓ ✓ And Imp
Dassouki et al. (
Dassouki et al.,
2017)
Proposing an intrusion detection system to deal with
DDoS attacks, including SIP flooding and TDoS
attacks, against authentication mechanisms in
mobile/telephone banking systems.
✓ ✓ Multi Imp
Malaquias and
Hwang
(Malaquias &
Hwang, 2016)
Conducting an empirical study on trust assessment in
mobile banking systems through Structural Equation
Modeling and Confirmatory Factor Analysis on 1077
questionnaires collected in Brazil in 2016.
Indicating barriers to building trust in FinTech
systems and accelerating its adoption in banks.
Access Control ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Hernandez et al. (
Hern´andez
et al., 2019)
Present S&P solutions for data protection on FinTech
platforms to build trust in financial services.
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Qiu et al. (Qiu
et al., 2018)
An attribute-based access control system leveraging a
proactive user-centric data security approach to be
employed in the financial sector.
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Multi Imp
Lei et al. (Lei &
Ngai, 2023)
Profiling 443 articles to present a new classification
of BC applications in information systems and
highlighting the promising role of BC in the future
systems designs of financial services.
BC Technology ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Multi
Raddatz et al. (
Raddatz et al.,
2021)
Using BC as a data store infrastructure in financialrelated applications instead of traditional database
systems. Promoting data privacy and transaction
integrity leveraging BC.
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Imp
Berdik et al. (
Berdik et al.,
2021)
Studying the role of BC in information systems.
Indicating how BC can be leveraged to develop or
improve the next generation of information systems
in modern enterprises, focusing on financial
information systems (FIS).
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Muti Imp
(continued on next page)
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
23
Table 5 (continued )
Reference Main idea and contribution Domain Category Mitigated Threats Service
Layer
Chn Env
Malw DDoS Digital
Extortion
Insiders Social
Eng.
Internet
Fraud
Data
Breach
Data
Leak
I P A
Zimba et al. (
Zimba et al.,
2019)
Exploring cryptojacking injection attacks in the
crypto-mining attacks landscape and studying a stateof-the-art web-centric attack vector.
Smart Contracts ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Web
Hassani et al. (
Hassani et al.,
2018)
Reviewing the effects of implementing BC in the
financial and banking sector, as well as the challenges
of big data facing BC infrastructure. Reporting solid
evidence of adopting BC technology in several banks.
✓ ✓ ✓ Web Imp
Sindhwani et al. (
Sindhwani
et al., 2023)
Analyzing the adoption of BC in supply chains and its
effects, including the integrity and sustainability of
product manifest, data sharing, traceability, and endto-end visibility of products in Industry 4.0.
✓ ✓ ✓
Wamba et al. (
Fosso Wamba
et al., 2020)
Investigating the SC industry to determine the pros
and cons of employing SC instead of money in various
industries to deal with challenges in FinTech.
Money Transfer ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Syed et al. (Syed
et al., 2022)
Studying existing risks and cyber threats against
supply chain using a systematic asset-centric threat
modeling method. Adopting the STRIDE threat model
to describe common threats in supply chains and
accommodate a platform for secure traceability and
falsifiability.
✓ ✓ ✓ Web Imp
Suegami (
Suegami, 2022)
Proposing a cryptography-based obfuscation
technique to evaluate the trust level in smart
contracts and cryptocurrencies.
Supply Chain
Management
✓ ✓ ✓ Web Imp
Almakhour et al. (
Almakhour
et al., 2023)
A new method to perform formal verification in smart
contracts employing finite state machine.
✓✓ ✓ ✓ Web Imp
Varga et al. (Varga
et al., 2021)
Presenting a Common Operational Picture (COP) as a
base for establishing Cyber Situational Awareness
(CSA).
Human Cyber-culture and
Security
Awareness
✓ ✓ ✓ N/A N/A
Airehrour et al. (
Airehrour et al.,
2018)*
Suggesting a User-reflective model for recognizing
and mitigating social engineering attacks in Banks of
New Zealand.
✓
de Leon et al. (de
Leon et al.,
2018)
Proposing a tutorial for implementing practical
security measurements at the OS level.
Cybersecurity
Training
✓ ✓
Shillair et al. (
Shillair et al.,
2022)
Providing some proposals for cybersecurity training
and awareness using pieces of evidence at the
national level in 80 countries worldwide.
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Alahmari et al. (
Alahmari et al.,
2022)
A new model and mobile applications for
cybersecurity training, awareness, and knowledge
sharing.
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Santini et al. (
Santini et al.,
2019)
Combining objective data and probabilistic
approaches as input for the HTMA model to evaluate
the cyber risk exposure in institutes and enterprises.
Procedure Risk Management ✓ N/A N/A
Masoud et al. (
Masoud & AlUtaibi, 2022)
A framework to determine the empirical indicators
for assessing cybersecurity risks in the financial
sector based on financial reports.
✓ ✓ ✓
Pisoni et al. (
Pisoni & DíazRodríguez,
2023)
Determining the requirements and specifications for
cybersecurity insurance from a legal standpoint.
Developing an AI-powered recommender system to
suggest insurance coverage for financial services.
Cyber-insurance ✓ ✓ ✓
(continued on next page)
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
24
6.6.1. In terms of technology
(a) It was alerted in this paper that, whereas the number of total
malware has significantly surged during recent years, the number
of detected banking malware has decreased. This proves significant advances in stealth behavior and silent actions in new
banking malware generations. Hence, malware detection
methods and tools need rapid innovation to detect such intelligent malware classes. To effectively deal with these new technologies that banking malware is equipped with, Anti-malware
scanners need to use new hooking technology able to perform
deeper scans at the lowest level of the operating systems’ kernel.
Although deeper hooks make interpreting and modeling the
processes’ behavior more complex, more stealth malware can be
identified and tracked. Using interrupt-level hooks instead of IRP
hooks, which are the most common way these days, is our suggestion to be considered by the researchers in the cybersecurity
community.
(b) Implementing BC as the infrastructure enables many security
advantages. However, the problem of processing big data and
today’s large-size and high-dimensional datasets in the financial
sector caused some obstacles. If these obstacles are tackled, the
way will be paved for the rapid adoption of BC in the financial
sector. As a short-term research direction, researchers from
distributed systems and big data analytics fields could focus on
employing BC-powered applications to process big data more
effectively with an acceptable response time. Making BCpowered applications adaptable to big real-time systems can
also be considered for long-term research.
(c) It is somehow too early to talk about vanishing the concept of
money in new supply chains; however, it has been anticipated by
some papers studied in this survey that, sooner or later, the
concept of money - in its current form - will disappear or be
replaced with new euphemisms in future BC-powered supply
chains. Studying the feasibility of this paradigm shift can be
attractive to researchers and scientists in the fields of the digital
economy, information systems, law, and IT as an interdisciplinary
research topic.
(d) Although several AC models have been introduced in the literature to guarantee the integrity and confidentiality of information
systems in general, none of them concentrated on ensuring the
integrity and confidentiality of financial data. The generic AC
models impose a considerable delay in granting access to financial data if they want to fully guarantee confidentiality and
integrity. Respecting the great importance of the speed of
committing financial transactions, the design and implementation of a customized AC system for FinTech rather than generic
AC systems can be considered by scholars as an important future
research direction, aiming to improve the performance of FinTech systems while integrity and confidentiality are guaranteed.
6.6.2. In terms of human factors
(a) Employing CEH teams to perform penetration testing is a missing
piece in the defense solutions offered by papers studied in this
survey. Considering today’s inter-connected large-scale networks
and massive storage of digital information, penetration tests by a
trusted CEH team make it feasible for early detection of security
flaws and patching them before rivals or malicious hackers can
find and exploit them for infiltration, espionage, or destruction.
Meanwhile, employing a CEH team needs many sensitive considerations and legal policies besides technical standards,
checklists, frameworks, and tools. The investigation and updating
of policies and legal affairs required for employing the CEH team
is suggested for future research direction, as this evidently lacks
Table
sufficient published materials to be referred to.
5 (continued )
Reference Main idea and contribution Domain Category Mitigated Threats Service
Layer
Chn Env
Malw DDoS Digital
Extortion
Insiders Social
Eng.
Internet
Fraud
Data
Breach
Data
Leak
I P A
Chao et al. (Chao
et al., 2022)
Analyzing AI applications in financial stability
regulation to overcome the limitations of RegTech to
reach financial stability. Proposing a RegTech
framework for machine learning, knowledge graphs,
complex networks, and dynamic systems
applications.
RegTech ✓
Currie et al. (
Currie et al.,
2018)
Analyzing empirical data gathered over 12 years
examining the deployment of an investment
management system in 8 financial firms in the UK
from a regulatory landscape. Proving how RegTech
can be used in financial services to mitigate pre- and
post-crisis, including cyber threats.
✓
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
25
Fig. 21. A taxonomy of defensive strategies versus a hierarchy of cybersecurity threats in FinTech.
Table 6
Lessons learned from previous cyber-attacks and our recommendation to address them.
Topic Lessons learned Our recommendations
All human-originated
threats
- Compared to well-developed intelligent defensive systems, human beings
are the weakest link in the digital system’s life cycle, where social, psychological, and cultural factors can influence their behavior. In this case,
the human-originated factors are sometimes the least challenging and
most accessible possible gateway for infiltrating secure facilities.
- Technology is being used to deceive humans as the most recent trend of
cyber threat in FinTech.
- Cyber-culture and security awareness to negate a large number of threats,
including both technology-based and human-originated threats from the
very beginning.
Insider Attacks - As a result of an increase in the number of insider attacks, recent solutions
and security debates should be enlarged to include trusted employees,
contractors, and business partners with more focus on insider threats
(Erola et al., 2022).
- Trust is a vital factor for FinTech systems since it not only brings efficiency
to financial institutions and banks but also can potentially improve
clients’ quality of life (Malaquias & Hwang, 2016).
- Providing pre- para- and post-employment policies and agreements to
maintain the confidentiality of data and information at an appropriate
level and guarantee it for a suitable period after the employment term.
- Post-employment has been the most neglected policy in many big
companies and businesses
- Although BYOD policies are critical to employees and have an undeniable
role in their interaction, they cannot be followed in the FinTech sector as
they might be a potential source for the propagation of security flaws and
vulnerabilities and, thus, loss of clients’ trust.
Malware Attacks - There is a hide-and-seek relation between security threats categorized in
Section 4. For instance, digital extortion, DDoS, and industrial espionage
are frequently carried out by malware programs. Therefore, in addition to
direct attacks, malware programs can perform the role of attack vectors
for other types of security threats. (Jiang et al., 2020); (Vignau et al.,
2021)
- If the malware is launched and the attack gets started, much more effort
will be needed to defuse the attack. It mainly needs stopping and
restarting the systems, which might cause service interruption. These
interruptions are extremely costly for the financial sector.
- Understanding malware’s internal procedures and attack patterns is the
most effective way to confront a broad range of cyber-attacks since the
primary source, malware executable file, will be eradicated.
- Using Anti-malware applications that are tailored to work based on a
hybrid malware analysis method, as they can simultaneously utilize the
advantages of static and dynamic analysis methods.
- Being equipped with monitoring/intercepting facilities based on
transparent hooks at kernel-level. IRP hooks or hooks with more depth in
the OS kernel space are much more effective in detecting APT attacks of
banking malware than other types of hooks (Javaheri et al., 2021).
- IRP hooks can be implanted using kernel-level filter drivers in different
versions of Windows NT.
Banking Malware - In marked contrast to a drastic incensement in the number of malware in
recent years, according to credible resources, the number of banking
malware, responsible for most catastrophic damage in the financial sector,
has significantly decreased. Our study discovered and disclosed that they
have not reduced in reality; they have become stealthier and more
obfuscated, so they are detected less by AVs.
- Like the Spyware class, banking malware is one of the most challenging
classes to detect by AVs as they are well-equipped with several obfuscation and metamorphism engines (Bai et al., 2021).
- Hardware trojans capable of stealing sensitive financial information might
be embedded into a variety of equipment used in the FinTech sector that
are not observable by visual inspection (Peris-Lopez & Martín, 2017).
- Using specialized Anti-spyware applications besides generic AVs for systems and servers that host financial services and FinTech applications to
detect stealth banking malware.
- Generic AVs usually ignore scanning inter-process communication (IPC)
for child processes/threads with a depth of three or more since it consumes plenty of system resources, resulting in system lags.
- Anti-spyware applications are tailored to intercept IPC communication
with more depth than generic AVs - usually up to the depth of 7 parent/
child processes or threads rather than 3 inter-app (Grace & Sughasiny,
2022).
- Optical inspection or Scanning Electron Microscopy is highly
recommended to detect hidden hardware trojans and security assurance
of critical equipment employed by FinTech service providers (Al Hasan,
2023).
(continued on next page)
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
26
Table 6 (continued )
Topic Lessons learned Our recommendations
Digital Extortion - There is always a significant chance of ransomware attacks for digital
extortion from organizations, particularly those that are active in the
financial sector. This chance was estimated to be 66 % by Sophos15 report
in 2022.
- Over 90 % of malware programs are tailored to run on the Windows OS
(Javaheri et al., 2021).
- Getting backups from the sensitive data and storing them on external and
firewalled/air-gapped servers, aiming to prevent the propagation of ransomware to the backup servers.
- Employing different OS for BK systems to prevent the deployment of
ransomware infection. Notably, in case of firewall failure, the
Ransomware executables cannot be launched and executed on the BK
machine(s) (Min et al., 2022).
- Using various platforms of virtualization technology (VT) for main and BK
servers, e.g. one IntelVT and the other AMD-V, to immune the BK servers
against malware able to perform Hyperjacking attacks like Blue Pill.
Social Engineering - The lack of awareness concerning cybersecurity threats among victims is
the root cause of the success of social engineering and doxing attacks
(Khanna et al., 2016).
- A comprehensive understanding of attack vectors is desperately required
to develop effective countermeasures and protect employees from social
engineering attacks (Krombholz et al., 2015).
- Cyber-culture and security awareness was recognized as the most effective
solution in addressing threats originating from humans.
- Holding regular cybersecurity training programs for personnel of banks,
financial institutes, and companies at any level of employment, including
high-, mid-, and low-level managers and employees.
Shortage of
cybersecurity
experts
- Training well-skilled cybersecurity experts in the quantity needed in the
financial sector requires plenty of experience and practical efforts and
cannot be accomplished in a short time (de Leon et al., 2018).
- Companies that have hired experts from other areas of computer science
as cybersecurity experts have experienced more challenges and suffered
more cyber damages as the result of security flaws caused by
misconfiguration of cyber defense equipment, in particular IDS, AVs,
firewalls, honeypots, and unified threat management (UTM) systems
(Shillair et al., 2022; Alahmari et al., 2022).
- To occupy the cybersecurity specialist posts, employing experts with
backgrounds in other areas of computer science and IT rather than pure
cybersecurity is strongly negated due to the possibility of
misconfiguration of security equipment.
Lack of CTI Sharing - Enormous financial loss and reputation damage have been imposed on
FinTech-enabled services as the result of electricity disruption and loss of
power supplies (Venkatachary et al., 2021).
- The majority of financial service providers have restricted access to
malicious and abroad IPs. However, this defensive strategy was lacking for
many power supplier entities (Cascavilla et al., 2021).
- To prevent the propagation of consequences from cyber-attacks against
power suppliers to the financial sector, the policy of abroad IP restriction
should also be followed by the companies supplying power to the financial
industry.
- A CTI sharing agreement between the financial and energy sectors is
needed to regularly update and sync their threat indicators through
common security vendors.
- Current legislations, GDPR in the EU and the 1995 Directive in the US,
should be revised to fully legalize automated CTI sharing (Sullivan &
Burger, 2017).
Lack of cyberinsurance
- Hazards originating from nature, like fire, or human activities like theft,
have always caught the attention of investors to arrange insurance policies
covering the risks and damages. However, investors and insurance makers
have not paid enough attention to hazards originating from cyber
incidents. Given many recent cybersecurity incidents resulting in
considerable financial loss, cyber insurance policies need to be
reconsidered (Pisoni & Díaz-Rodríguez, 2023).
- Players in the financial sector are to ensure they have insurance policies to
cover cyber incidents, focusing on sufficient responsibilities for
cybersecurity attacks, particularly insider attacks.
Sluggish Speed of
Defenses vs. Threats
- Whereas banks and financial institutions have grown increasingly aware
of the changing threat landscape and the debilitating effects of attacks on
the availability, integrity, and confidentiality of financial data and
services, numerous recent catastrophic cyber-attacks proved that the
speed of changing cyber threat landscaper has been much more than the
growth in cyber-culture awareness of financial institutes and banks (Varga
et al., 2021).
- Enhancing the speed of cyber-culture awareness, cybersecurity training,
and employing new technology-related solutions like BC.
- An immediate update of current defense systems with the latest security
patches, specifically for IDS, AVs, and Firewalls.
General - FinTech is a mission-critical application (Jin et al., 2019). - To effectively deal with such a wide range of cyber-attacks threatening the
financial sector, the combination of both AI-assisted decision support
systems and manual approaches by security experts is indispensable to
respond to the sheer number of today’s attacks as well as to deal with low
and slow APTs and insiders, respectively.
- A defense-in-depth (DiD) architecture containing multi-layer defense
strategies should be implemented for FinTech services to take effective
and on-time actions against imminent threats.
General - It is undeniable in cybersecurity that vulnerabilities and flaws always
exist, and no defense strategies can guarantee security to one hundred
percent. Hence, it is far more reasonable that these latent vulnerabilities
be detected by trusted persons instead of malicious individuals (Wang
et al., 2020).
- Employing a certified ethical hacking (CEH) team of trusted experts and
putting the pre- and post-employment policy.
- Performing ethical penetration tests as rigorously as possible against all
the assets, equipment, procedures, and even individuals for the big players
in the financial sector based on standards and legislation.
- OWASP ASVS 4.0.315 is one of the most notable penetration test
standards for the security verification of web-based applications.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
27
Table A1
The list and details of papers included for qualitative synthesis (Step 4) in this survey.
Threat/Defense Main category Subcategory Reference Channel Source Year
Threats (43 papers) Technology-based Malware (Black et al., 2018) Journal ScienceDirect 2018
(Noor et al., 2019) Journal ScienceDirect 2019
(Peris-Lopez & Martín, 2017) Journal ScienceDirect 2017
DDoS (P´erez-Díaz et al., 2020) Journal IEEE Xplore 2020
(Javaheri et al., 2023) Journal ScienceDirect 2023
(Mustafa et al., 2018) Journal ScienceDirect 2018
(Golait & Hubballi, 2017) Journal IEEE 2017
Digital Extortion (Keshavarzi & Ghaffary, 2020) Journal ScienceDirect 2020
(Sharmeen et al., 2020) Journal IEEE Xplore 2020
(Molina et al., 2022) Journal IEEE Xplore 2022
(Min et al., 2022) Journal IEEE Xplore 2022
Industrial Espionage (Hou & Wang, 2020) Journal ScienceDirect 2020
(Sadok et al., 2020) Journal Springer Link 2020
(H¨
arting et al., 2022) Conference ScienceDirect 2022
Vulnerability in IIOTs (Soni et al., 2022) Journal ScienceDirect 2022
(Sha et al., 2019) Journal ACM 2019
(Zhang et al., 2020) Journal ScienceDirect 2020
(McDermott et al., 2018) Conference IEEE Xplore 2018
(Jiang et al., 2020) Journal ACM 2020
(Vignau et al., 2021) Journal ScienceDirect 2021
(Madan et al., 2022) Journal ScienceDirect 2022
(Taheri et al., 2021) Journal IEEE Xplore 2021
(Stellios et al., 2021) Journal ScienceDirect 2021
Power Attacks (Han et al., 2019) Journal ScienceDirect 2019
(Yang et al., 2020) Journal ScienceDirect 2020
(Liang et al., 2017) Journal IEEE 2017
(Wang et al., 2017) Journal ScienceDirect 2017
(Venkatachary et al., 2021) Journal Springer Link 2021
(Xu et al., 2020) Journal IEEE Xplore 2020
Human-originated Insider Attacks (Erola et al., 2022) Journal ScienceDirect 2022
(Yuan & Wu, 2021) Journal ScienceDirect 2021
Social Engineering (Krombholz et al., 2015) Journal ScienceDirect 2015
(Botacin et al., 2018) Journal ACM 2018
(Khanna et al., 2016) Conference ScienceDirect 2016
(Al-Hamar et al., 2021) Journal ScienceDirect 2021
(Airehrour et al., 2018) Journal MDPI 2018
Internet Fraud (Wang et al., 2022) Journal ScienceDirect 2022
(Ali et al., 2019) Journal ScienceDirect 2019
(Carminati et al., 2018) Journal ACM 2018
Procedure-related Data Leak (Ahmad, 2021) Magazine IEEE Xplore 2021
(Burow et al., 2020) Conference ACM 2020
(Millions of records leaked ..., 2021) Journal ScienceDirect 2021
Data Breach (Lee et al., 2022) Journal ScienceDirect 2022
Defenses (31 + 3* papers) Technology-based CTI Sharing (Noor et al., 2019)* Journal ScienceDirect 2019
(Cascavilla et al., 2021) Journal ScienceDirect 2021
(Sullivan & Burger, 2017) Journal ScienceDirect 2017
Anti-malware and Intrusion Detection (Sharmeen et al., 2020)* Journal IEEE Xplore 2020
(Min et al., 2022)* Journal IEEE Xplore 2022
(Bai et al., 2021) Journal IEEE Xplore 2021
(Dassouki et al., 2017) Journal ScienceDirect 2017
Access Control Systems (Malaquias & Hwang, 2016) Journal ScienceDirect 2016
(Hern´
andez et al., 2019) Journal ScienceDirect 2018
(Qiu et al., 2018) Conference Springer Link 2019
BC Technology (Lei & Ngai, 2023) Journal ScienceDirect 2023
(Raddatz et al., 2021) Journal ScienceDirect 2021
(Hong et al., 2018) Conference ACM 2018
(Berdik et al., 2021) Journal ScienceDirect 2021
BC Infrastructure Smart Contracts (Guo et al., 2021) Journal ScienceDirect 2021
(Du et al., 2019) Journal ScienceDirect 2019
(Zimba et al., 2019) Journal Taylor & Francis 2019
(Hassani et al., 2018) Journal Taylor & Francis 2018
Money Transfer (Wang et al., 2019) Journal Emerald 2019
(Paul et al., 2022) Journal ScienceDirect 2022
(Fosso Wamba et al., 2020) Journal Taylor & Francis 2020
(Syed et al., 2022) Journal ScienceDirect 2022
Supply Chain Management (Suegami, 2022) Journal ScienceDirect 2022
(Almakhour et al., 2023) Journal ScienceDirect 2022
Human-originated Cyber Culture and Security Awareness (Varga et al., 2021) Journal ScienceDirect 2021
(Airehrour et al., 2018) Journal MDPI 2021
Cybersecurity Training (de Leon et al., 2018) Journal ACM 2018
(Shillair et al., 2022) Journal ScienceDirect 2022
(Alahmari et al., 2022) Journal Springer Link 2022
Procedure-related Risk Management Policies (Santini et al., 2019) Journal Hindawi 2019
(Masoud & Al-Utaibi, 2022) Journal ScienceDirect 2022
(continued on next page)
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
28
(b) Because of the misuse of lawful access, detecting insider threats is
much more complicated than detecting outsiders, and their repercussions and consequences are far more devastating. Given
the hidden nature of insider attacks and their growing trend,
future research should consider the rapid development of an insider digital forensic investigation and an insider threat program,
as systematic forensic-readiness was discovered to be a neglected
point by many entities in the financial sector.
6.6.3. In terms of procedures
(a) Whereas some ISO standards were introduced to provide checklists of cybersecurity essentials to be implemented in businesses
and enterprises, there is a lack of an ISO standard capable of
covering all technology-, human-, and process-based risk factors
for the FinTech systems. Hence, we propose that developing such
standards and policies, including security checklists for the
financial sector, be considered a subject for future research by
scientists in the cybersecurity and economy sectors.
(b) Currently, insurance companies offer some insurance policies to
cover cyber incidents. However, many ambiguities and controversies exist with these insurance policies, e.g. what kind of cyber
incidents should be covered? How to designate the origin of a
cyber incident? How to prove whether a cyber incident results
from a cyber-attack or not? What kinds of evidence are required
to prove the impact of a certain attack? Responding to these
concerns requires determining if a cyber insurance policy offers
sufficient responsibilities and coverage against cybersecurity attacks. Therefore, we strongly recommend deep and comprehensive reviews of the legal acts to make cyber insurance policies
adaptable to cover cybersecurity attacks and digital forensics.
(c) Providing reliable models to measure and quantify cybersecurity
risks still has many open challenges. Therefore, much more effort
and research need to be conducted to extract a holistic legal
framework, as well as in-detail legislation to be cited as a base for
measuring cybersecurity risks. Besides, the financial sector needs
a dedicated risk management policy as the assets are invaluable,
untouchable, and radically different from other domains.
7. Conclusion
FinTech has revolutionized the financial sector by delivering global
digital services to organizations and individuals. The rapid development
of FinTech, further propelled by the COVID-19 pandemic, has brought
transformative changes to economies and broadened access to financial
services. In this survey paper, we explored the most potential and
destructive cybersecurity threats targeting FinTech and reviewed the
latest defense solutions, analyzing 74 papers using PRISMA methodology. We introduced a novel taxonomy of security threats in FinTech and
elaborated on the application of defensive measures against incoming
threats. Our comparison covered various perspectives, including technical details, the impacts, and defense efficacy, shedding light on current
shortcomings in threat detection and defense strategy. We proposed
actionable insights and recommendations to address these gaps,
intending to improve business resilience and sustainability. The findings
are of paramount importance to key stakeholders in the financial sector,
such as banks and enterprises, as they provide a roadmap for cybersecurity experts to address the ever-evolving threats in this mission-critical
arena.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Danial Javaheri: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis,
Investigation, Methodology, Resources, Validation, Visualization,
Writing – original draft. Mahdi Fahmideh: Conceptualization, Formal
analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Writing – review &
editing. Hassan Chizari: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Writing – review & editing. Pooia
Lalbakhsh: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Writing – review & editing. Junbeom Hur:
Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Resources, Supervision, Validation, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the
Korea government (MSIT) (No. 2022-0-00411, IITP-2023-2021-0-
01810, IITP-2023-2020-0-01819) and National Research Foundation
of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (NRF2021R1A6A1A13044830).
Appendix A
References
Muthukannan, P., Tan, B., Gozman, D., & Johnson, L. (Dec. 2020). The emergence of a
Fintech Ecosystem: A case study of the Vizag Fintech Valley in India. Information &
Management, 57(8), Article 103385. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IM.2020.103385
P. Gomber, R. J. Kauffman, C. Parker, and B. W. Weber, “On the Fintech Revolution:
Interpreting the Forces of Innovation, Disruption, and Transformation in Financial
Services,” 10.1080/07421222.2018.1440766, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 220–265, Jan. 2018,
10.1080/07421222.2018.1440766.
D. Gozman, J. Liebenau, and J. Mangan, “The Innovation Mechanisms of Fintech StartUps: Insights from SWIFT’s Innotribe Competition,” 10.1080/
07421222.2018.1440768, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 145–179, Jan. 2018, 10.1080/
07421222.2018.1440768.
Ashta, A., & Herrmann, H. (May 2021). Artificial intelligence and fintech: An overview of
opportunities and risks for banking, investments, and microfinance. Strategic Change,
30(3), 211–222. https://doi.org/10.1002/jsc.2404
M. Mocanu, “Management of Cyber-Espionage Intrusions,” in 16 Edition of The
International Conference European Integration - Realities and Perspectives. Proceedings,
2021.
Mirsky, Y., & Lee, W. (Jan. 2021). The Creation and Detection of Deepfakes: A Survey.
ACM Computing Surveys, 54(1). https://doi.org/10.1145/3425780
Liebrenz, M., Schleifer, R., Buadze, A., Bhugra, D., & Smith, A. (2023). Generating
scholarly content with ChatGPT: Ethical challenges for medical publishing. Lancet
Digit Health, 5(3), pp. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2589-7500(23)00019-5
Table A1 (continued )
Threat/Defense Main category Subcategory Reference Channel Source Year
Cyber-insurance (Pisoni & Díaz-Rodríguez, 2023) Journal ScienceDirect 2023
RegTech (Chao et al., 2022) Journal ScienceDirect 2022
(Currie et al., 2018) Journal Springer Link 2018
* These references have studied a threat and a defense approach simultaneously. Hence, they have been listed in both threats and defenses.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
29
Ge, W., Lalbakhsh, P., Isai, L., Lenskiy, A., & Suominen, H. (Jan. 2022). Neural NetworkBased Financial Volatility Forecasting: A Systematic Review. ACM Computing
Surveys, 55(1). https://doi.org/10.1145/3483596
Nasir, A., Jan, N., Pamucar, D., & Khan, S. U. (Aug. 2023). Analysis of cybercrimes and
security in FinTech industries using the novel concepts of interval-valued complex qrung orthopair fuzzy relations. Expert Systems with Applications, 224, Article 119976.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ESWA.2023.119976
Karim, S., Naz, F., Naeem, M. A., & Vigne, S. A. (2022). Is FinTech providing effective
solutions to Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in ASEAN countries? Econ Anal
Policy, 75, 335–344. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eap.2022.05.019
Bajunaied, K., Hussin, N., & Kamarudin, S. (Mar. 2023). Behavioral intention to adopt
FinTech services: An extension of unified theory of acceptance and use of
technology. Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity, 9(1),
Article 100010. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JOITMC.2023.100010
Gai, K., Qiu, M., & Sun, X. (2018). A survey on FinTech. Journal of Network and Computer
Applications, 103, 262–273. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2017.10.011
Huang, K., Siegel, M., & Madnick, S. (Jul. 2018). Systematically Understanding the Cyber
Attack Business: A Survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 51(4). https://doi.org/10.1145/
3199674
Mehrban, S., et al. (2020). Towards Secure FinTech: A Survey, Taxonomy, and Open
Research Challenges. IEEE Access, 8, 23391–23406. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2020.2970430
Chen, H., Pendleton, M., Njilla, L., & Xu, S. (Jun. 2020). A Survey on Ethereum Systems
Security: Vulnerabilities, Attacks, and Defenses. ACM Computing Surveys, 53(3).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3391195
Bollaert, H., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., & Schwienbacher, A. (2021). Fintech and access to
finance. Journal of Corporate Finance, 68, Article 101941. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcorpfin.2021.101941
N. Kaloudi and J. Li, “The AI-Based Cyber Threat Landscape: A Survey,” ACM Comput.
Surv., vol. 53, no. 1, Feb. 2020, 10.1145/3372823.
Liberati, A., et al. (2009). The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and
meta-analyses of studies that evaluate healthcare interventions: Explanation and
elaboration. BMJ, 339. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.b2700
Ambore, S., Richardson, C., Dogan, H., Apeh, E., & Osselton, D. (Oct. 2017). A resilient
cybersecurity framework for Mobile Financial Services (MFS). Journal of Cyber
Security Technology, 1(3–4), 202–224. https://doi.org/10.1080/
23742917.2017.1386483
Stallings, W., & Brown, L. (2018). Computer Security: Principles and Practice (4th ed.).
USA: Pearson Education Inc.
Black, P., Gondal, I., & Layton, R. (2018). A survey of similarities in banking malware
behaviours. Computers & Security, 77, 756–772. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cose.2017.09.013
Javaheri, D., Hosseinzadeh, M., & Rahmani, A. M. (2018). Detection and elimination of
spyware and ransomware by intercepting kernel-level system routines. IEEE Access,
6. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2884964
Santini, P., Gottardi, G., Baldi, M., & Chiaraluce, F. (2019). A Data-Driven Approach to
Cyber Risk Assessment. Security and Communication Networks, 2019, 6716918.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/6716918
Noor, U., Anwar, Z., Amjad, T., & Choo, K.-K.-R. (2019). A machine learning-based
FinTech cyber threat attribution framework using high-level indicators of
compromise. Future Generation Computer Systems, 96, 227–242. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.future.2019.02.013
Ghafir, I., et al. (2018). Detection of advanced persistent threat using machine-learning
correlation analysis. Future Generation Computer Systems, 89, 349–359. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.future.2018.06.055
Peris-Lopez, P., & Martín, H. (Jun. 2017). Hardware Trojans against virtual keyboards on
e-banking platforms – A proof of concept. AEU - International Journal of Electronics
and Communications, 76, 146–151. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AEUE.2017.04.003
“HSBC bank and Irish National Lottery among latest DDoS victims,” Computer Fraud &
Security, vol. 2016, no. 2, pp. 1–3, Feb. 2016, 10.1016/S1361-3723(16)30011-2.
P´erez-Díaz, J. A., Valdovinos, I. A., Choo, K.-K.-R., & Zhu, D. (2020). A Flexible SDNBased Architecture for Identifying and Mitigating Low-Rate DDoS Attacks Using
Machine Learning. IEEE Access, 8, 155859–155872. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2020.3019330
Wang, X., Yang, H., & Zhong, S. (2021). Improved results on consensus of nonlinear
MASs with nonhomogeneous Markov switching topologies and DoS cyber attacks.
Journal of the Franklin Institute, 358(14), 7237–7253. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jfranklin.2021.07.044
Varga, S., Brynielsson, J., & Franke, U. (2021). Cyber-threat perception and risk
management in the Swedish financial sector. Computers & Security, 105, Article
102239. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2021.102239
Sharifian, Z., Barekatain, B., Quintana, A. A., Beheshti, Z., & Safi-Esfahani, F. (Oct. 2023).
Sin-Cos-bIAVOA: A new feature selection method based on improved African vulture
optimization algorithm and a novel transfer function to DDoS attack detection.
Expert Systems with Applications, 228, Article 120404. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
ESWA.2023.120404
Mustafa, H., Xu, W., Sadeghi, A. R., & Schulz, S. (May 2018). End-to-end detection of
caller ID spoofing attacks. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 15
(3), 423–435. https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2016.2580509
Golait, D., & Hubballi, N. (Mar. 2017). Detecting Anomalous Behavior in VoIP Systems: A
Discrete Event System Modeling. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
Security, 12(3), 730–745. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2016.2632071
Vijayakumar, M., & Shiny Angel, T. S. (Dec. 2021). Performing Attack Halting Process
with Digital Pattern and Proactive Model Resolving the Security Issues in IoT Based
Models. Pattern Recognition Letters, 152, 428–435. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
PATREC.2021.11.009
Javaheri, D., Gorgin, S., Lee, J.-A., & Masdari, M. (2023). Fuzzy logic-based DDoS attacks
and network traffic anomaly detection methods: Classification, overview, and future
perspectives. Inf Sci (N Y), 626, 315–338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ins.2023.01.067
Rizvi, A., Mirkovic, J., Heidemann, J., Hardaker, W., & Story, R. (Dec. 2023). Defending
Root DNS Servers against DDoS Using Layered Defenses (Extended). Ad Hoc
Networks, 151, Article 103259. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ADHOC.2023.103259
Keshavarzi, M., & Ghaffary, H. R. (2020). I2CE3: A dedicated and separated attack chain
for ransomware offenses as the most infamous cyber extortion. Comput Sci Rev, 36,
Article 100233. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosrev.2020.100233
Davies, S. R., Macfarlane, R., & Buchanan, W. J. (2020). Evaluation of live forensic
techniques in ransomware attack mitigation. Forensic Science International: Digital
Investigation, 33, Article 300979. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fsidi.2020.300979
Sharmeen, S., Ahmed, Y. A., Huda, S., Koçer, B.S¸ ., & Hassan, M. M. (2020). Avoiding
Future Digital Extortion Through Robust Protection Against Ransomware Threats
Using Deep Learning Based Adaptive Approaches. IEEE Access, 8, 24522–24534.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2970466
Molina, R. M. A., Torabi, S., Sarieddine, K., Bou-Harb, E., Bouguila, N., & Assi, C. (2022).
On Ransomware Family Attribution Using Pre-Attack Paranoia Activities. IEEE
Transactions on Network and Service Management, 19(1), 19–36. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TNSM.2021.3112056
Min, D., Ko, Y., Walker, R., Lee, J., & Kim, Y. (2022). A Content-Based Ransomware
Detection and Backup Solid-State Drive for Ransomware Defense. IEEE Transactions
on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, 41(7), 2038–2051.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCAD.2021.3099084
Hou, T., & Wang, V. (Nov. 2020). Industrial espionage – A systematic literature review
(SLR). Computers & Security, 98, Article 102019. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
COSE.2020.102019
Sadok, M., Welch, C., & Bednar, P. (2020). A socio-technical perspective to counter
cyber-enabled industrial espionage. Security Journal, 33(1), 27–42. https://doi.org/
10.1057/s41284-019-00198-2
H¨
arting, R.-C., Bühler, L., Winter, K., & Gugel, A. (2022). The threat of industrial
espionage for SME in the age of digitalization. Procedia Computer Science, 207,
2940–2949. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2022.09.352
He, P., Almasifar, N., Mehbodniya, A., Javaheri, D., & Webber, J. L. (2022). Towards
green smart cities using Internet of Things and optimization algorithms: A systematic
and bibliometric review. Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems, 36, Article
100822. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.suscom.2022.100822
Soni, G., Kumar, S., Mahto, R. V., Mangla, S. K., Mittal, M. L., & Lim, W. M. (Jul. 2022).
A decision-making framework for Industry 4.0 technology implementation: The case
of FinTech and sustainable supply chain finance for SMEs. Technol Forecast Soc
Change, 180, Article 121686. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TECHFORE.2022.121686
Sha, L.-T., Xiao, F., Huang, H.-P., Chen, Y., & Wang, R.-C. (Jun. 2019). Catching Escapers:
A Detection Method for Advanced Persistent Escapers in Industry Internet of Things
Based on Identity-Based Broadcast Encryption (IBBE). ACM Transactions on
Embedded Computing Systems, 18(3). https://doi.org/10.1145/3319615
Javaheri, D., Lalbakhsh, P., & Hosseinzadeh, M. (2021). A Novel Method for Detecting
Future Generations of Targeted and Metamorphic Malware Based on Genetic
Algorithm. IEEE Access, 9. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3077295
Zhang, X., Upton, O., Beebe, N. L., & Choo, K.-K.-R. (2020). IoT Botnet Forensics: A
Comprehensive Digital Forensic Case Study on Mirai Botnet Servers. Forensic Science
International: Digital Investigation, 32, Article 300926. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fsidi.2020.300926
McDermott, C., Petrovski, A., & Majdani, F. (2018). Towards Situational Awareness of
Botnet Activity in the Internet of Things. https://doi.org/10.1109/
CyberSA.2018.8551408
Jiang, X., Lora, M., & Chattopadhyay, S. (May 2020). An Experimental Analysis of
Security Vulnerabilities in Industrial IoT Devices. ACM Transactions on Internet
Technology, 20(2). https://doi.org/10.1145/3379542
Vignau, B., Khoury, R., Hall´e, S., & Hamou-Lhadj, A. (Jun. 2021). The evolution of IoT
Malwares, from 2008 to 2019: Survey, taxonomy, process simulator and
perspectives. Journal of Systems Architecture, 116, Article 102143. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.SYSARC.2021.102143
Madan, S., Sofat, S., & Bansal, D. (2022). Tools and Techniques for Collection and
Analysis of Internet-of-Things malware: A systematic state-of-art review. Journal of
King Saud University - Computer and Information Sciences. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jksuci.2021.12.016
Taheri, R., Shojafar, M., Alazab, M., & Tafazolli, R. (2021). Fed-IIoT: A Robust Federated
Malware Detection Architecture in Industrial IoT. IEEE Trans Industr Inform, 17(12),
8442–8452. https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2020.3043458
Stellios, I., Kotzanikolaou, P., & Grigoriadis, C. (2021). Assessing IoT enabled cyberphysical attack paths against critical systems. Computers & Security, 107, Article
102316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2021.102316
Lee, R. M., Assante, M. J., & Conway, T. (2016). Analysis of the Cyber Attack on the
Ukrainian Power Grid. Washington: E-ISAC [Online]. Available:.
Han, C.-H., Park, S.-T., & Lee, S.-J. (2019). The enhanced security control model for
critical infrastructures with the blocking prioritization process to cyber threats in
power system. International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection, 26, Article
100312. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcip.2019.100312
Yang, H., Xia, Y., & Yang, H. (2020). Event-based distributed state estimation for linear
systems under unknown input and false data injection attack. Signal Processing, 170,
Article 107423. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sigpro.2019.107423
Liang, G., Zhao, J., Luo, F., Weller, S. R., & Dong, Z. Y. (2017). A Review of False Data
Injection Attacks Against Modern Power Systems. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 8
(4), 1630–1638. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2015.2495133
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
30
Wang, J., Hui, L. C. K., Yiu, S. M., Wang, E. K., & Fang, J. (Aug. 2017). A survey on cyber
attacks against nonlinear state estimation in power systems of ubiquitous cities.
Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 39, 52–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
PMCJ.2017.04.005
Venkatachary, S. K., Alagappan, A., & Andrews, L. J. B. (2021). Cybersecurity challenges
in energy sector (virtual power plants) - can edge computing principles be applied to
enhance security? Energy Informatics, 4(1), 5. https://doi.org/10.1186/s42162-021-
00139-7
Xu, H., Lin, Y., Zhang, X., & Wang, F. (2020). Power System Parameter Attack for
Financial Profits in Electricity Markets. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 11(4),
3438–3446. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2020.2977088
Eggenschwiler, J., Agrafiotis, I., & Nurse, J. R. C. (2016). Insider threat response and
recovery strategies in financial services firms. Computer Fraud & Security, 2016(11),
12–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1361-3723(16)30091-4
Erola, A., Agrafiotis, I., Goldsmith, M., & Creese, S. (2022). Insider-threat detection:
Lessons from deploying the CITD tool in three multinational organisations. Journal of
Information Security and Applications, 67, Article 103167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jisa.2022.103167
Yuan, S., & Wu, X. (2021). Deep learning for insider threat detection: Review, challenges
and opportunities. Computers & Security, 104, Article 102221. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cose.2021.102221
Gan, Y., et al. (Jul. 2019). Leveraging Deep Learning to Improve Performance
Predictability in Cloud Microservices with Seer. SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev., 53(1),
34–39. https://doi.org/10.1145/3352020.3352026
Li, T., Wang, X., & Ni, Y. (2022). Aligning social concerns with information system
security: A fundamental ontology for social engineering. Information Systems, 104,
Article 101699. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2020.101699
Hadnagy, C. (2018). Social Engineering: The Science of Human Hacking (2nd ed.). Wiley.
Krombholz, K., Hobel, H., Huber, M., & Weippl, E. (2015). Advanced social engineering
attacks. Journal of Information Security and Applications, 22, 113–122. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jisa.2014.09.005
Botacin, M., De Geus, P. L., & gr´egio, A. (Jul. 2018). Who Watches the Watchmen: A
Security-Focused Review on Current State-of-the-Art Techniques, Tools, and
Methods for Systems and Binary Analysis on Modern Platforms. ACM Computing
Surveys, 51(4). https://doi.org/10.1145/3199673
Lee, N. (2015). In Cyber Attacks, Prevention, and Countermeasures BT - Counterterrorism
and Cybersecurity: Total Information Awareness (pp. 249–286). Cham: Springer
International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-17244-6_10.
L. J. Trautman, “E-Commerce, Cyber, and Electronic Payment System Risks: Lessons from
PayPal,” UC Davis Business Law Journal, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 261–308, [Online].
Available: https://heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hein.journals/ucdbulj16&i=271.
S. V. Kumar, G. A. A. Mary, P. Suresh, and R. Uthirasamy, “Investigation On CyberAttacks Against In-Vehicle Network,” in 2021 7th International Conference on
Electrical Energy Systems (ICEES), 2021, pp. 305–311. 10.1109/
ICEES51510.2021.9383720.
Rambow, N. G., Andorka, S., & Rambow-Hoeschele, K. (2020). “Connected Vehicles in
the Shark Tank: Rethinking the Challenge for Cybersecurity to Keep Pace with
Digital Innovation BT -. In R. Jos´e, K. Van Laerhoven, & H. Rodrigues (Eds.), 3rd EAI
International Conference on IoT in Urban Space” (pp. 71–78). Cham: Springer
International Publishing.
“Doubts remain over whether North Korea was responsible for massive hack of Sony
Pictures.” Network Security, vol. 2015, no. 1, pp. 1–2, 2015, 10.1016/S1353-4858
(15)70001-2.
Rio, M. (2016). Black mobility matters: An exploratory study of Uber, hacking, and the
commons in Baltimore. Architecture_MPS, 10(4), 1–27.
Khanna, P., Zavarsky, P., & Lindskog, D. (2016). Experimental Analysis of Tools Used for
Doxing and Proposed New Transforms to Help Organizations Protect against Doxing
Attacks. Procedia Computer Science, 94, 459–464. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
procs.2016.08.071
Granger, S. (2003). “Social Engineering Fundamentals. Part I: Hacker Tactics”.
Clark, J., Leblanc, S., & Knight, S. (2011). Risks associated with USB Hardware Trojan
devices used by insiders. IEEE International Systems Conference, 2011, 201–208.
https://doi.org/10.1109/SYSCON.2011.5929130
Al-Hamar, Y., Kolivand, H., Tajdini, M., Saba, T., & Ramachandran, V. (2021). Enterprise
Credential Spear-phishing attack detection. Computers & Electrical Engineering, 94,
Article 107363. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2021.107363
Airehrour, D., Vasudevan Nair, N., & Madanian, S. (2018). Social Engineering Attacks
and Countermeasures in the New Zealand Banking System: Advancing a UserReflective Mitigation Model. Information, 9(5). https://doi.org/10.3390/
info9050110
Button, M., Hock, B., Shepherd, D., & Gilmour, P. (Sep. 2023). Understanding the rise of
fraud in England and Wales through field theory: Blip or flip? Journal of Economic
Criminology, 1, Article 100012. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JECONC.2023.100012
Wang, G., Ma, J., & Chen, G. (2022). Attentive statement fraud detection: Distinguishing
multimodal financial data with fine-grained attention. Decision Support Systems. ,
Article 113913. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2022.113913
Ali, M. A., Azad, M. A., Parreno Centeno, M., Hao, F., & van Moorsel, A. (2019).
Consumer-facing technology fraud: Economics, attack methods and potential
solutions. Future Generation Computer Systems, 100, 408–427. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.future.2019.03.041
M. Carminati, M. Polino, A. Continella, A. Lanzi, F. Maggi, and S. Zanero, “Security
Evaluation of a Banking Fraud Analysis System,” ACM Trans. Priv. Secur., vol. 21, no.
3, Apr. 2018, 10.1145/3178370.
Ahmad, N. (2021). Do data almost always eventually leak? Computer (Long Beach Calif),
54(2), 70–74. https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2020.3041880
N. Burow, R. Burrow, R. Khazan, H. Shrobe, and B. C. Ward, “Moving Target Defense
Considerations in Real-Time Safety- and Mission-Critical Systems,” in Proceedings of
the 7th ACM Workshop on Moving Target Defense, in MTD’20. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2020, pp. 81–89. 10.1145/
3411496.3421224.
Shannon, C. E. (Jul. 1948). A mathematical theory of communication. Bell System
Technical Journal, 27(3), 379–423. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1538-7305.1948.
tb01338.x
“Millions of records leaked as T-Mobile is breached for the sixth time in four years,”
Computer Fraud & Security, vol. 2021, no. 9, pp. 1–3, 2021, 10.1016/S1361-3723(21)
00089-0.
Lee, J., de Guzman, M. C., Wang, J., Gupta, M., & Rao, H. R. (2022). Investigating
perceptions about risk of data breaches in financial institutions: A routine activityapproach. Computers & Security, 121, Article 102832. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cose.2022.102832
Singh, J., & Singh, J. (2021). A survey on machine learning-based malware detection in
executable files. Journal of Systems Architecture, 112, Article 101861. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.sysarc.2020.101861
Naik, N., Jenkins, P., Savage, N., Yang, L., Boongoen, T., & Iam-On, N. (2021). Fuzzyimport hashing: A static analysis technique for malware detection. Forensic Science
International: Digital Investigation, 37, Article 301139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fsidi.2021.301139
Jing, C., Wu, Y., & Cui, C. (2022). Ensemble dynamic behavior detection method for
adversarial malware. Future Generation Computer Systems, 130, 193–206. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.future.2021.12.013
Babun, L., Aksu, H., & Uluagac, A. S. (2021). CPS Device-Class Identification via
Behavioral Fingerprinting: From Theory to Practice. IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security, 16, 2413–2428. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2021.3054968
Prachi, N Dabas, & Sharma, P. (Nov. 2023). MalAnalyser: An effective and efficient
Windows malware detection method based on API call sequences. Expert Systems with
Applications, 230, Article 120756. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ESWA.2023.120756
Bai, C., Han, Q., Mezzour, G., Pierazzi, F., & Subrahmanian, V. S. (May 2021). DBank:
Predictive Behavioral Analysis of Recent Android Banking Trojans. IEEE Transactions
on Dependable and Secure Computing, 18(3), 1378–1393. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TDSC.2019.2909902
Dassouki, K., Safa, H., Nassar, M., & Hijazi, A. (Sep. 2017). Protecting from Cloud-based
SIP flooding attacks by leveraging temporal and structural fingerprints. Computers &
Security, 70, 618–633. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COSE.2017.08.003
Malaquias, R. F., & Hwang, Y. (Jan. 2016). An empirical study on trust in mobile
banking: A developing country perspective. Comput Human Behav, 54, 453–461.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CHB.2015.08.039
Hern´
andez, E., Oztürk, ¨ M., Sitton, ´ I., & Rodríguez, S. (2019). “Data protection on fintech
platforms”, Communications in Computer and Information. Science, 1047, 223–233.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-24299-2_19/COVER
Qiu, M., Gai, K., Thuraisingham, B., Tao, L., & Zhao, H. (2018). Proactive user-centric
secure data scheme using attribute-based semantic access controls for mobile clouds
in financial industry. Future Generation Computer Systems, 80, 421–429. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.future.2016.01.006
Yemini, Y., Dailianas, A., Florissi, D., & Huberman, G. (2000). MarketNet: Protecting
access to information systems through financial market controls. Decision Support
Systems, 28(1), 205–216. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-9236(99)00069-X
Fahmideh, M., et al. (Dec. 2022). Engineering Blockchain-Based Software Systems:
Foundations, Survey, and Future Directions. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(6). https://
doi.org/10.1145/3530813
Lei, C. F., & Ngai, E. W. T. (Aug. 2023). Blockchain from the Information Systems
Perspective: Literature Review, Synthesis, and Directions for Future Research.
Information & Management. , Article 103856. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
IM.2023.103856
Sori, A. A., Golsorkhtabaramiri, M., & Sori, A. A. (2021). Green Efficiency for Quality
Models in the Field of Cryptocurrency; IOTA Green Efficiency. IEEE Green
Technologies Conference (GreenTech), 2021, 357–363. https://doi.org/10.1109/
GreenTech48523.2021.00101
Raddatz, N., Coyne, J., Menard, P., & Crossler, R. E. (2021). Becoming a blockchain user:
Understanding consumers’ benefits realisation to use blockchain-based applications.
European Journal of Information Systems, 32(2), 287–314. https://doi.org/10.1080/
0960085X.2021.1944823
Chen, Y. J., & Chen, Y. M. (Nov. 2022). Forecasting corporate credit ratings using big
data from social media. Expert Systems with Applications, 207, Article 118042.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ESWA.2022.118042
Y. Hong, H. Kwon, J. Lee, and J. Hur, “A practical de-mixing algorithm for bitcoin mixing
services.” in BCC 2018 - Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Workshop on Blockchains,
Cryptocurrencies, and Contracts, Co-located with ASIA CCS 2018, pp. 15–20, May
2018, 10.1145/3205230.3205234.
Berdik, D., Otoum, S., Schmidt, N., Porter, D., & Jararweh, Y. (Jan. 2021). A Survey on
Blockchain for Information Systems Management and Security. Information
Processing and Management, 58(1), Article 102397. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
IPM.2020.102397
Guo, H., Zhang, D., Liu, S., Wang, L., & Ding, Y. (Dec. 2021). Bitcoin price forecasting: A
perspective of underlying blockchain transactions. Decision Support Systems, 151,
Article 113650. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.DSS.2021.113650
Du, W. (Derek), Pan, S. L., Leidner, D. E., & Ying, W. (Mar. 2019). Affordances,
experimentation and actualization of FinTech: A blockchain implementation study.
The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 28(1), 50–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.JSIS.2018.10.002
Xia, H., Wang, Y., Gauthier, J., & Zhang, J. Z. (Dec. 2022). Knowledge graph of mobile
payment platforms based on deep learning: Risk analysis and policy implications.
D. Javaheri et al. 
Expert Systems With Applications 241 (2024) 122697
31
Expert Systems with Applications, 208, Article 118143. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
ESWA.2022.118143
Grobys, K. (Aug. 2021). When the blockchain does not block: On hackings and
uncertainty in the cryptocurrency market. Quant Finance, 21(8), 1267–1279. https://
doi.org/10.1080/14697688.2020.1849779
Zimba, A., Wang, Z., & Mulenga, M. (Jan. 2019). Cryptojacking injection: A paradigm
shift to cryptocurrency-based web-centric internet attacks. Journal of Organizational
Computing and Electronic Commerce, 29(1), 40–59. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10919392.2019.1552747
Hassani, H., Huang, X., & Silva, E. (Oct. 2018). Banking with blockchain-ed big data.
Journal of Management Analytics, 5(4), 256–275. https://doi.org/10.1080/
23270012.2018.1528900
Sindhwani, R., Hasteer, N., Behl, A., Chatterjee, C., & Hamzi, L. (Sep. 2023). Analysis of
sustainable supply chain and industry 4.0 enablers: A step towards decarbonization
of supply chains. Ann. Oper. Res., 2023, 1–39. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10479-023-
05598-7
Wang, Y., Han, J. H., & Beynon-Davies, P. (Mar. 2019). Understanding blockchain
technology for future supply chains: A systematic literature review and research
agenda. Supply Chain Management, 24(1), 62–84. https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-03-
2018-0148/FULL/PDF
Paul, S., Adhikari, A., & Bose, I. (Sep. 2022). White knight in dark days? Supply chain
finance firms, blockchain, and the COVID-19 pandemic. Information & Management,
59(6), Article 103661. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IM.2022.103661
Fosso Wamba, S., Kala Kamdjoug, J. R., Epie Bawack, R., & Keogh, J. G. (Feb. 2020).
Bitcoin, Blockchain and Fintech: A systematic review and case studies in the supply
chain. Production Planning & Control, 31(2–3), 115–142. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09537287.2019.1631460
Suryawanshi, P., & Dutta, P. (2022). Optimization models for supply chains under risk,
uncertainty, and resilience: A state-of-the-art review and future research directions.
Transp Res E Logist Transp Rev, 157, Article 102553. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tre.2021.102553
Syed, N. F., Shah, S. W., Trujillo-Rasua, R., & Doss, R. (2022). Traceability in supply
chains: A Cyber security analysis. Computers & Security, 112, Article 102536. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2021.102536
Suegami, S. (2022). Cryptographic obfuscation for smart contracts: Trustless bitcoin
bridge and more. Blockchain: Research and Applications. , Article 100118. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bcra.2022.100118
Almakhour, M., Sliman, L., Samhat, A. E., & Mellouk, A. (2023). A formal verification
approach for composite smart contracts security using FSM. Journal of King Saud
University - Computer and Information Sciences, 35(1), 70–86. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jksuci.2022.08.029
de Leon, D. C., Jillepalli, A. A., House, V. J., Alves-Foss, J., & Sheldon, F. T. (Oct. 2018).
Tutorials and Laboratory for Hands-on OS Cybersecurity Instruction. Journal of
Computing Sciences in Colleges, 34(1), 242–254.
Shillair, R., Esteve-Gonzalez, ´ P., Dutton, W. H., Creese, S., Nagyfejeo, E., & von Solms, B.
(2022). Cybersecurity education, awareness raising, and training initiatives:
National level evidence-based results, challenges, and promise. Computers & Security,
119, Article 102756. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2022.102756
Alahmari, S., Renaud, K., & Omoronyia, I. (2022). Moving beyond cyber security awareness
and training to engendering security knowledge sharing, no. 0123456789. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10257-022-00575-2
Cascavilla, G., Tamburri, D. A., & Van Den Heuvel, W.-J. (2021). Cybercrime threat
intelligence: A systematic multi-vocal literature review. Computers & Security, 105,
Article 102258. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2021.102258
Sullivan, C., & Burger, E. (2017). ‘In the public interest’: The privacy implications of
international business-to-business sharing of cyber-threat intelligence. Computer Law
& Security Review, 33(1), 14–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2016.11.015
Bunnell, L., Osei-Bryson, K. M., & Yoon, V. Y. (Mar. 2021). Development of a consumer
financial goals ontology for use with FinTech applications for improving financial
capability. Expert Systems with Applications, 165, Article 113843. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.ESWA.2020.113843
Hubbard, D. W., & Seierse, R. (2016). How to Measure Anything in Cybersecurity Risk. NJ,
USA: Wiley [Online]. Available:.
J. Freund, Jones, Jack,, “Measuring and managing information risk : a FAIR approach.”
2015. [Online]. Available: http://www.books24x7.com/marc.asp?bookid=73433.
Masoud, N., & Al-Utaibi, G. (Jun. 2022). The determinants of cybersecurity risk
disclosure in firms’ financial reporting: Empirical evidence. Research in Economics,
76(2), 131–140. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RIE.2022.07.001
Pisoni, G., & Díaz-Rodríguez, N. (May 2023). Responsible and human centric AI-based
insurance advisors. Information Processing and Management, 60(3), Article 103273.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IPM.2023.103273
Chao, X., Ran, Q., Chen, J., Li, T., Qian, Q., & Ergu, D. (2022). Regulatory technology
(Reg-Tech) in financial stability supervision: Taxonomy, key methods, applications
and future directions. International Review of Financial Analysis, 80, Article 102023.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.irfa.2022.102023
Currie, W. L., Gozman, D. P., & Seddon, J. J. M. (Dec. 2018). Dialectic tensions in the
financial markets: A longitudinal study of pre- and post-crisis regulatory technology.
Journal of Information Technology, 33(4), 304–325. https://doi.org/10.1057/S41265-
017-0047-5/TABLES/7
Bai, C., Han, Q., Mezzour, G., Pierazzi, F., & Subrahmanian, V. S. (2021). DBank DBank:
Predictive Behavioral Analysis of Recent Android Banking Trojans. IEEE Transactions
on Dependable and Secure Computing, 18(3), 1378–1393. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TDSC.2019.2909902
Grace, M., & Sughasiny, M. (Dec. 2022). Behaviour analysis of inter-app communication
using a lightweight monitoring app for malware detection. Expert Systems with
Applications, 210, Article 118404. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ESWA.2022.118404
Al Hasan, M. M., et al. (Jun. 2023). EVHA: Explainable Vision System for Hardware
Testing and Assurance—An Overview. J. Emerg. Technol Computing Systems, 19(3).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3590772
T. Jin et al., “FinExpert: Domain-specific test generation for FinTech systems,” ESEC/FSE
2019 - Proceedings of the 2019 27th ACM Joint Meeting European Software Engineering
Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering, pp. 853–862,
Aug. 2019, 10.1145/3338906.3340441.
Y. Wang, M. McCoey, and Q. Hu, “Developing an Undergraduate Course Curriculum for
Ethical Hacking,” SIGITE 2020 - Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference on
Information Technology Education, pp. 330–335, Oct. 2020, 10.1145/
3368308.3415366.
D. Javaheri et al. 