Decision Support Systems 147 (2021) 113580
Available online 29 April 2021
A dynamic simulation approach to support the evaluation of cyber risks and security investments in SMEs
Stefano Armenia a,*
, Marco Angelini b
, Fabio Nonino b
, Giulia Palombi b
, Mario
Francesco Schlitzer a
a Department of Research, Link Campus University of Rome, Rome, Italy b Department of Computer, Control and Management Engineering, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Cybersecurity
SME
Risk assessment
Risk management
System dynamics
Modeling & simulation
ABSTRACT
The growing amount of cyberspace threats highlights the need to evaluate cybersecurity risks and to plan for
effective investments. One internationally recognized document for cybersecurity risk management is the
framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity by the US National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST). It provides guidelines, best practices and standards for cybersecurity risk management.
Nevertheless, as other self-assessment frameworks, it produces a static view of an organization’s cyber posture
and does not capture the dynamics of organizational changes and cyberattacks. Moreover, the current situation
sees small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in a critical position since they need to manage their cybersecurity
while usually not being skilled or equipped enough to internalize this process. Therefore, there is a need for a
practical and easily applicable model able to identify a cybersecurity risk profile and its dynamics. This study
proposes a system dynamics methodology and tool (SMECRA - SME Cyber Risk Assessment) for supporting
cybersecurity investment decisions for SMEs through the evaluation of cyber risk and previous investments.
SMECRA addresses dynamic organizational complexity and can be used to assess cyber risks and related dynamics over time. Three case studies demonstrate its capability to assess a SME’s cybersecurity status and to
evaluate investments impacts on an organization’s risk profile, raising cybersecurity awareness. This study is
important for SMEs wishing to manage their own cybersecurity risk and for insurance companies in their economic evaluation of residual risks that SMEs wish to externalize.
1. Introduction
In our increasingly digitalized world, organizations rely on
constantly connected information systems. This means that even small
and medium enterprises (SMEs) represent potential targets for cybercriminals which can exploit vulnerabilities to cause economic and
reputational damage to them [1,2].
Under this perspective, cyberattacks are able to affect and disrupt
critical infrastructures of our contemporary society across different
sectors such as healthcare, energy, transportations, banking and stock
markets [3]. Furthermore, it is now widely accepted that cybersecurity
is not only a technological issue, but it is inherently multidisciplinary as
its potential vulnerabilities which comprise a vast range of aspects
including the human factor [4]. The growing amount of cyber threats
highlights the need to define security policies in a context where
information on the potential threats can be incomplete or require an
outsized effort compared to the organization’s size. The need to evaluate
cybersecurity risks and hence plan for effective investments using
appropriate tools has been already largely recognized [5], and several
studies focused both on cyber risk management [4,6–11] and on the
allocation of a budget related to cyber defense for risk mitigation
[8,12–14]. These approaches represent a guidance for cybersecurity
investments but lack the capacity to integrate across multiple domains of
cyber-physical systems (such as threat, vulnerability and consequence
[11]), and to capture their complexity [15]; moreover, they are static, i.
e., they do not take into account the cause-effect interdependencies and
are unable to include the “dynamics of cyberattacks” as well as uncertainty [14]. According to Nazareth and Choi [9] any attempt to manage
resources to improve information security must entail an understanding
of the dynamic aspects of security threats. Multiple different factors and
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: s.armenia@unilink.it (S. Armenia), angelini@diag.uniroma1.it (M. Angelini), fabio.nonino@uniroma1.it (F. Nonino), giulia.palombi@
uniroma1.it (G. Palombi), mf.schlitzer@unilink.it (M.F. Schlitzer).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Decision Support Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/dss
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2021.113580
Received 26 June 2020; Received in revised form 24 April 2021; Accepted 26 April 2021 
Decision Support Systems 147 (2021) 113580
2
many dynamic relations are involved and can be investigated through
simulation, which is one of the most accurate methodologies when it
comes to embodying and interconnecting all of these aspects.
Another limitation of current studies is related to the analyzed contexts, i.e.: mainly large enterprises and critical infrastructures. The
increasing number of cyberattacks towards Small or Middle-Sized
Businesses1 and the fact that these companies often do not deploy
effective defenses against attackers because of their limited economic
resources and shortage of skilled security workers [16], calls for the
need to undertake relevant cybersecurity actions in SMEs.2 Hence, in
this study we propose a system dynamics-based methodology and tool
that allows for a systemic assessment and evaluation of a SME’s cybersecurity risk profile as well as planning for effective investments aimed
at risk mitigation: the SMECRA (SME Cyber Risk Assessment) tool. The
NIST Cybersecurity Framework3
, whose Italian extension is called Italian National Cybersecurity Framework [17], has been adopted as a basis
to develop the initial assessment (through a method that we named
“Snapshot Survey”) that is used to collect data defining the actual SME’s
risk profile at the start of the analysis. In this paper we show the
application of the tool to different case studies, evidencing their dynamic behavior over time in cyber-environments characterized by
different threat levels, thus allowing the simulation of different possible
investment scenarios for each case. SMECRA allows users to set up
different strategic priorities for cybersecurity-related investments, thus
giving the possibility to compare and evaluate the future outcomes
caused by different investment choices.
This work is structured as follows: the relevant literature on cyber
risk management is outlined in section 2, together with the gap of
research and the objective of the study. The methodology used to
develop the SMECRA tool is described in section 3, while section 4
provides the simulation results for the three chosen case studies and
section 5 comprises the discussion and a strategic focus. Finally, section
6 draws the conclusions of our study.
2. Cybersecurity risk management
Cybersecurity is the set of tools, policies, security concepts, security
safeguards, guidelines, risk management approaches, actions, training,
best practices, assurance and technologies that can be adopted to protect
the cyber environment, organization and user’s assets [1]. Cyber criminals use the internet to launch malware and social engineering campaigns; employees do not always comply with the internet use policy
unless the risks of deterrence can be justified by the perceived benefits of
personal internet use at work [18]. Threats can come from outside
(external threats) but also from the internal environment: insider threats
represent one of most relevant topics in cybersecurity and they include
fraud, sabotage, theft of intellectual property, and copyright violation
[19]. The management of cyber risk is a process related to and included
in a currently critical survival strategy for business continuity, which is
cyber resilience [20]. In this section, various aspects of cybersecurity
risk management, as proposed in the literature, and the key documents
related to a few cybersecurity strategies, are reviewed.8
2.1. Approaches to Cybersecurity risk management
The existing approaches to cyber risk management in literature can
be divided into two broad groups.
The first one proposes theoretical frameworks and/or an agenda of
actions aimed at managing cybersecurity risk [4,6–11,13]. This group
includes the risk-based cybersecurity framework designed by Collier
et al. [6] which shows how to be more resilient to dynamic threats by
moving from the standard risk assessment, and the Jensen study [7]
which suggests how to improve the classical risk management approach,
introducing informational campaigns about the specific cyber risk the
organization faces and the pressure from customers. The Cybersecurity
Framework published by the US National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) offers important guidance and provides guidelines,
best practices and standards for cyber security risk management. The
NIST Framework lays the basis for several studies on cybersecurity by
providing new phases [8], samples on unit and system tests for each
framework phase [10], and pillars for cyber resilience [4], and several
countries (i.e.: Canada, Italy and Spain) designed their own cybersecurity framework starting from it. In the next paragraph, we will specifically focus on the US NIST Framework since we have chosen it as one
of the main building blocks of our proposed methodological approach.
Ganin et al. [11] proposed a multi-criteria decision framework for
cybersecurity risk assessment and management by a hypothetical case
study exemplifying the process of evaluating and ranking five cybersecurity enhancement strategies: hardware and software upgrade,
personnel training, insurance against data losses, data handling policy
and just do nothing (so no action plan as elective alternative).
The second group of research focuses on the allocation of a protection budget across a spectrum of possible alternatives after an evaluation
of viable options [8,12–14]. According to Jeong et al. [21], many firms
are not capable of immediately seeing the expected financial loss due to
security breaches or, likewise, the expected gain from their investments
in information security. Bojanc and Jerman-Blaˇziˇc [12] allow the selection of the best investment in cybersecurity based on the quantification of value of each protected system. An approach called Cyber
Security Risk Management (CSRM) proposed by Katsumata et al. [8]
adds the risk-management planning phase to the ones of risk assessment,
risk mitigation and monitoring/control adopted by the NIST Framework. The model presented by Chen et al. [13] analyzes the effectiveness
of a diversification strategy under different operating conditions and in
presence of different vulnerabilities, suggesting that this is advantageous not only to a risk averse firm but also to a risk-neutral firm
interested in minimizing mean downtime.
Recent contributions to this branch of literature includes the study by
Nazareth and Choi [9] in which the authors, by using a system dynamics
model, evaluate alternative security management strategies through an
investment and security cost lens, providing managerial guidance for
security decision such as the fact that investing in security detection
tools has a higher payoff than investments into deterrence ones. Zeijlemaker et al. [22] also address the topic of the influence and impact of
systems complexity for what concerns decisions related to investments
in cybersecurity. Finally, Pat´e-Cornell et al. propose a general probabilistic risk analysis framework for cyber risk management in the domain
of critical infrastructures suggesting and analyzing three related case
studies [14]. They present several ways to quantify the cyber risk using
not only past statistics but also other available features characterizing
the specific cases, like the statistical analysis of a real database, a systems analysis of cyber risk for a smart grid and an analysis of sequential
decisions to upgrade the software of an actual cybersecurity system.
2.2. The Italian National Strategy on cyber risk management: an
extension of the NIST framework
Cybersecurity is a central theme for the national digital transformation of many countries. Upon request from the US Government, the
NIST introduced the Cybersecurity Framework, which proposes a riskbased approach to manage cybersecurity risks and constitutes the reference document for the US national strategy for cybersecurity risk management. We focus on the NIST framework as it is used as the building
block of our methodology. It consists of three parts: core, tiers and profiles.
1 State of Cybersecurity in Small & Medium Size Businesses (SMBs). Research
Report, Ponemon Institute, 2018. 2 ENISA Threat Landscape Report 2018, The European Union Agency for
Cybersecurity (ENISA), 2019. 3 Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity (Version
1.1), National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2014.
S. Armenia et al. 
Decision Support Systems 147 (2021) 113580
3
The first one introduces a set of cybersecurity activities, desired outcomes
and references common across critical infrastructure sectors, a framework
core that is designed for communication between and within organizations and it is constituted by five concurrent and continuous functions:
Identify, Protect, Detect, Respond and Recover. These are divided in 21
categories and 98 subcategories, with each subcategory listing the related
practices and standards. The four frameworks tiers range from partial
(informal, reactive responses) to adaptive (agile and risk-informed entity). The framework profiles define practices which best match the business needs of an organization and that can be obtained from the
Framework Core. Profiles can be useful to identify opportunities for
improving cybersecurity level by comparing the current (“as-is”) profile
with the desired target (“to-be”) one, and this offers a uniform, voluntary
approach for tackling cybersecurity in order to reduce cyber risks. In the
Italian context, the National Cybersecurity Framework [17] represents a
key document for cybersecurity risk management. The Italian National
Cybersecurity Framework extends the NIST Framework by allowing a
broader application to different contexts outside of critical infrastructures, such as public administrations, private companies and
SMEs. At the same time, it maintains full compatibility with the NIST
Framework, sharing its framework core and enriching it with three new
key concepts: priority levels, maturity levels, contextualization prototypes (i.
e., GDPR prototype). Priority levels are used to define each Framework
Core subcategory’s implementation priority, depending on the business’
nature, size and profile risk. Maturity levels allow to choose between
different modalities for the implementation of each subcategory and
must be set carefully as a higher maturity level will reduce risk exposure
but will increase costs and management complexity. Anyone willing to
implement the framework can choose the functions, categories and
subcategories that fit the organization and define for them priority levels,
maturity levels and security checks. The resulting scheme takes the name
of “Framework Contextualization” and is particularly useful to measure
the actual exposure of a generic organization (and not only a critical
infrastructure) towards cyber-threats (actual profile) and to define the
new desired posture (target profile). Finally, these two profiles allow
defining and prioritizing the list of corrective actions (or accepted risks).
Another key document was introduced in 2018, when the CINI
Italian Cybersecurity National Laboratory produced the White Paper on
Cybersecurity4
, presenting the main cybersecurity challenges Italy had
to face in the next five years. It outlined a set of focus areas and actions
that the Italian research community considered essential to implement
and support what was foreseen in an executive decree on cybersecurity
issued in February 2017 by the Italian Government. The White Paper
examines different aspects of cybersecurity, including the definition of
infrastructures and centers for organizing defense, the actions and
technologies to improve protection, the identification of the main defense technologies, and the proposal of a set of horizontal actions for
training, awareness, and risk management.
2.3. Gaps in research and objectives of this study
The above-mentioned cyber-risk management models identify best
practices and processes to follow in order to improve organizational
cybersecurity. However, “existing approaches (...) lack the ability to integrate across multiple domains of cyber systems to provide guidance for
enhancing cybersecurity” [[15]: 1] and from the defender point of view,
“the analysis has to include uncertainty and the dynamics of cyberattacks”
[[14]: 240]. Recent evidence also suggests extending the attention to SMEs
given the increasing number of cyber attacks they experienced [16] and the
limited resources they own to contrast them.
Although system dynamics tools have already been proposed to
support investment decisions [23] in the form of decision support
systems based on the combination of business objects and system
structure [24], to the best of our knowledge, a practical, dynamic and
easy to use model, able to identify and estimate the cyber risk related to
a specific SME, does not exist yet.
Therefore, the aim of this study is to propose a methodology and tool
named SMECRA (SME Cyber Risk Assessment methodology and tool),
comprising two modules, the Snapshot Survey and the System Dynamics
simulation model (both based on the NIST Cybersecurity Framework),
that allow for the evaluation of cyber risks and for the planning of
effective investments in SMEs.
The SMECRA tool aims at supporting decision makers in understanding how to improve the resilience of a SME against cyber-threats by
following investments in certain business areas (i.e.: investments on HR,
on production systems, on Information/Security Systems, etc.). We
argue that the use of systems thinking and system dynamics in the field
of cybersecurity is proving its value as well as introducing advantages
for this and a number of other problems (particularly, on investments
sustainability). Other examples include understanding the dynamics of
cyberwarfare [25,26]; the evaluation of financial impacts of cybersecurity and Data Protection Impact Assessments (DPIA).
The system dynamics model at the root of the SMECRA methodology
and tool has been developed by starting from a qualitative causal loop
diagram (CLD) model, proposed by Armenia et al. [27], that interconnects, through a typical Systems Thinking approach, the categories of the Italian Cyber Security Framework to the generic
organizational structure of a SME, and that identifies some levers for
improving the cyber-risk profile of such organizations.
In that study, the authors argue that the NIST framework categories can
be directly linked to various areas and aspects of an organization (for
instance, investments in cybersecurity are generally connected to an increase in the number and use of security devices and tools needed for aggregation and correlation of event data from multiple sources and sensors:
this is strictly connected to the subcategories DE.AE - anomalies and events
- and DE.DP - detection process - from the “Detection” NIST category), and
such aspects are in turn interconnected due to the intrinsically systemic
nature of organizations [28,29]. This implies that, by “projecting” the
framework categories on the “organizational plane”, which shows how
organizational aspects are interconnected, it is possible to infer that the
framework categories are also systemically interconnected among themselves through organizational relationships and links (see Fig. 1).
The research from Armenia et al. [27] did not include the connection
with other aspects of cyber-physical systems, as it did not delve into
further details: the aim was mostly to show that the framework categories are systemically related, and that investments to improve the
cyber-posture in those categories need to take this aspect into account.
In this paper, we are starting from those assumptions and are trying to
build a quantitative tool that captures those systemic interconnections.
This implies that not all of the possible feedback loops are included in
the current SMECRA formulation, but just those that are linking,
through interconnected organizational aspects, some specific framework categories. We will postpone the evaluation of the inclusion of
other subsystems to a future elaboration of the SMECRA model, but it is
worth mentioning here that the inclusion of all possible feedback loops
is well beyond the scope of this initial research and not necessarily a
needed aspect. In fact, building on a relevant system dynamics tenet
stating that “simpler is better” [30], usually the fundamental loops
derive by the inclusion of specific relevant relationships among the main
parts of the system. In this case, we have included all mainly relevant
relationships that describe the interdependencies between the specified
framework categories and main organizational variables.
3. Description of the SMECRA methodology
3.1. Concept and architecture
Following the need to effectively assess the current cyber risk of a
4 CINI (2018). The future of Cybersecurity in Italy: Strategic focus areas.
White book. CINI - Consorzio Interuniversitario Nazionale Informatica.
S. Armenia et al. 
Decision Support Systems 147 (2021) 113580
4
SME and to support its decisions on cybersecurity investments in order
to mitigate such a risk, we built a tool that first analyzes the cyberposture of a SME and then simulates the effect of different investment
strategies (see Fig. 2). The core of the methodology is based on a
quantitative SD simulation model (as said, built starting from the
qualitative model presented in Armenia et al. [27]) that takes into account the systemic, feedback-based relationships among the various,
interdependent aspects addressed by the NIST framework and their
dynamic behavior over time.
The initialization parameters of such a “stocks and flows” model (see
next paragraph for a brief explanation of stocks and flows) derive from
the use of the NIST framework itself in a first instance when the initial
assessment of the “as-is” cybersecurity risk profile of a SME is performed. Such an assessment translates qualitative evaluations into the
quantification of core parameters depicting the starting situation (initial
risk profile), which are then used in scenario simulations. It is worth
mentioning that the presence of several initialization parameters does
not invalidate the robustness of the model, which is mainly rooted into
another important System Dynamics principle, stating that it is the
structure of a system that influences its behavior.
3.2. Modeling approach: systems thinking and system dynamics
System Dynamics consists of an iterative process used to define a
dynamic hypothesis, develop a formal model to test and validate it, then
formulate and evaluate different intervention policies [31]. The
approach was developed in the ‘60s by Jay W. Forrester [32] in order to
study complex business situations and was later expanded to study
problems associated with the dynamics of growth and decline in urban
centers [33], in the world as a whole [34,35], as well as other complex
problems such as climate change. The features of system dynamics
modeling and simulation include the possibility to account for nonlinearities, information feedbacks, time delays, and dynamic complexity
[31].
System Dynamics employs various tools for extrapolating information on the behavior over time of complex systems, hence discovering
hidden or even counterintuitive behaviors. The causal-loop diagram
(CLD) approach, aimed at understanding the interdependencies among
various parts of a complex system (and that is thus typical of the Systems
Thinking approach), while being inherently qualitative, is also the
starting point for the subsequent development of a quantitative model.
Causal loop diagrams [31] are used to map the causal relationships
between pairs of elements within a system and to identify the feedback
loops that link together all the relevant aspects of a system, hence
determining the system’s structure and ultimately its behavior. In fact,
positive, negative, and delayed feedback loops can create a variety of
recurring systemic structures, named Systems Archetypes, which can
assist in analyzing the problem displayed by a certain system and in
diagnosing the optimal solution [36]. Notwithstanding its qualitative
value, the analysis of CLDs can introduce several important results. The
main advantage in using this type of analysis is that it provides a vision
that considers many themes inside a system as interconnected with each
other, contrary to those past approaches where systems are analyzed
individually and on a sectoral basis. Understanding the dynamics of
stocks and flows is key to figuring out the behavior over time of complex
systems [36]. Stocks and flows symbolism can be explained as follows:
(1) a stock represents things in the model that can accumulate, it will
rise and drop depending on its flows and will remain constant while in
equilibrium; (2) a flow is (one of the) rate(s) of change of a stock: inflows
add to a stock, outflows take away from the stock: equilibrium occurs
when inflows to all stocks are equal to the outflows; and (3) the information links represent a variable’s direct influence on another one. It is
important to note that stocks, especially large ones, tend to change
slowly, even when the flows into or out of them change suddenly, simply
because it takes time for the flow itself to accumulate into them [31]. For
this reason, stocks act as delays or shock absorbers in systems, and
therefore the presence of stocks allows inflows and outflows to be independent of each other and temporarily out of balance which leads to
the need of a controlling mechanism, that is feedback. Furthermore,
feedback loops are generally linked together, often in quite intricate
patterns: a stock might very well have several reinforcing or balancing
loops of differing strengths pulling it in several directions, and a flow
could be influenced by the contents of multiple stocks and fill one stock
while draining another one and feeding into decisions that impact a
third stock or even more. The many feedback loops within a system can
tug against each other, trying to make stocks grow, die off, or balance
each other. As a result, complex systems do much more than just stay
steady, explode exponentially, or approach goals smoothly [36].
3.3. Snapshot survey
In order to build effective tools using established parameters for selfassessment, a proper data acquisition structure was needed. Such an
instrument has been elaborated building on the Cybersecurity Essential
Controls,5 a paper that introduces “15 essential controls” that can be
Fig. 1. (Projection 1) sub-categories relate to organizational variables, interconnected according to a systemic perspective; (Projection 2) then, NIST sub-categories
get systemically interrelated, into an organizational perspective.
5 CIS Sapienza (2017). 2016 Italian Cybersecurity Report
S. Armenia et al. 
Decision Support Systems 147 (2021) 113580
5
adopted and implemented by Italian SMEs in order to increase their
defenses against cyberattacks without excessive costs or complexity for
businesses of that size. Building on these controls (which are inherently
NIST-based as they are a relevant subset, for SMEs, of the full set of
categories in the NIST framework), a survey has been developed, in
order to collect the data needed to capture the “as-is” risk profile (hence
the name of Snapshot Survey) of a given SME at the time of analysis,
through 24 easy to understand questions regarding the state of the
company’s cyber defenses. The results of the Snapshot Survey constitute
an initial “as-is” defense assessment score for the SME in question,
mapping the compliance with the aforementioned Essential Controls
expressed with a coverage score ranging from 0 to 100%, plus four subscores that can be helpful to quickly pinpoint the weak points in the
SME’s defenses and to emphasize areas of possible further improvements. A 100% score represents the target cyber posture, also called the
“to-be” risk profile. In fact, in order to provide an accurate snapshot of
the SME’s situation, using simple binary Yes/No choices would not
provide the desired level of detail for many questions; thus, multiple
possible options are offered when needed, thus ensuring higher accuracy
without an excessive increase in complexity. The rationale of the
coverage score is to capture the cyber posture of the organization with
respect to each of the Essential Controls, thus it is displayed in percentage form. The more a control is covered, the higher will be the
coverage score. If the score is below 70% it means that at least an
important part of the control is missing; if it is lower than 50%, it means
that the organization is not compliant with the control. The inspection of
the snapshot survey will also allow those in charge to focus on the
missing cybersecurity features. A weighing system is also used to model
the relative importance of a question with respect to the category it
belongs to, so that the maximum score achievable by selecting the
higher grade in all the questions belonging to one category is always
100. This way, we managed to avoid a potential bias towards any
particular category and to highlight the more important questions for
each of the cyber-defense categories. This approach allows mitigating
the arbitrariness of the assessment by being based on an accepted
standard for risk management, namely the NIST Cybersecurity Framework and its derivates, that helps in categorizing and homogenizing the
collected evidences on cyber-posture. On the other hand, it allows the
needed degree of customizability that SMEs require in order to be
modeled convincingly, given the heterogeneity of their domains and
inner structures, and for which the Cybersecurity Essential Controls have
been created. Each business will of course utilize those data to develop a
unique strategy founded on different strengths, goals and budget constraints. The survey data is then used to populate the system dynamics
model described in the next section, and every answer translates into
values of the model’s variables and parameters, following the mapping
shown in Table 1.
3.4. Model description
The SMECRA system dynamics simulation model has been developed
using Powersim® software with a specific focus on a generic SME
context, and adopting the Snapshot Survey as an input for the initial
state variables and parameters, before simulating different scenarios.
The overall model includes the network of relationships among the
previously mentioned variables (and their equations) as well as structures related to funding, resource allocation, eventual capability and
capability loss related to each variable. The overall model comprises
more than 50 equations describing the relationships among its variables.
In Table 2 the example of backup-related equations is provided. In a
similar way, respecting their meanings and interdependencies, the other
variables have been modeled too.
It is useful to look at the model’s most significant causal loop diagrams (CLD) in order to understand the main functionalities and basic
dynamics of SMECRA (Fig. 3). First, without proper cyber defenses in
place, any business can quickly fall into a spiral of escalating damage, as
shown by the Reputational Damage Reinforcing Loop (RDRL, highlighted in green in Fig. 4). In fact, Successful Attacks increase the
Damage from Attacks, which in turn increase the Vulnerability Perception, as the business is now perceived as an easier target for other potential attackers (increasing both Expected Damage and Attractiveness -
see Eq. 1 and Eq. 2, and their related behaviors in Fig. 6).
This increases the Attack Rate, which in turn is assumed to mean
more Successful Attacks, thus dealing more damage, and escalating the
loop. Strictly related to this loop, yet operating differently, is the Economic Damage Balancing Loop (EDBL, shown in orange in Fig. 4): while
it looks similar to the previous one, this is a balancing loop, not a
reinforcing one. Here, the Damage from Attacks results in a financial loss,
reducing the Actual Financial Result and therefore reducing the business’
Attractiveness, leading to a reduced Attack Rate, which in turn means a
Fig. 2. Architectural concept of the SMECRA tool.
Attractiveness = ((1 − Prevention Capability) + (0.1*Vulnerability Perception))*(Financial Result) (1)
Expected Damage = Avg.Attack Damage*(Blocked Attacks + Detected unblocked)*(1 − Mitigation Cap.) (2)
S. Armenia et al. 
Decision Support Systems 147 (2021) 113580
6
reduction in Damage from Attacks, balancing the loop. At first glance, this
might seem like a good thing, but what is actually happening is that the
business has lost so much money from previous attacks and indirect
consequences that criminals do not even consider it a worthy target
anymore. As this loop’s strength increases, staying in business becomes
increasingly challenging.
A simplified view of the SFD model pertaining to the RDRL and EDBL
is shown in Fig. 4. Beyond those, the larger Cyber Defense Reinforcing
Loops (CDRL) represents the effects of investing in cybersecurity for a
generic SME.
At least eight of such loops can be identified in the full model, and
again the choice of showing the CDRL pertaining to the Mitigation
component (see Fig. 5, highlighted in blue) does not lead to any loss of
generality.
Here, an increase in Mitigation Funds leads to higher investment,
which improves the business’ Mitigation Capability, one of the key factors
in raising the Mitigation Level. This, in turn, leads to more Blocked Attacks, therefore reducing the Damage from Attacks and increasing the
Actual Financial Result, allowing for more cybersecurity investment.
These loops are virtuous loops that counter the negative effects of the
ones shown before, protecting the business from a potentially downward
spiral.
While the model’s logical architecture has already been discussed, it
is worth giving a more in-depth look to its stocks and flows structure.
Starting from the bottom left part of Fig. 4, the Attack Rate is a
Poisson distribution based on the selected environment’s Threat Level
(more on it in the following) and the company’s Attractiveness, about
which much has been already said with the help of the causal loop diagram. Obviously, Attack Rate controls the flow populating the Incoming
Attacks stock, whose two outflows both depend on the Detection Rate,
itself a function of the company’s Detection Capability. Attacks that can
be detected with the current capabilities end up in the Detected Attacks
Table 1
From NIST phases to SMECRA model variables.
Essential control (by NIST Phase) Snapshot survey question(s) Model
variable
Identify Identify
1. Systems, devices, software,
services, accounts and web
applications used within the
business perimeter are
inventories, with the inventory
being updated regularly.
1. Systems, devices, software,
services, accounts and web
applications used within the
business perimeter are
inventories, with the inventory
being updated regularly.
Inventory
2. Third-party web services
(social network, cloud
computing, email, web
hosting, etc.) are only used
when strictly necessary.
2. Third-party web services
(social network, cloud
computing, email, web hosting,
etc.) are only used when strictly
necessary.
3. Critical information, data and
systems are identified in order
to ensure adequate protection.
3. Critical information, data
and systems are identified in
order to ensure adequate
protection.
4. A responsible for information
and IT systems management
and protection activities
coordination has been
appointed.
4. A responsible for
information and IT systems
management and protection
activities coordination has
been appointed.
5. Laws and/or regulations
regarding cybersecurity
applicable to the business have
been identified and complied
with.
5. Laws and/or regulations
regarding cybersecurity
applicable to the business have
been identified and complied
with.
Regulation
Detect Detect
6. Regularly updated protection
software (antivirus, antimalware, etc.) is installed
wherever possible.
6. Protection software
(antivirus, anti-malware, etc.)
is installed wherever possible.
7. Frequency of protection
software updates.
8. Typology of protection
software updates.
Accounts
Protect Protect
7. Passwords are adequately
complex and different for
every account, and the
adoption of safer
authentication methods is
considered.
9. Passwords are adequately
complex and different for every
account.
10. Two-factor authentication
is adopted.
11. The business utilizes
password managers.
8. Personnel granted with remote
or local access to IT systems is
provided with personal
accounts that are not shared
with others, and access is
properly protected.
Old, unused accounts are
deleted or deactivated.
12. Personnel granted with
remote or local access to IT
systems is provided with
personal accounts that are not
shared with others, and access
is properly protected.
13. Old, unused accounts are
deleted or deactivated.
9. Each user can only access
information and systems that
are needed and pertaining to
his job.
14. Each user can only access
information and systems that
are needed and pertaining to
his job.
10. Employees are aware and
trained to understand
cybersecurity risks and the
practices needed to safely
operate the business’ IT
systems.
15. Employees are aware and
trained to understand
cybersecurity risks and the
practices needed to safely
operate the business’ IT
systems.
HR Skills
11. Experienced personnel,
bearing responsibility for such
task, is in charge of the initial
set up for all systems and
devices.
Default access credentials are
always replaced.
16. Experienced personnel,
bearing responsibility for such
task, is in charge of the initial
set up for all systems and
devices.
17. Default access credentials
are always replaced.
Backups
12. Critical information, data
and systems, identified at #3,
are periodically backed up.
Backups are safely stored and
periodically checked.
18. Critical information, data
and systems, identified at #3,
are periodically backed up.
19. Backups are safely stored
and periodically checked.
Table 1 (continued )
Essential control (by NIST Phase) Snapshot survey question(s) Model
variable
Respond Respond
13. Networks and systems are
protected against
unauthorized accesses using
proper tools, such as firewalls.
20. Networks and systems are
protected against unauthorized
accesses using proper tools,
such as firewalls.
21. All wireless networks are
protected.
Network
Protection
14. In the event of an accident
(such as malware or other
attacks being detected), those
in charge of security are
informed, and IT systems are
secured by experienced
personnel.
22. In the event of an accident
(such as malware or other
attacks being detected), those
in charge of security are
informed, and IT systems are
secured by experienced
personnel.
Respond
15. All software, firmware
included, is updated to the
latest version suggested by the
manufacturer.
Obsoleted software or devices
that cannot be upgraded are
disposed of.
23. All software, firmware
included, is updated to the
latest version suggested by the
manufacturer.
24. Obsoleted software or
devices that cannot be
upgraded are disposed of.
Inventory
Table 2
Example of PowerSim® model equations.
Backup capability loss IF(Backups>30,’Backup Funding’,0)
Backup Funding GRAPHSTEP ((‘Backup Resources Allocation’),100 <
<EUR>>,500 < <EUR>>,{2,10,15,20,25,30,30//
Min:0;Max:100//}) + Inventory*0.05
Backup Resources
Allocation (EUR)
Resources*(30/570)*(‘Strategic Focus’ [5]/
ARRAVERAGE(‘Strategic Focus’))
Backups 3*’Initial State’[16]+6*’Initial State’[17]+3*’Initial
State’[18]+3*’Initial State’[19]
S. Armenia et al. 
Decision Support Systems 147 (2021) 113580
7
stock, while the rest goes Undetected and therefore Not Blocked,
increasing the Damage from Attacks. On the other side, a part of Detected
Attacks ends up as Blocked Attacks, at a rate linked to the business’
Mitigation Capability, while the rest leaves the stock as Detected but not
Blocked, still increasing the Damage from Attacks. From there, the increase in Damage from Attacks both reduces the company’s Actual
Financial Result and increases the Vulnerability Perception (see related
behavior in Fig. 6a, left side, and Eq. 3).
This is quite interesting, as management now feels the pressure to
invest in cybersecurity yet has less resources available to do so. In fact,
both those variables drive the Resources Acquisition Rate (see related
behavior in Fig. 6b, right side, and Eq. 4).
Such a rate controls the flow that increases the large Resources stock
at the top, which in turn is depleted by seven different outflows,
Fig. 3. Causal Loop Diagram (CLD) of the SMECRA model with significant loops highlighted.
Vulnerability Perception = 0.7*Expected Damage Rate + Attacks Damage − Expected Damage Rate (3)
Resource Acquisition Rate = 0.025*Actual Financial Result*Vulnerability Perception (4)
S. Armenia et al. 
Decision Support Systems 147 (2021) 113580
8
representing Resource Allocation for each of the seven model variables:
Regulations, Accounts, Inventory, Backup, Protection, Damage Mitigation
and Human Resources Skills. The aforementioned allocated resources are
then invested and converted into actual Funding flows, each one of which
in turn increases a capability stock bearing the same name of the
respective cybersecurity areas, as can be seen in the central area of the
model. From there, each flow goes on to influence one or more of the
three main capabilities, namely Prevention, Detection and Mitigation. For
example, an increase in HR Skill Level will end up raising all three of
them, emphasizing the importance of a cyber-educated workforce. In
turn, those three variables respectively affect the already mentioned
Attractiveness, Detection Rate and Mitigation Rate, completing the system
dynamic model. Having displayed the model’s general functioning, we
focus on few useful features of this tool, namely the input variables that
Fig. 4. A simplified view of the S&F model pertaining to the RDRL and EDBL.
Fig. 5. A simplified view of the S&F model pertaining to the Mitigation CDRL.
Fig. 6. Attractiveness and vulnerability perception (a) - Expected damage and resource acquisition rate (b).
S. Armenia et al. 
Decision Support Systems 147 (2021) 113580
9
allow the user to control the simulations.
First, the data collected through the Snapshot Survey presented
earlier, and modeled according to Framework categories in order to
avoid excessive arbitrariness, is used as an input (in the Initial State
variable), to initialize the model with the actual state of the business in
question at the current time. Furthermore, the model gives the user the
possibility to simulate a cyber-environment with different risk scenarios
(acting on the Threat Level variable), displaying the effect of the chosen
actions in a Low, Medium or High Threat Environment (for a Threat Level
value of 1, 2 and 3 respectively). Threat Level values represent the risk
associated with a threat, nominally a combination of likelihood and
impact, where the former is influenced by the sophistication of the
relative attack and the second represents the potential damage to the
company. This way, the three levels represent three different scenarios
of “exposure” to cyber-attacks (or with a bigger attack surface in terms
of likelihood and impact) according to which different actions can be
planned. On top of that, the model also lets the user set different strategic priorities for cybersecurity-related investments, giving him the
possibility to compare and evaluate the future outcomes caused by
different spending choices. This can be done by acting on the Strategic
Focus parameter, shown in red in Fig. 5, above. By default, the model
acts “rationally”, allocating resources to the various areas proportionally
to the cost of investing to improve the respective capabilities. However,
a business might be unable and/or unwilling to invest that way,
preferring to distribute its funds differently or merely wanting to
compare the results of different potential choices. Therefore, the Strategic Focus parameter constitutes an effective means to increase or
reduce cybersecurity spending across the seven categories used by the
model.
It is worth noting that the three aforementioned capabilities (Prevention, Detection and Mitigation) are modeled in a scale ranging from
zero to one, where zero stands for total exposure and one for perfect
defense. Needless to say, a “perfect defense” is not achievable in a reallife situation, no matter how permissive the environment might be (even
more so when operating on a SME’s limited budget), which is why each
capability has been assigned its own “hard cap” ceiling, representing the
actually achievable maximum instead of the theoretical one.
4. Scenarios and simulation results
Simulations have been run in order to understand what could actually happen to one or more SMEs in realistic scenarios. For this purpose,
we have selected two different SMEs that, for non-disclosure of identity
purposes, we will call Alpha and Beta, and we have tested their behavior
in SMECRA according to the following scenarios:
• Scenario 1: An “average” company (Alpha) that does not pay
particular attention to cybersecurity, in a medium-threat
environment.
• Scenario 2: The same company as before, Alpha, this time in a highthreat environment.
• Scenario 3: A second company, Beta, which is modeled as identical to
Alpha with the significant difference of cybersecurity preparedness,
again in a high-threat environment.
Common parameters (e.g.: total simulation time, timestep, etc.) for
all simulations are listed in Table 3 below, whereas detailed survey responses for Alpha and Beta can be found in Table 4. For example, a
Table 3
Constant simulation parameters.
Simulation parameter Standard value
Total simulation time 5.00 years
Timestep 1 week
SME income € 1,300,000
Table 4
Snapshot Survey results.
Question Parameters Weight Alpha Beta
Identify
1. Systems, devices, software,
services, accounts and web
applications used within the
business perimeter are
inventories, with the
inventory being updated
regularly.
0: No
1: Yes, but not
updated
2: Yes, and
updated
10 0 0
2. Third-party web services
(social network, cloud
computing, email, web
hosting, etc.) are only used
when strictly necessary.
0: No
1: Yes
6 0 0
3. Critical information, data and
systems are identified in order
to ensure adequate protection.
0: No
1: Yes, part-time
2: Yes, full-time
10 0 0
4. A responsible for information
and IT systems management
and protection activities
coordination has been
appointed.
0: No
1: Yes, part-time
2: Yes, full-time
18 1 2
5. Laws and/or regulations
regarding cybersecurity
applicable to the business
have been identified and
complied with.
0: No
1: Partially
2: Totally
14 1 2
Detect
6. Protection software
(antivirus, anti-malware, etc.)
is installed wherever possible.
0: Nowhere
1: Somewhere
4: Everywhere
15 1 4
7. Frequency of protection
software updates.
0: None or
occasional
1: At least
quarterly
3: At least monthly
5: At least weekly
7 1 3
8. Typology of protection
software updates.
0: Manual
1: Automatic
5 0 1
Protect
9. Passwords are adequately
complex and different for
every account.
0: No, same
passwords
1: Different
passwords
2: Different and
complex
passwords
4 1 2
10. Two-factor authentication is
adopted.
0: No
1: Yes
6 0 0
11. The business utilizes
password managers.
0: No
1: Yes
5 0 0
12. Personnel granted with
remote or local access to IT
systems is provided with
personal accounts that are not
shared with others, and access
is properly protected.
0: No
1: Yes
3 0 0
13. Old, unused accounts are
deleted or deactivated.
0: No
1: Yes
2 0 0
14. Each user can only access
information and systems that
are needed and pertaining to
his job.
0: No
1: Yes
2 0 0
15. Employees are aware and
trained to understand
cybersecurity risks and the
practices needed to safely
operate the business’ IT
systems.
0: No
1: Partially
3: Completely
8 1 1
16. Experienced personnel,
bearing responsibility for such
tasks, is in charge of the initial
set up for all systems/devices.
0: No
1: Yes
3 1 1
17. Default access credentials
are always replaced.
0: No
1: Yes
6 0 0
(continued on next page)
S. Armenia et al. 
Decision Support Systems 147 (2021) 113580
10
standard five years’ period that has been kept constant for all simulations, since the rapidly evolving nature of cyber threats would make
decade-plus timespans excessive. The business income for Alpha and
Beta, before any cyber losses, is also set to the mean income for Italian
SMEs. It is worth noting that if cyber-defense preparedness is the only
difference between Alpha and Beta, that will ensure that any difference
in their outcomes will be due to cyber-related factors, preemptively
removing any risk of confusion from miscellaneous elements and
increasing the simulations’ signal-to-noise ratio.
These scenarios allow us to show the effects of an increasingly
dangerous cyber-environment on undefended businesses, as well as
understand how cybersecurity investment “pay for themselves” by
preventing significant economic damage, and that a cyber-defense
advantage can be used by SMEs to exploit an unprepared competitor’s
weakness and increase market share, or to strengthen their position in
other ways.
4.1. The first scenario: company alpha
Our first company, called Alpha, is a typical SME that does not pay
particular attention to cybersecurity, which is not unusual nowadays.
While there are some basic safety measures in place, Alpha’s management has never really thought about cyber risk as an actual threat or has
never properly invested to protect the company from cyberattacks,
therefore the initial analysis finds out that the business starts out in a
significantly unprotected position. Examining Alpha through the previously mentioned Snapshot Survey results in generally inadequate
scores, 33% for Identify, 22% for Detect, 33% for Protect and 65% for
Respond, resulting in a meager 38% overall.
First, the company’s real income (compared to the income without
cyber-attack losses) over time is displayed in Fig. 7. As the graph shows,
as soon as the simulation starts, cyber criminals and other malicious
actors quickly target Alpha, since its lack of adequate defenses make it a
rather easy prey. After six months, these attacks are costing Alpha more
than 16% of its original income. This means that, as the losses increase,
management starts to realize the company’s vulnerability and decides to
allocate more funds towards cybersecurity, improving Alpha’s once poor
defense capabilities in order to reduce losses from cyber-attacks.
Starting from the second semester, the situation improves significantly even though the losses remain relatively high for a few semesters,
and only in the fourth year cyber losses are definitely reduced. In this
first simulation, for example, Alpha avoided a crippling and potentially
business-ending scenario by spending just 4% of its earnings at its peak,
and less than 2% once the situation stabilized.
4.2. The second scenario: increasing threats
The second simulation sees the same company (Alpha), this time
operating in a different, high threat environment, meaning more
frequent and dangerous attacks, not to mention lower capability ceilings. Alpha started out woefully unprepared, but this time attackers are
more aggressive and targeted it much harder, leading to a loss of almost
25% of its original income after a few months (see Fig. 7). Even more
worrisome is the fact that, despite the company enacting proper countermeasures due to massive damage, the situation does not improve
enough. While the trend is positive, five years later Alpha is still losing
around 12% of its original income and will likely be going out of business anyway, as very few SMEs can absorb such significant losses
without succumbing to competition or just going bankrupt. In this case,
the negative feedback loops involving economic and reputational
damage have gained so much strength that they will still be influencing
the system for years to come, likely for longer than Alpha can afford.
Looking at the company’s defense capabilities over time underscores
this point. In this situation, alarmed by the sizable losses, Alpha’s
management invests around 40% more than before and reaches the
capability ceilings before the end of the first year. Yet, that does not
result in a fully acceptable outcome, as the mistake had already been
made when the business decided to operate in such a challenging
environment despite being clearly unprepared, as it takes more time for
cyber damages to be reduced, due to intrinsic system delays and harmful
feedback loops (e.g. RDRL). Once again, this shows that prevention can
be a much more effective strategy than accepting potentially crippling
damage, and the last simulation will make this even clearer.
4.3. The third scenario: company Beta
The third and final scenario involves a different company, Beta,
operating in a high threat environment again. Beta is identical to Alpha
under almost every organizational aspect, with the significant exception
of a higher cyber preparedness: while Beta’s cyber defenses are still far
from perfect, its management and employees pay attention to cybersecurity and have adopted a series of good practices and countermeasures.
This time, examining Beta through the previously mentioned
Table 4 (continued )
Question Parameters Weight Alpha Beta
18. Critical information, data
and systems, identified at #3,
are periodically backed up.
0: Never
1: Sporadically
2: At least twice a
quarter
4: At least twice a
month
3 0 2
19. Backups are safely stored
and periodically checked.
0: No
1: Yes
3 0 1
20. Networks and systems are
protected against
unauthorized accesses using
proper tools, such as firewalls.
0: No
1: Yes
8 0 1
21. All wireless networks are
protected.
0: No
1: Yes (or, there
are no wireless
networks)
18 1 1
Respond
22. In the event of an accident
(such as malware or other
attacks being detected), those
in charge of security are
informed, and IT systems are
secured by experienced
personnel.
0: No
1: Yes
35 1 1
23. All software, firmware
included, is updated to the
latest version suggested by the
manufacturer.
0: No
2: Occasional
manual updates
4: Automatic or
frequent updates
15 2 2
24. Obsoleted software or
devices that cannot be
upgraded are disposed of.
0: No
1: Yes
5 0 0
Fig. 7. Income over time for each simulation scenario.
S. Armenia et al. 
Decision Support Systems 147 (2021) 113580
11
Snapshot Survey results in significantly higher scores, with a 64% for
Identify, 86% for Detect, 54% for Protect and 65% for Respond. Despite
the obvious margins for improvement, the resulting 67.25% is almost
twice Alpha’s, already telling even an unskilled third party that Beta will
likely be less vulnerable. As expected, Beta responded much better to this
highly challenging situation. At its worst, the company experiences a ~
17% loss, which is lower than Alpha’s from the previous simulation, and
said loss is quickly reduced to around 60% compared to the second scenario. As shown in Fig. 8, since Beta had better cyber defenses already in
place, it is in a stronger position to face the initial waves of attacks,
preventing the harmful feedback loops from gaining excessive strength
and therefore managing to keep the situation under control much better.
5. Discussion and strategic focus on cybersecurity investments
The simulations, whose results have been summarized in Table 5 and
Fig. 9b, ultimately show how much better Beta is able to resist cyberattack waves, particularly in the first two, crucial, years. Even if both
companies will eventually achieve a similar result (as said, everything
about them being identical except for the starting situation), Alpha’s
lack of initial defenses has led to a critical vulnerability, and it is
reasonable to imagine Alpha going out of business in the near future,
being unable to deal with heavy economic and/or reputational losses.
In a scenario where Alpha and Beta are actually in competition, this
would obviously lead to Beta gaining Alpha’s market share, simply
thanks to proper and timely attention to cybersecurity.
Fig. 9a compares cybersecurity expenditures with the damage caused
by cyberattacks over time and offers two extremely valuable pieces of
information. First, as properly accounted for in the model, businesses
tend to spend very little on cybersecurity even when they are being
targeted and suffering serious damage. Furthermore, it is also worth
noting that this kind of investment is cheap when compared to the
damage from attack, generally amounting to less than 25% of the
aforementioned damages.
Fig. 8. Defense capabilities over time in the three scenarios
Table 5
Simulation comparison under three different scenarios.
Company Threat
environment
Peak
losses
Losses in
year 3
Losses in
year 5
Time to
plateau
Alpha Medium 16% 7% 4% 16 months
Alpha High 25% 14% 11% 13 months
Beta High 17% 12% 11% 18 months
Fig. 9. Damages and acquisition rate over time (a) - Effects of different strategies adopted by scenarios 2 and 3 (b).
S. Armenia et al. 
Decision Support Systems 147 (2021) 113580
12
By delving deeper into the results of the SD-model simulations, the
following data refer to the high threat environment simulation runs (#2
and #3), and display each business’ cash outflows for every year,
including:
• The cost of enacting the initial cyber-defense measures detailed in
the Snapshot Survey and extrapolated from the Essential Controls,
which amounts to 12 k€ for Alpha and 19 k€ for Beta (added to the
first year’s expenditures).
• The further costs sustained each year by both SMEs to mitigate cyberattack damage, as shown in the aforementioned simulations.
• The damage inflicted by cyber-attacks on each SME during the five
years according to simulations.
Clearly, the combined impact of the three economic components
outlined above can be used to compare the different strategies adopted
by the two SMEs, and allow us to fully appreciate Beta’s advantage over
a less cyber-ready competitor (see Table 6).
To validate those results, a paired t-test has been performed, and the
corresponding two-tailed P value equals 0.022: thus, by conventional
criteria (95% confidence interval), this difference is considered to be
statistically significant. The second graph in Fig. 9 displays the aforementioned difference, and thus Beta’s undeniable advantage in an easyto-understand form.
The advantages of the SMECRA approach are in fact be even more
noticeable when compared with an unfortunately common approach to
cybersecurity by many SMEs who spend, on average, under € 500 per
year on cybersecurity [37] and end up incurring in much more substantial costs than what they would have had using a systemic approach,
as shown in Table 7.
Even following Alpha’s basic approach, an extra €115,700 expenditure results in a €1,318,000 damage reduction, greatly offsetting the
initial investment. Furthermore, it is interesting to note that Beta’s
approach is superior to Alpha’s in both dimensions (costs and damages),
underscoring the potentialities of a System Dynamics approach such as
the one used in the SMECRA tool.
These simulations not only display the capability and versatility of
this tool, but they also underscore the importance of prevention and
awareness regarding cybersecurity matters, not just for large corporations but also for small and medium enterprises.
In order to create (and/or maintain) a competitive advantage in today’s digital world, a crucial aspect for a SME is to evaluate and decide on
its investments on cybersecurity. These have to be economically sustainable (in terms of percentage of the SME’s income) and they must aim
at minimizing the sum of investments and damages in the following years.
Hence, adequate cybersecurity investments are key for the success of
a SME: they depend not only on the environment, which can be more or
less risky in terms of cyber threats, or on the overall amount of invested
money, but also on the nature of such investments, on how the cybersecurity budget is allocated to the various possible investment areas. In
order to support decisions on how to allocate a certain budget to
investing in specific cybersecurity areas, we suggest that SMEs use the
SMECRA tool: first, by assessing their cybersecurity readiness through
the Snapshot Survey and then by evaluating how future investments in
specific areas can improve their readiness and posture, through the SDbased assessment support system. We demonstrated that, through the
use of the SMECRA model, different SMEs can incur in significantly
reduced cybersecurity costs (sum of investments and damages),
depending on the appropriateness and type of the adopted measures, as
rated by the Snapshot Survey.
In Fig. 10, a decision tree clarifying how this study can significantly
support the investment decisions of SMEs is displayed. The focus of the
attention that has to be paid when allocating the budget must be on
some of our model’s variables, i.e. Regulations, Accounts, Inventory,
Protection Software, Network Protection, Damage Mitigation, HR Skill
and Backups. The adequacy of decisions in cybersecurity investments for
SMEs is a strategic asset that finds its operative instrument in the budget
allocation to cover one or more of those areas.
6. Conclusions
In this paper we have introduced a System Dynamics-based simulation methodology and tool, SMECRA (SME Cyber Risk Assessment), that
initially allows an assessment of a SME’s current cyber risk profile
through the results of the Snapshot Survey, based on the NIST-driven
Italian National Cyber Security Framework [17], and then enables the
evaluation of systemic impacts deriving from investments in cybersecurity. We also showed some scenario simulations in order to highlight
the effect of different strategies. The SMECRA methodology and tool is
based on a systemic perspective linking the organization’s structure with
the risks posed by the cyber environment through targeted investments.
Its strength lies in the capability of considering how the dynamics
arising from such interdependencies, in the form of cause-effect relationships expressed according to the System Dynamics modeling and
simulation approach, can overcome the limitations of linear approaches
to investment policies in the cybersecurity field. With reference to the
NIST Framework (and, broadly speaking, to most types of cyber-posture
assessment frameworks), the current mainstream perspective is that,
after an initial assessment of the “as-is” situation, investments are to be
allocated to each category without paying too much attention on how
this might in turn affect other ones (“silo mentality”). Our point of view
is that, as the categories are deeply interconnected with each other due
to systemic organizational interdependencies, spending in one category
might in turn generate an effect (whether positive or negative) on other
categories as well. In other words, while the management of a SME
might decide to invest a specific amount of economic resources according to the evaluation of improvement needs for each category
(“linear” or “silo” approach), through a systemic approach they could
realize that due to the aforementioned interconnections, they might be
able to obtain the same “to-be” risk profile by spending less in each of
the very same categories. Alternatively, they could find that expenditure
made with a linear-thinking approach would not be capable of lowering
the risk exposure as desired. This is the first very relevant managerial
implication, as SMECRA allows verifying the management mental
models with reference to effective results when compared to investment
expectations.
It is worth noting that, in terms of managerial implications, SMECRA,
which is based on a new conceptual approach to impacts assessment
based on a systemic view of the related framework, could also be useful
to other organizations interested in evaluating risks and managing investments in cybersecurity, as well as to third parties (i.e.: banks, insurance companies) willing to define the residual risk level of a SME.
As far as research implications are concerned, through this paper we
Table 6
Different strategies adopted in scenarios 2 and 3.
Years Costs + Damages (Alpha) Costs + Damages (Beta)
1 (includes initial costs) € 428,200 € 298,050
2 € 379,600 € 328,000
3 € 343,200 € 303,000
4 € 306,800 € 248,000
5 € 270,400 € 236,000
Total € 1,728,200 € 1,413,050
Table 7
Cost-effectiveness of a standard approach vs SMECRA.
Basic approach Alpha Beta
Cybersecurity expenses € 500 € 116,200 € 62,050
Damage from attacks € 1,430,000 € 312,000 € 226,000
Total € 1,430,500 € 428,200 € 298,050
S. Armenia et al. 
Decision Support Systems 147 (2021) 113580
13
are contributing to the establishment of a pathway towards a new
perspective of evaluations based on “systemic and dynamics frameworks” [38]. In this paper, the latter concept has been applied to a
generic cybersecurity scenario, but the model could be customized
further (i.e.: based on the importance of the context in which the organization is embedded [39]) or even be likewise adopted by other
fields, not necessarily (or only) security-based, such as energy, agriculture, sustainability, social issues, etc. In the field of cybersecurity, this
paper constitutes an innovation that can lead to a new perspective in the
assessment of cyber risks through further research on this topic.
In conclusion, this analysis helps in better defining the actual profile
of cyber risks as well as the target profile to which the SME should be
aligned taking into consideration dynamics of the element modeled
through the Italian and NIST Cybersecurity Frameworks and not only
through their static definition. Furthermore, the SMECRA methodology
and tool proves itself especially valuable for planning and evaluation,
ultimately allowing the user to simulate any number of highly different
cyber scenarios based on various strategic choices and environments
before actually committing manpower and financial resources. As a last
note, we have argued that the advantages introduced by the SMECRA
methodology and tool were made possible by recurring to the Systems
Thinking/System Dynamics approach, which proved crucial for the purpose of this research, ultimately allowing SMEs in making their cyber risk
evaluations more accurate, dynamic and sustainable at the same time.
Declaration of Competing Interest
None.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the fund “Progetto di Eccellenza” of the
Department of Computer, Control and Management Engineering
“Antonio Ruberti”, Sapienza University of Rome. The department has
been designated by the Italian Ministry of Education (MIUR) for being
“Department of Excellence” in advanced training programs in the field
of cybersecurity. This work is also partially supported through the ECHO
Project (the European network of Cybersecurity centres and competence
Hub for innovation and Operations), which has received funding from the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
under the grant agreement no 830943.
References
[1] R. Von Solms, J. Van Niekerk, From information security to cyber security,
Comput. Security 38 (2013) 97–102.
[2] D. Di Mase, Z.A. Collier, K. Heffner, I. Linkov, Systems engineering framework for
cyber physical security and resilience, Environ. Syst. Decisions 35 (2) (2015)
291–300.
[3] S.M. Rinaldi, J.P. Peerenboom, T.K. Kelly, Identifying, understanding, and
analyzing critical infrastructure interdependencies, IEEE Control. Syst. Mag. 21 (6)
(2001) 11–25.
[4] E.G. Carayannis, E. Grigoroudis, S.S. Rehman, N. Samarakoon, Ambidextrous
cybersecurity: the seven pillars (7Ps) of cyber resilience, IEEE Trans. Eng. 68 (1)
(2021) 223–234.
[5] O. Khan, D.A.S. Estay, Supply chain cyber-resilience: creating an agenda for future
research, Technol. Innov. Manag. Rev. 5 (4) (2015) 6–12.
[6] Z.A. Collier, I. Linkov, J.H. Lambert, Four domains of cybersecurity: a risk-based
systems approach to cyber decisions, Environ. Syst. Decisions 4 (33) (2013)
469–470.
[7] S.J. Jensen, S. Feldmann-Jensen, D.M. Johnston, N.A. Brown, The emergence of a
globalized system for disaster risk management and challenges for appropriate
governance, Int. J. Disaster Risk Sci. 6 (1) (2015) 87–93.
[8] P. Katsumata, J. Hemenway, W. Gavins, Cybersecurity risk management, in: 2010
Military Communications Conference (MILCOM), 2010, pp. 890–895.
[9] D.L. Nazareth, J. Choi, A system dynamics model for information security
management, Inf. Manag. 52 (1) (2015) 123–134.
[10] P. Rohmeyer, T. Ben-Zvi, D. Lombardi, A. Maltz, Capability effectiveness testing for
architectural resiliency in financial systems, in: 2017 Portland International
Conference on Management of Engineering and Technology (PICMET), 2017,
pp. 1–7.
[11] A.A. Ganin, P. Quach, M. Panwar, Z.A. Collier, J.M. Keisler, D. Marchese, I. Linkov,
Multicriteria decision framework for cybersecurity risk assessment and
management, Risk Anal. 40 (1) (2020) 183–199.
[12] R. Bojanc, B. Jerman-Blaˇziˇc, A quantitative model for information-security risk
management, Eng. Manag. J. 25 (2) (2013) 25–37.
[13] P.Y. Chen, G. Kataria, R. Krishnan, Correlated failures, diversification, and
information security risk management, MIS Q. (2011) 397–422.
[14] M.E. Pat´e-Cornell, M. Kuypers, M. Smith, P. Keller, Cyber risk management for
critical infrastructure: a risk analysis model and three case studies, Risk Anal. 38
(2) (2018) 226–241.
[15] W.P. Nguyen, S.Y. Nof, Collaborative response to disruption propagation (CRDP) in
cyber-physical systems and complex networks, Decis. Support. Syst. 117 (2019)
1–13.
[16] J. Saleem, B. Adebisi, R. Ande, M. Hammoudeh, A state of the art survey-Impact of
cyber attacks on SME’s, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Future
Networks and Distributed Systems, ACM, 2017, p. 52.
[17] M. Angelini, C. Ciccotelli, L. Franchina, A. Marchetti-Spaccamela, L. Querzoni,
Italian National Framework for Cybersecurity and data protection, in: L. Antunes,
M. Naldi, G. Italiano, K. Rannenberg, P. Drogkaris (Eds.), Privacy Technologies and
Policy. APF 2020. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol 12121, Springer, Cham,
2020, pp. 127–142.
[18] H. Li, X.R. Luo, J. Zhang, R. Sarathy, Self-control, organizational context, and
rational choice in internet abuses at work, Inf. Manag. 55 (3) (2018) 358–367.
[19] S. Zeadally, B. Yu, D.H. Jeong, L. Liang, Detecting insider threats: solutions and
trends, Inform. Security J. Glob. Perspect. 21 (4) (2012) 183–192.
[20] J. Hua, Y. Chen, X.R. Luo, Are we ready for cyberterrorist attacks? — Examining
the role of individual resilience, Inf. Manag. 55 (7) (2018) 928–938.
[21] C.Y. Jeong, S.Y.T. Lee, J.H. Lim, Information security breaches and IT security
investments: impacts on competitors, Inf. Manag. 56 (5) (2019) 681–695.
[22] S. Zeijlemaker, E.A.J.A. Rouwette, Unravelling the dynamic complexity of cyber
security investment decision making, in: One Conference 2019. The Hague, the
Netherlands. [Sl: sn], 2019.
[23] A.C. Marquez, C. Blanchar, A decision support system for evaluating operations
investments in high-technology business, Decis. Support. Syst. 41 (2) (2006)
472–487.
[24] A. Gregoriades, B. Karakostas, Unifying business objects and system dynamics as a
paradigm for developing decision support systems, Decis. Support. Syst. 37 (2)
(2004) 307–311.
[25] S. Armenia, A. Cardazzone, C. Carlini, Understanding security policies in the cyber
warfare domain through system dynamics, in: Proceedings of the 4th International
Defense and Homeland Security Simulation Workshop (DHSS 2014), 2014, ISBN
9788897999416, pp. 27–32.
[26] S. Zeijlemaker, Zuna A. Montellano, Detection dynamics: The balancing act in the
realm of cyber security under conditions of staff shortage and attacker behaviour
growth, in: Proceedings of the 37th International System Dynamics Conference
(ISDC), Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA, 2019, ISBN 9781510897311, pp. 9–10.
Fig. 10. Decision tree supporting cybersecurity investment decisions for SMEs.
S. Armenia et al. 
Decision Support Systems 147 (2021) 113580
14
[27] S. Armenia, E. Ferreira Franco, F. Nonino, E. Spagnoli, C.M. Medaglia, Towards the
definition of a dynamic and systemic assessment for cybersecurity risks, Syst. Res.
Behav. Sci. 36 (2018) 404–423. ISSN: 1099-1743.
[28] H. Mintzberg, Structure in 5’s: a synthesis of the research on organization design,
Manag. Sci. 26 (3) (1980) 322–341.
[29] R.L. Ackoff, Why few organizations adopt systems thinking, Syst. Res. Behav. Sci.
23 (5) (2006) 705.
[30] I. Martinez Moyano, G.P. Richardson, An expert view of the system dynamics
modeling process: Concurrences and divergences searching for best practices in
system dynamics modeling, in: Proceedings of the 20th International Conference of
the System Dynamics Society (Vol. 28), 2002, July.
[31] J. Sterman, Business Dynamics, Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2000.
[32] J.W. Forrester, Industrial Dynamics, Productivity Press, Portland, Oregon, 1961.
[33] J.W. Forrester, Urban dynamics, IMR; Ind. Manag. Rev. (Pre-1986) 11 (3) (1970)
67.
[34] J.W. Forrester, World Dynamics, J.W. Wright-Allen Press, 1971.
[35] D.L. Meadows, D.H. Meadows, et al., The Limits to Growth, Potomac Associates,
1972.
[36] D.H. Meadows, Thinking in Systems, C.G. Publishing, 2008.
[37] S. Morrow, T. Crabtree, The future of cybercrime & security, in: Threat Analysis,
Impact Assessment & Mitigation Strategies, 2019, pp. 2019–2024.
[38] S. Armenia, Taking decision making to the next level by integrating data analytics
with systems thinking and system dynamics, in: New Challenges in Corporate
Governance: Theory and Practice, 2019, pp. 41–42.
[39] A. Annarelli, F. Nonino, G. Palombi, Understanding the management of cyber
resilient systems, Comput. Ind. Eng. 149 (2020) 106829.
Stefano Armenia (PhD, MBA) is a Senior Research Fellow in the Analysis and Management of Complex Organization and Organizational Behavior through a Systems Thinking
and System Dynamics approach at the Link Campus University of Rome. He has a degree in
Computer Engineering, Industrial Automation & Control Systems from Sapienza University of Rome, a Ph.D. in Business Engineering and a Master in Management and Business
Administration from Tor Vergata University of Rome. He is Vice President for Chapters and
SIGs of the International System Dynamics Society (SDS), President of SYDIC - System
Dynamics Italian Chapter (the Italian Network of the SDS) since 2011, member of WOSC,
World Organization on Systems and Cybernetics and EURAM. He has been the coordinator
of several EU proposals in various EU programmes. His research interests deal with the
analysis of complex systems dynamics in many fields: decision support systems, organizational behavior, logistics and transportation, finance, technological innovation, digital
transformation, food systems, assessment of impacts of innovation and policies on organizational performance and society. He has been co-editor in chief (2016-2020) of the
Kybernetes Journal (Emerald-Insights), Associate Editor of IJSS (International Journal of
Systems and Society) and IJOTS (International Journal on Organizations Theory and
Behavior) as well as guest editor and reviewer in several other top scientific journals in the
field of management and business organizations. He currently holds the course on Business
Information Systems at the Faculty of Economics and Management, Tor Vergata University
of Rome.
Marco Angelini (PhD) is a Post-Doctoral Researcher in Engineering in Computer Science
at University of Rome “La Sapienza”, Italy, Department of Computer, Control and
Management Sciences & Engineering, where he achieved is Ph.D. He is a researcher in the
Centre for Cyber-Intelligence and Security of “La Sapienza” University of Rome
(https://www.cis.uniroma1.it/en), where he participate in several projects about automatic detection, management and reaction to cyber-threats for Critical Infrastructures
protection. Marco Angelini is member of CINI Cybersecurity National Laboratory
(https://cybersecnatlab.it/), where he coordinates national projects with the goal of
strengthening the Cyber-Security status of an organization, both in public and private
sectors. He is a member and coordinates research projects of A.W.A.RE group (Advanced
Visualization & Visual Analytics REsearch group) (http://aware.diag.uniroma1.it/). His
main research interests include Cybersecurity, focused on designing solutions for cyberdefense of critical infrastructures, security governance modeling and assessment of
cyber-risk, open-source intelligence, malware analysis, and Visual analytics, the process of
combining visualization of information, interaction by user and analytical computation for
solving heavy computational problems, applied specifically in the Cybersecurity domain.
As a result of these activities, Dr. Marco Angelini has published more than 49 paprs in
peer-reviewed international journals and conferences. More about him can be found at: htt
ps://sites.google.com/dis.uniroma1.it/angelini
Fabio Nonino (PhD) is Associate Professor of Business Management and Project Management at Sapienza University of Rome. He carries out his research activities in the field
of Management focusing on Operations and Service Management, Innovation Management and Organizational Behavior development. His main publications appeared in
Journal of Cleaner Production, Supply Chain Management: An international Journal,
Production Planning & Control, Omega – The Journal of Management Science, International Journal of Production Research and Technological Forecasting and Social Change.
He is a Member of the editorial board of Kybernetes – The International Journal of Cybernetics, Systems and Management Sciences and the International Journal of Information
Systems and Supply Chain Management.
Giulia Palombi (PhD) is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow and Lecturer at Sapienza University of Rome in the field of Organization and Business Management. Previously she
obtained a PhD in Industrial and Management Engineering at Sapienza University of Rome
and she has been a visiting researcher at University of Kentucky (USA). Her research interests include Operations and Project Management, Cybersecurity Management and
Organizational Behavior. She presented her studies at several international conferences
including ISPIM, EUROMA, IFKAD, and DSI. Her main publications appeared in Journal of
Manufacturing Technology Management and Computers & Industrial Engineering.
Mario Francesco Schlitzer(Msc.) successfully completed his MSc in Management Engineering at Sapienza University of Rome in late 2019. His Master’s thesis, titled “A System
Dynamics Based Tool for Small and Medium Enterprises to Evaluate Cybersecurity Risk and Plan
Effective Investments” has been referenced in further work such as “The Italian National
Cybersecurity Framework as the base for a dynamic approach to the evaluation of Cyber Risks in
SMEs” (ITASEC 2020). He is currently employed as a consultant for Link Campus University in Rome, involved in various international research projects such ECHO (European
Network of Cybersecurity Centres and Competence Hub for Innovation and Operations). His
research interests range from defense and geopolitics to logistics, history, cybersecurity,
finance, organization management and more.
S. Armenia et al. 